Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Terminology; General Penalty
[Adopted 12-27-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-12 (Part 1, Ch. 1, Secs.
1-1002 and 1-1008, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances); amended in
its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Board of Commissioners:
A. Commonwealth. The words "the commonwealth" shall be construed to
mean the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
C. Township. The words "the Township" or "this Township" shall mean the
Township of Manheim, Pennsylvania.
D. Municipality. The words "the municipality" or "this municipality" shall
mean the Township of Manheim, Pennsylvania.
E. Commissioners. Whenever the word "Commissioners" is used, it shall
mean the Board of Commissioners of Manheim Township.
F. Other officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officers,
agencies or departments by title only, i.e., "Manager-Secretary,"
"Treasurer," "Solicitor," "Engineer," "Tax Collector," "Tax Receiver," etc.,
it shall mean the officers, agencies, or departments of the Township of
Manheim.
G. Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as
well as to males.
H. Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
I. Limits. The word "limits" shall mean the corporate limits or legal
boundary of the Township of Manheim.
J. Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be
construed as though the words "of the Township of Manheim" were
added.
K. Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed
and understood according to such meaning.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. General penalty.
Whenever, in this Code or in any ordinance of the Township, any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or the doing of any act is
required and the failure to do so is declared to be unlawful, such action or
failure to act, as the case may be, shall constitute a violation of this Code
or of the pertinent ordinance. Except as otherwise provided by statute,
any person violating any Township ordinance regulating building, housing,
property maintenance, health, fire or public safety or water, air and noise
pollution violations shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $1,000, and
any person violating any other Township ordinance shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $600, which fines and penalties may be collected by suit
brought in the name of the Township before any Magisterial District Judge,
in like manner as debts of like amount may be sued for by existing laws.
L. Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and, in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent
to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
M. Or; and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense
requires it.
N. Person. The word "person" may extend and be applied to associations,
organizations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, corporations, and
bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to
individuals.
O. Individual. The word "individual" shall mean any natural person, male
or female.
P. Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets,
avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and all
other public streets and ways in the Township and shall embrace all
parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. The word
"street" shall also be construed to embrace highways as used and
referred to in the Vehicle Code.1
Q. Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street
between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the
use of pedestrians.
1. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 1-1 MANHEIM CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
§ 1-3. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502, Clause I, II (53 P.S. § 56502) of the First Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Manheim, County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 510,
together with an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Manheim, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Manheim,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of the 1976 Code and the ordinances and resolutions in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Manheim, and
it is the intention of said Board of Commissioners that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions
of § 1-5 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-8
below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in § 1-18 below.
§ 1-5. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-6, Legislation saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-18; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Township of Manheim which is not in conflict with
the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-6. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-5 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-5 or the saving from
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-10-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
§ 1-6 MANHEIM CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-6A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-8. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Ordinance No. 2006-16, adopted 5-22-2006, known as the "Stormwater
Management Ordinance of Manheim Township."
T. Ordinance No. 2011-11, adopted 8-8-2011, and Ordinance No. 2012-10,
adopted 7-23-2012, pertaining to the Articles of Incorporation of the
General Municipal Authority.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Commissioners, and
it is the intent of the Board of Commissioners that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-9. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-18.2
C. Nomenclature.
(1) Throughout the Code, references to the following agencies or
officials are updated as indicated:
(a) References to "District Justice" and "District Magistrate" are
amended to read "Magisterial District Judge."
(b) References to the "Department of Environmental Resources"
and "DER" are amended to read "Department of Environmental
Protection" and "DEP," respectively.
(c) References to the "Department of Community Affairs" and
"DCA" are amended to read "Department of Community and
Economic Development" and "DCED," respectively.
(d) References to "Manager" and "Secretary" are amended to read
"Manager-Secretary."
(e) References to the "Soil Conservation Service" and "SCS" are
amended to read "Natural Resources Conservation Service"
and "NRCS," respectively.
(2) In the specific chapters listed below, references to the following are
updated as indicated:
(a) Throughout Ch. 125, Art. III, "special school police officers" is
amended to read "school crossing guards."
D. Statutory references. Throughout the Code, outdated, incorrect and
obsolete statutory references have been updated to the current
citation.
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-8B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 2-25-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-8 MANHEIM CODE § 1-10
1:8
§ 1-10. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-11. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Manager-Secretary and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such
copy or copies shall be certified to by the Township Manager-Secretary, as
provided by law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the
office of the Township Manager-Secretary, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-12. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-13. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager-Secretary or someone
authorized and directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy
or copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office
of the Township Manager-Secretary for the use of the public. All changes
in said Code and all legislation adopted by the Board of Commissioners
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Board of
Commissioners shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
§ 1-14. Publication of notices.
The Township Manager-Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a notice of the introduction and of the
adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the
publication of the notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law,
and the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-16. Effect of amendments on penalty provisions.
In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty
is not provided, the general penalty as provided in § 1-2 of the Code shall
apply to the section as amended or added, or, in case the amendment
contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned
general penalty, is provided in another section of the same chapter, the
penalty so provided in that other section shall be held to relate to the
section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein.
§ 1-17. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners that
this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-18. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after February 25, 2013.
§ 1-14 MANHEIM CODE § 1-18
1:10
Chapter 3
CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEES
§ 3-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the Board of Commissioners to
establish citizen-oriented advisory committees that will review, research,
analyze, discuss and make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners
on specific topics, areas, needs or issues that the Board of Commissioners
determine are important to the overall health, safety and welfare of the
Township. A citizen advisory committee shall furnish information and
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners but shall not have actual,
or de facto, decision-making authority.
§ 3-2. Creation; appointments; terms of office.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to create, by
resolution, citizen advisory committees from time to time to aid in the
execution of its corporate powers when it has determined a need exists
to engage various skills and capabilities of the Township citizenry to
advise it on the best approaches and practices in addressing current
and future needs.
B. Each citizen advisory committee created shall be effective upon the
adoption by the Board of Commissioners of a resolution establishing the
name and purpose of the advisory committee; the number of members
to serve on the committee; how frequently the committee should meet;
what information, report, recommendation or other deliverables the
advisory committee is expected to provide to the Board of
Commissioners; and whether the advisory committee is a standing
committee or an ad-hoc committee that exists only for a specified
timeframe. Unless the Board of Commissioners establishes an end-date
for a citizens advisory committee, the committee will continue until the
Board of Commissioners takes official action to discontinue the
committee or to place the committee into an inactive status.
C. Each citizen advisory committee enacted shall consist of an odd number
of members having no less than five members and no more than 15
members. [Amended 8-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-20]
D. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint the members of a citizen
advisory committee by majority vote. All but one member of a citizen
advisory committee shall be a resident, landowner or business owner of
Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. The Board of
Commissioners may appoint one member to a citizen advisory
committee who is not a resident, landowner or business owner in
Manheim Township who can provide expertise, knowledge or
experience that the Board of Commissioners deems to be particularly
helpful to a committee.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:11
§ 3-3. Officers; meetings; reporting.
E. The term for members of a standing committee shall be three years.
The term for members of an ad-hoc committee that will be in existence
for less than three years will be for the duration of the existence of that
committee. Upon the establishment of a standing committee, the initial
terms for members shall be staggered as set forth below with any future
terms, thereafter, being set for three years:
(1) On a committee of five members, two shall be appointed for three
years, two shall be appointed for two years and one shall be
appointed for one year;
(2) On a committee of seven members, three shall be appointed for
three years, two shall be appointed for two years and two shall be
appointed for one year;
(3) On a committee of nine members, three shall be appointed for
three years, three shall be appointed for two years and three shall
be appointed for one year.
F. The Board of Commissioners may renew the term of a citizen advisory
committee member up to two times for a total of three consecutive
terms; i.e., nine years.
G. Citizen advisory committees serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Commissioners and may be abolished by a majority vote of the Board of
Commissioners.
A. The Board of Commissioners by majority vote shall annually appoint the
chair and vice chair for each citizen advisory committee it establishes.
B. Each citizen advisory committee will select its own recording secretary.
The recording secretary shall take minutes of the public meetings,
record them in a minute book and forward copies of the meeting
minutes to the Board of Commissioners within 10 days after a meeting.
C. When establishing a citizen advisory committee, the Board of
Commissioners may establish a meeting schedule or a minimum
number of times the committee must meet per year; otherwise, a
committee shall meet at least four times a year.
D. A citizen advisory committee may be aided from time to time by experts
or advisors in their particular area of study. No expert, advisor or
consultant shall be contracted without the express consent of the Board
of Commissioners.
E. While a citizen advisory committee is not subject to the Pennsylvania
Sunshine Act,3 all meetings of a citizen advisory committee should be
open to the public and should provide an opportunity for public
3. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 3-2 MANHEIM CODE § 3-3
1:12
§ 3-4. Principles, objective and limitations of citizen advisory
committees.
comment, subject to reasonable rules and regulations. The date, time
and location of meetings for citizen advisory committees should
generally be available to the public. This could include posting the
meetings on the Township website, placing them in the Township's
newsletter or announcing them at a Board of Commissioners' meeting.
In addition, all meeting minutes of a citizen advisory committee and
any official reports, findings or recommendations shall be available for
review and copying by the public.
F. The chair, vice chair or an authorized member of a citizen advisory
committee shall provide an update to the Board of Commissioners every
90 days during one of the Board of Commissioners' regularly scheduled
public meetings on the committee's activities and any findings or
recommendations it may have.
G. The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to take whatever
action it deems appropriate to address an advisory committee that fails
to comply with the provisions of this chapter. This chapter does not
create a cause of action or otherwise vest any statutory or legal rights
in the public or in a third party to enforce its provisions should an
advisory committee fail to comply with any provision of this chapter.
A. The objective of a citizen advisory committee is to examine a public
issue identified by the Board of Commissioners by meeting over an
extended period of time to examine the issue in order to develop policy
recommendations or proposals for the Board of Commissioners to
consider.
B. A citizen advisory committee should seek to incorporate the following
principles in its advisory committee role:
(1) Have broad-based input from Township citizens into planning and
decision-making on the issue it has been authorized to address;
(2) Develop recommendations based on a focused examination of
issues;
(3) Provide a forum for in-depth and focused involvement and input
from a wide range of stakeholders, ideas and perspectives;
(4) Welcome various perspectives and ideas;
(5) Promote public participation by the citizens of Manheim Township;
(6) Operate transparently, ethically and in the best interest of the
public.
C. Township staff shall work with the chair or vice chair of a citizen
advisory committee to respond to reasonable document and material
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:13
Chapter 6
AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 6-1. Statutory authority; designation of entity to provide services.4
The Township, among the powers granted under the First Class Township
Code5 and the Emergency Medical Services System Act, Act of August 18,
2009, P.L. 308, No. 37, as amended (the "code"),6 in furtherance of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township, is empowered
to enter into contracts for the purpose of providing ambulance services and
emergency medical care within the Township. The Board of Commissioners
("Board") desires to acknowledge and designate the Manheim Township
Ambulance Association ("Ambulance Association") as the entity to provide
ambulance services and emergency medical care within the Township,
subject to the terms of an agreement as to ambulance services
("agreement") substantially in the form of the agreement attached to this
chapter.7
§ 6-2. Agreement for service authorized.
The Ambulance Association is hereby acknowledged and designated as the
primary entity to provide ambulance services, including basic life support
(BLS) and advanced life support (ALS), and emergency medical care within
the Township pursuant and subject to the terms of the agreement, and the
President or Vice President of the Board and the Manager-Secretary or
Assistant Manager-Secretary of the Township are hereby authorized and
directed on behalf of the Township to review, revise and to enter into the
agreement with the Ambulance Association and to execute and deliver the
agreement to the Association.
Chapter 11
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
requests, subject to limitations for certain personnel and legal-related
matters or other material that is confidential.
D. Citizen advisory committees are strictly advisory in nature and have no
decision-making authority and are prohibited from incurring expenses,
making payments, entering contracts, leases or obligations or
otherwise binding the Township without the expressed consent of the
Board of Commissioners.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 8101 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 3-4 MANHEIM CODE § 6-2
1:14
ARTICLE I
Manheim Township Municipal Authority
[Adopted 8-26-1957 by Res. No. 1957-98 (Part 2, Ch. 4, Art. E.1, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 11-1. Intention to organize.
The Board of Commissioners (constituting the municipal authorities of the
Township) hereby signifies its intention to organize an authority under the
provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.,
as amended.
§ 11-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Commissioners of the Township
are hereby authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Township,
Articles of Incorporation for the Authority, setting forth, among other
things:
A. That the name of the Authority shall be "Manheim Township Municipal
Authority."
B. That the Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended.
C. That no other authority has been organized under the Act or under the
Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, and is in existence in and for the
Township or the school district of the Township, except:
(1) The Lancaster Area Incinerator Authority, incorporated in
December 1954 by the Township jointly with the City of Lancaster
and the Townships of Manor, East Lampeter, West Lampeter,
Lancaster and East Hempfield (all in Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania).
(2) The Manheim Township School Authority, incorporated in
December 1955 by the school district of Manheim Township.
D. That the name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of
Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
E. That there shall be five members of the Board of the Authority.
F. Stating the names and addresses of members and officers of the Board
of Commissioners of the Township of Manheim and the names,
addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of the
Authority.
8. Editor's Note: Section 3 of Res. No. 1957-9 appointed the first members of the Board;
Section 5 directed that certain actions be taken to effect incorporation.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:15
§ 11-3. Authorized projects.
The Authority shall have the power to acquire, hold, construct, improve,
maintain, operate, own and lease, either as lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer
systems, sewage treatment works, property and equipment for the
Township and for such other territory as it may be authorized to serve, and
such other project or projects permitted and authorized by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as the Township may, from time to time, by
resolution or ordinance, specify and authorize.
§ 11-3 MANHEIM CODE § 11-3
1:16
ARTICLE II
General Municipal Authority
[Adopted 5-23-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-59 (Part 2, Ch. 4, Art. E.2, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 11-4. Intention to organize.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Manheim signifies and
expresses its intention to organize the General Municipal Authority of the
Township of Manheim (the "Authority") under the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended (the "Act"), for the purpose
of acquiring, holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and operating,
owning or leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, projects of all
kinds and character which an authority is authorized to undertake under
the Act.
§ 11-5. Provision of educational facilities.
It is recognized that such Authority shall be empowered and authorized,
under the Act, to acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain and operate,
own or lease buildings and facilities for private, nonprofit, nonsectarian
colleges and universities, state-related universities and community colleges.
The Township deems that it is desirable for the health, safety and welfare
of the public of the area to be served by such educational facilities to have
such facilities provided by an Authority.
§ 11-6. Business improvements and administrative services
projects.
It is further recognized that such Authority shall be empowered and
authorized, under the Act, to undertake projects involving the making of
business improvements or providing administrative services. The Township,
therefore, retains the right which exists under the Act to approve any plan
of the Authority with respect to any project undertaken by the Authority for
the purpose of making business improvements or providing administrative
services.10
§ 11-7. Provision of buildings and facilities for Lancaster Bible
College. [Added 5-23-1983 by Res. No. 1983-2111]
9. Editor's Note: Section 5 of Ord. No. 1983-5 authorized and directed specified officers of
the Township to execute and file the Articles of Incorporation of the Authority.
10.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-4064, Articles of Incorporation, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II). The current Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Township offices.
11.Editor's Note: The preamble to this resolution reads as follows: WHEREAS, the Board of
Commissioners (the "Board") of the Township of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania (the "Township"), has enacted Manheim Township Ordinance 1983-5, by
which the Township has organized the General Municipal Authority of the Township of
Manheim (the "Authority") pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended (the "Act"); Articles of Incorporation of the Authority
have been approved; and appropriate officers of the Township have been authorized and
directed to execute and file such Articles of Incorporation with the Secretary of the
§ 11-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-7
1:17
A. The buildings and facilities for the college are approved, it being
understood that the college shall be making application to the Authority
for the Authority's determination as to whether the college is an eligible
educational institution, as that term is defined in the Act, and it being
further understood that this approval shall not obligate the taxing
power of the Township in any way.
B. It is declared that it is desirable for the health, safety and welfare of the
people in the area served by the college to have the buildings and
facilities provided by the Authority.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to take all other action necessary to incorporate the
Authority in compliance with the Act; and WHEREAS, the Act vests in the Authority, inter
alia, the power of acquiring, holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and operating,
owning, leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, buildings and facilities for
private, nonprofit, nonsectarian colleges and universities, state-related universities and
community colleges, which are determined by the Authority to be eligible educational
institutions, as that term is defined in the Act, provided that such buildings and facilities
for such institutions are approved by resolution adopted by the governing body of the
municipality organizing the Authority; and WHEREAS, upon application of Lancaster Bible
College (the "college") and approval by the Board, the Authority will make a
determination as to whether the college is such an eligible educational institution and,
assuming that it finds the college to be an eligible educational institution, will consider
undertaking as a project (the "project") the refinancing of the existing mortgage and line
of credit indebtedness of the college with the Farmers First Bank, Lititz, Pennsylvania,
which shall involve the acquisition and leasing by the Authority of all those certain two
tracts of land owned by the college and located in Manheim Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, as more fully described in Exhibit "A" attached to and made a part of this
resolution, together with all buildings, improvements, equipment and fixtures now or
hereafter erected, constructed or situated thereon and all rights, powers and
appurtenances thereto (the "buildings and facilities"), all as more fully described in a
preliminary official statement (the "preliminary official statement") which has been
submitted to and reviewed by the Board, a copy of which is attached to and made a part of
this resolution as Exhibit "B"; and WHEREAS, the college shall request the Authority to
issue its College Revenue Bonds, Series of 1983, in the aggregate principal amount of
$2,500,000 (the "bonds"), to finance the project; and WHEREAS, the Act provides that
none of the powers granted to an Authority by the Act shall be exercised in the
construction, improvement, maintenance, extension or operation of any project or
projects which in whole or in part shall duplicate or compete with existing enterprises
serving substantially the same purposes; and WHEREAS, the Act provides that such
limitations upon the grant of powers to an Authority shall not apply to school building
projects and facilities to be leased to private, nonprofit, nonsectarian colleges and
universities, state-related universities and community colleges if the municipality
organizing an Authority for such a project shall declare by resolution or ordinance that it
is desirable for the health, safety and welfare of the people in the area served by such
facilities to have such facilities provided by an Authority.
§ 11-7 MANHEIM CODE § 11-7
1:18
Chapter 17
BIDS AND CONTRACTS
§ 11-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-7
1:19

ARTICLE I
Participation in County Purchase Contracts
[Adopted 5-8-1989 by Res. No. 1989-25 (Part 2, Ch. 6, Art. A, Sec.
2-6002, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 17-1. Authorization.
The administration is authorized to participate in purchase contracts of the
County of Lancaster and does agree that it will be bound by the terms and
conditions prescribed by the County of Lancaster and will be responsible for
payment directly to the vendor under each purchase contract.
§ 17-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1
1:21

ARTICLE II
Cooperative Procurement Program
[Adopted 7-12-1999 by Res. No. 1999-34 (Part 3, Ch. 1, Art. B, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 17-2. Findings.
Act 57 of May 15, 1998,12 permits local public procurement units to
participate in those contracts for supplies, services, or construction entered
into by the Department of General Services (DGS) that are made available
to local public procurement units. A "local public procurement unit" is
defined as any political subdivision, public authority, educational, health
or other institution and, to the extent provided by law, any other entity,
including a council of governments or an area government, nonprofit fire,
rescue, or ambulance company, and any nonprofit corporation operating a
charitable hospital.
§ 17-3. Request for authorization to participate in program.
Manheim Township hereby requests authorization to participate in DGS's
contracts for the procurement of supplies, services or construction, subject
to the following conditions:
A. That Manheim Township agrees to be bound by such contract terms and
conditions DGS may prescribe.
B. That Manheim Township agrees to be responsible for payment directly
to the contractor under each contract for those supplies, services or
construction ordered by the local public procurement unit.
12.Editor's Note: See 62 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 17-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3
1:23
Chapter 23
CAPITAL RESERVE FUND
§ 23-1. Creation of fund; use of funds.
A separate capital reserve fund ("capital reserve fund") is hereby created
and shall be maintained for any and all legal capital expenditures of the
Township, the moneys in the capital reserve funds to be used, from time
to time, for the construction, purchase or replacement of or additions,
improvements or extraordinary repairs to municipal buildings, equipment,
machinery, motor vehicles, land, easements or land rights and any and all
other capital assets or projects of or undertaken on behalf of the Township,
including, without limitation, use of such money in payment of debt service
on bonds or other obligations issued by the Township to fund any such
capital projects.
§ 23-2. Revenue sources.
The Board may appropriate funds from general Township funds to be paid
into the capital reserve fund or cause to be placed in the capital reserve
fund any moneys received from the sale, lease or other disposition of any
Township property, proceeds of bonds or other obligations of the Township
issued to fund capital projects or moneys from any other source (provided
that such moneys or proceeds were not specifically received for a particular
purpose not encompassed in or intentionally excluded from the capital
reserve fund).
§ 23-3. Investment of moneys in fund.
Moneys in the capital reserve fund, when invested, shall be invested in
securities designated by law as legal investments for sinking funds of
municipalities, and the moneys in the capital reserve fund, including
investment income thereon, shall be expended on such capital projects,
including debt service on bonds or obligations of the Township issued to
fund such capital projects, as the Board shall determine.
Chapter 30
COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
§ 17-3 MANHEIM CODE § 23-3
1:24
ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 2-13-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-3 (Part 2, Ch. 1, Art. A, Sec.
2-1004, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-1. Future automatic increases.
A. Subject to the limitations subsequently set forth in this section, the
compensation and salary of the Commissioners of the Township shall,
following January 1, 1990, automatically increase, without enactment of
further ordinances or other action, to the maximum salary which may
be lawfully established in the event that:
(1) The applicable provisions of the code13 shall be amended or other
applicable law superseding or replacing such provisions of the code
shall be enacted to permit an increase in the maximum salary or
compensation which may be established for Commissioners of the
Township; or
(2) Available official census figures would permit an increase in the
maximum salary or compensation which may be established for
Commissioners of the Township under the code or other applicable
law.
B. Any increase in the salary and compensation of the Commissioners of
the Township under this section shall not become effective until the
next succeeding date of commencement of the term of office of newly
elected or reelected Commissioners ("effective date") and shall be
effective only as to Commissioners who shall be newly elected and
reelected and shall take and commence a new term of office as of such
effective date.
13.Editor's Note: The "code" referred to in this section is the First Class Township Code, 53
P.S. § 55101 et seq., as amended.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-1
1:25

ARTICLE II
Meetings
[Adopted 1-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-1 (Part 2, Ch. 1, Art. A, Secs.
2-1001 and 2-1002, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-2. Meeting time established.14
The Township Commissioners shall meet on the second Monday and the
fourth Monday of each and every month at 6:30 p.m., prevailing time, and
at such other times as may be deemed necessary.
§ 30-3. Meeting place established.
The place of the meeting shall be the Manheim Township Office, 1840
Municipal Drive, Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 30-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:27

ARTICLE III
Duties of Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 2-22-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-3 (Part 2, Ch. 4, Art. B, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-4. Election to eliminate Shade Tree Commission.
The Board of Commissioners has elected to eliminate the Shade Tree
Commission, as established, and the Commission is hereby eliminated, and
the Commissioners presently appointed to the Shade Tree Commission are
removed from office and discharged from their duties as Commissioners.
§ 30-5. Duties to be performed by Board of Commissioners.
As provided in the code,15 the Board of Commissioners shall exercise all
rights and perform all duties and obligations imposed by the code upon a
shade tree commission.
15.Editor's Note: The "code" referred to in this section is the First Class Township Code, 53
P.S. § 55101 et seq., as amended.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-5
1:29

ARTICLE IV
Insurance Programs
[Adopted 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-7 (Part 2, Ch. 1, Art. A, Sec.
2-1005, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 30-6. Authorization for inclusion of Commissioners.
Manheim Township is authorized to expend from the general Township
funds such amounts as may be necessary to include the Commissioners of
Manheim Township in the insurance programs of the Township with respect
to its policies of group insurance covering life, health, hospitalization,
medical and surgical service or accident insurance.
§ 30-7. Eligibility.
Commissioners who are elected or reelected in the general election held in
November 1993 shall be eligible for participation in the aforesaid insurance
programs when they shall take office on or after January 1, 1994.
Commissioners who are elected or reelected in any general election held
thereafter shall be eligible for participation in the aforesaid insurance
programs when they shall take office.
§ 30-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-7
1:31
Chapter 48
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
§ 48-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish those activities to be taken by
the Manheim Township government to protect the life and property of the
citizens in the event of a natural, technological or terrorism emergency or
disaster and to satisfy the requirements of the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Services Code, (35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.), as amended.
§ 48-2. Findings.
A. Township location and description. Manheim Township is located in
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Manheim Township is the second most
populated municipality within the county, second only to the city of
Lancaster that borders to the south. The population of the Township as
of 2000 was about 34,000. Manheim Township is a First Class Township
within Lancaster County and contains a wide diversity of housing,
commercial, light industry, heavy industry, and agricultural usage.
B. Township capabilities and resources.
(1) Facilities and services.
(a) Manheim Township has a combination of governmental and
volunteer emergency services and facilities that are sufficient
to handle emergencies. However, due to economic, manpower
and equipment considerations, these assets may not be
sufficient to deal with a major disaster.
(b) The response to any disaster must rely upon established
operational plans, organizations, trained personnel, and
intermunicipal and mutual aid resources that will facilitate the
prompt mobilization and delegation of the total resource
capabilities of government and the private sector.
(2) Warning system. Emergency announcements will be broadcast over
the Emergency Alert System.
C. Summary of Township vulnerability to hazards.
(1) Natural hazards. Manheim Township is subject to the following
natural hazards:
(a) Drought.
(b) Earthquake.
(c) Flash floods and flooding.
(d) Hurricanes.
§ 30-7 MANHEIM CODE § 48-2
1:32
§ 48-3. Operations.
(e) Lightning.
(f) Tornadoes.
(g) Windstorms.
(h) Winter storms.
(2) Man-made disasters. Manheim Township is subject to the following
man-made disasters:
(a) Energy emergencies.
(b) Fires.
(c) Hazardous materials accidents.
(d) Transportation accidents.
(e) Water supply deficiencies.
(3) Terrorism and war-caused.
(a) Manheim Township is subject to be exposed to weapons of
mass destruction either by a direct or indirect attack:
[1] Biological and chemical agents.
[2] Bombs and explosives.
[3] Conventional and nuclear missiles.
[4] Radiation fallout.
[5] Sabotage.
(b) The Township is designated as an evacuation point for
residents who live within 10 miles of Three Mile Island and
could be tasked with providing shelter for evacuees.
(4) Resource management. The Township will be responsible for
acquiring any resources necessary to maintain essential services
that would impact the health, safety and welfare of the citizens.
This may be accomplished through emergency purchase orders,
stockpiling of supplies and requests for assistance from other
municipalities and Lancaster County Emergency Management.
A. General.
(1) Requirements of elected officials. The Manheim Township Board of
Commissioners will exercise primary supervision and control over
emergency management and those activities necessary for the
protection of the lives and property of the citizens.
§ 48-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-3
1:33
(2) Emergency management. The plan will provide an effective
organization through the use of designated personnel and
resources operating under the Unified Incident Command System
to cope with emergencies and to mitigate any disaster that may
strike and/or affect the Township.
(3) Declaration of disaster emergency.
(a) The Manheim Township Board of Commissioners may declare a
disaster emergency should the need arise for the response and
recovery operations and to provide authorized aid and
assistance to the citizens.
(b) The declaration will be filed with the Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency through the Lancaster County EMA.
B. Interjurisdictional assistance.
(1) Obtaining assistance.
(a) The Board of Commissioners may enter into intermunicipal,
automatic-aid and mutual-aid agreements for personnel and
resources required to manage an emergency and mitigate a
disaster.
(b) Any request for state and/or federal government assistance
must follow established protocol through Lancaster County
EMA.
C. Operations.
(1) Emergency management. An Emergency Management Coordinator
(EMC) will be appointed by the Governor upon recommendation of
the Board of Commissioners. The EMC will have responsibility for
the Office of Emergency Management and the Emergency
Operations Center.
(2) Emergency Operations Center. The EOC is located in the basement
of the Manheim Township Police Department located at 1825
Municipal Drive, Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
(3) Incident Command System.
(a) The Incident Commander (IC) at the incident site will be from
Fire, Police, or Emergency Medical Services, depending on the
nature of the incident, and will follow the established
Lancaster County Incident Command System.
(b) When the EOC is activated, the EMC or designee will
coordinate between the Incident Commander and County
EMA.
D. Continuity of government.
§ 48-3 MANHEIM CODE § 48-3
1:34
§ 48-4. Organization and responsibilities.
(1) Line of succession.
(a) Board of Commissioners: President, Vice President and Board
members designated by the President.
(2) Relocation of the EOC. If the EOC cannot be used, then the control
may be transferred to the Mobile Command Post or the Lancaster
County EOC.
(3) Orientation of new officials. The Emergency Management
Coordinator will brief all elected/appointed officials on their
responsibilities and emergency procedures at least annually or on
an as-needed basis.
(4) Preservation of records. All recorded public and private documents
of the EOC will be protected from unauthorized disclosure and will
be stored in a fireproof file cabinet.
(5) Relocation of government. In the event of a requirement to relocate
government operations from the Municipal Building located at
1821 Municipal Drive, the following facilities may be used to
temporarily relocate government:
(a) Stauffer Park Mansion.
(b) Boettcher House.
(c) Manheim Township Fire Stations.
E. Phases of emergency management:
(1) Mitigation: the efforts to eliminate or reduce the impact of hazards
that exist within a community and are a threat to life and property
and comprises the operation of emergency management.
(2) Preparedness: being ready to react promptly and effectively to an
emergency and/or disaster with a plan of action conducted through
training and exercising.
(3) Response: occurs after the onset of an emergency or disaster;
provides for the emergency assistance for casualties through
search and rescue, shelter, and medical care and reduces damage
by efforts such as sandbagging of floodwaters, diking of waterway
to control hazardous spills and shoring up and boarding of property
to prevent further damage.
(4) Recovery: the efforts to restore essential services and basic needs
through the use of temporary housing, food distribution,
psychological counseling, restoration of vital services,
reconstruction of damaged areas and measures to prevent future
occurrences.
§ 48-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-4
1:35
A. Organization.
(1) Emergency/disaster situations.
(a) Governmental, private and volunteer organizations are
mobilized to implement specific emergency response activities
and operations.
(b) The EOC and the Mobile Command Post are operated by the
governmental, private and volunteer organizations to manage
emergency/disaster situations.
B. Responsibilities.
(1) Board of Commissioners.
(a) The elected officials are responsible for the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens within the Township.
(b) The elected officials have the overall responsibility for
direction and control over Township operations related to
emergencies and/or disasters.
(2) Emergency management:
(a) Coordination of the governmental, private and volunteer
organizations contributing to the operation of an emergency
and/or disaster.
(b) Provide information on the threats to the Township, plan for
emergencies and conduct recovery operations.
(3) Emergency Management Coordinator:
(a) Coordination, planning and training:
[1] Overall preplanning of emergency/disaster operations.
[2] Disseminate alert/warning information through the
Emergency Alert System.
[3] Maintain and operate the Emergency Operations Center
and the Mobile Command Post.
[4] Coordinate operations with the County Emergency
Management Coordinator.
[5] Provide services and resources as needed.
[6] Coordination of municipal governmental, private and
volunteer emergency forces.
[7] Provide for the reentry of evacuees after the disaster
situation is secured.
§ 48-4 MANHEIM CODE § 48-4
1:36
[8] During emergency/disaster operations, coordinate the
duties and responsibilities of personnel in situations not
covered in the Emergency Operations Plan.
[9] Act as a Public Information Officer (PIO) when needed.
(4) Amateur radio operator:
(a) Maintain progress of an emergency and/or disaster:
[1] Assist Emergency Management Coordinator in
dissemination of alert/notification information.
[2] Maintain communications with emergency shelters.
[3] Maintain communications with route alert teams during
evacuations.
[4] Maintain communications with other emergency agencies.
[5] Provide health and welfare communications regarding
Manheim Township residents to family members when
telephone communications fail.
[6] Provide sky warn communications for severe weather
conditions.
[7] Provide Manheim Township officials with necessary
communications.
[8] Maintain communications with the County Emergency
Operations Center.
[9] Help, aid and assist Manheim Township Emergency
Services with emergency communications.
(5) Resource Advisor:
(a) Coordination:
[1] Maintain a complete list of available equipment and
supplies.
[2] Maintain liaison with servicing utilities, i.e., gas, electric
and water agencies.
[3] Assist Police Services in obtaining material for traffic
control purposes.
(6) Shelter and Transportation Advisor:
(a) Public evacuation sites and transportation resources:
[1] Maintain current list of available shelter locations with
capacities.
§ 48-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-4
1:37
[2] Coordinate all evacuations with the American Red Cross.
[3] Coordinate efforts with the County Mass Care Chief.
[4] Maintain current list of available transportations
resources, such as trucks and buses.
[5] Coordinate efforts with the County Transportation Group
Chief.
(7) Health/Medical Advisor:
(a) Health and sanitary conditions:
[1] Maintain communications with the Manheim Township
Ambulance Association.
[2] Coordinate the sanitation efforts.
[3] Assist the Haz-Mat 2 Team in identification of biological
and chemical agents.
[4] Assist in the proper care for radiological contamination.
[5] Review and coordinate the available medical staff facilities
within Manheim Township.
[6] Coordinate efforts with the County EOC Medical Group
Chief.
(8) Audio Visual Advisor:
(a) Visual evidence of an emergency and/or disaster:
[1] Collect visual data for damage assessment.
[2] Photographs and videotape of damage.
(9) Township Manager-Secretary:
(a) Acts on behalf of the Manheim Township Commissioners:
[1] In charge of the municipal staff.
[2] Handles any disputes between local emergency officials.
[3] Provides recommendations to the Commissioners.
(10) Fire and Rescue Services:
(a) Services provided by Eden, Neffsville and Southern Manheim
Township Fire Companies:
[1] Responsible for the fire and rescue service and hazardous
materials incidents.
§ 48-4 MANHEIM CODE § 48-4
1:38
[2] All Fire Chiefs and officers must operate all incidents
under the unified Incident Command System.
[3] Provide supplemental communications.
[4] Provide assistance to police in the alert and warning and
evacuation of the public.
[5] Provide emergency medical services and first aid to the
level of training and available equipment.
[6] Provide hazardous materials containment and support to
the county's Hazardous Materials Unit.
[7] Provide a representative upon activation of the EOC.
(11) Police Services:
(a) Services provided by Manheim Township Police Department:
[1] Maintain law and order within the Township and under
automatic aid to East Petersburg Borough.
[2] Organize the alert and warning of the public.
[3] Organize the evacuation of affected public.
[4] Assist in the return of the evacuated citizens.
[5] Coordinate with other police authorities.
[6] Provide a representative upon activation of the EOC.
(12) Emergency Medical Services:
(a) Services provided by Manheim Township Ambulance
Association:
[1] Provide emergency prehospital medical and first aid
service to the public.
[2] Responsible for the medical needs of all injured persons
after rescue operations are completed by the Fire and
Rescue Service.
[3] Establish working relations with the area hospitals.
[4] Maintain radio communications with the hospitals to
provide patient data and transport information.
[5] Establish proper procedures to interface with additional
medical services.
[6] Work with the Manheim Township Emergency
Management and the Director of Manheim Township
§ 48-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-4
1:39
§ 48-5. Administration and logistics.
Public Works to provide Manheim Township residents with
adequate community sanitation.
[7] Transport the injured to the appropriate hospital or other
health care facility.
[8] Provide a representative upon activation of the EOC.
[9] Coordinate efforts with other emergency medical services
organizations.
(13) Public works:
(a) Services provided by Manheim Township:
[1] Maintain and clear roads to ensure passage of traffic.
[2] Coordinate public water and sanitation services and return
of electrical, gas and phone utilities for the public as soon
as possible.
[3] Establish temporary fresh drinking water and sanitary
portable lavatory for the public.
[4] Perform other services as requested to assist with
emergency/disaster recovery.
[5] Provide a representative upon activation of the EOC.
A. Administration.
(1) Municipal reports and records.
(a) Township government reports. The Emergency Management
Coordinator will provide damage assessment reports, situation
reports and requests for assistance to the County EMA.
(b) Expenditures and obligations. Records of expenditures and
obligations in operations will be maintained by the Township
Finance Department.
(c) Emergency Operations Center records. The Emergency
Management Coordinator will maintain all narrative and event
action log records in a fire-protected file cabinet.
(2) Nondiscrimination. There will be no discrimination on grounds of
race, color, religion, nationality, sex, age, or economic status in the
execution of disaster preparedness or disaster relief and assistance
functions.
B. Agreements and understanding: automatic-aid, intermunicipal and
mutual-aid agreements.
§ 48-4 MANHEIM CODE § 48-5
1:40
§ 48-6. Authority and references.
§ 48-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS CONTROL POINTS (ACP) — Manned posts established by
Township police, augmented by Fire Police or by the National Guard, on
roads leading into a disaster area for the purpose of controlling entry during
an emergency.
ACTIVATE — Start or place into action an activity or system.
CONTROL — Exercise authority with the ability to influence actions,
compel, or hold in restraint.
COORDINATION — Arranging, in order, activities of equal importance to
harmonize in a common effort.
DEPLOY — To move to the assigned location in order to start operations.
DIRECTION — Providing authoritative guidance, supervision, and
management of activities/operations along a prescribed course to reach an
attainable goal.
DISASTER — A man-made, natural or war-caused catastrophe.
(1) Manheim Township will use preestablished agreements by
Lancaster County EMA to help supplement depleted Township
resources.
(2) Duly authorized officials may enter into all agreements and
understandings for the protection of Manheim Township.
(3) Copies of any agreements are to be maintained in the office of the
Emergency Management Coordinator and the EOC.
A. Pennsylvania emergency management:
(1) Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services Code (35 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7101 et seq.), as amended, and Resolution No. 88-7: assigns
functions as necessary to support a comprehensive emergency
management program.
MAN-MADE — Any industrial, nuclear or transportation accident
explosion, conflagration, power failure, natural resource shortage or
other condition, except enemy action resulting from man-made causes,
such as oil spills and other injurious environmental contamination,
which threatens or causes substantial damage to property, human
suffering, hardship, or loss of life.
A.
NATURAL — Any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, winddriven
water, tidal wave, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm,
B.
§ 48-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-7
1:41
DISASTER EMERGENCY — Those conditions that, upon investigation, are
found to:
EMERGENCY — A sudden unexpected happening or occasion for action,
constraint or pressing necessity to prevent the loss of life and/or property.
EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM (EAS) ANNOUNCEMENTS — Official
announcements made at the county level for the specific purpose of
providing information, instructions, or directions from the County
Commissioners, or their designated official representative, to the
permanent and transient residents of the county. Announcements are made
over the EAS network. EAS announcements at the state level are made
only when they are applicable statewide. Restriction on the use of EAS
announcements does not preclude appropriate use of newspapers, radio,
and television for public information statements.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — The judicious planning, assignment, and
coordination of all available resources in a program of mitigation,
preparedness, response, and recovery for emergencies of all kinds, whether
from enemy attack, man-made, or natural sources.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA) — Recognized agency in
Manheim Township to attain specific goals or objectives in an organized
effort to mitigate against, prepare for, respond to, and recover from any
emergency and/or disaster.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR (EMC) — Recognized staff
position by the Manheim Township Commissioners and appointed by the
Governor of Pennsylvania for the coordination of all emergency and disaster
services within Manheim Township.
drought, fire or other catastrophe which results in substantial damage
to property, hardship, suffering, or possible loss of life.
WAR-CAUSED — Any condition following an attack upon the United
States resulting in substantial damage to property or injury to persons
in the Township caused by use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, or nuclear,
radiological, chemical or biological means, or other weapons or overt
paramilitary actions, or other acts such as sabotage or terrorism.
C.
Affect safety: affect seriously the safety, health, or welfare of the
citizens or preclude the operation or use of essential public facilities.
A.
Require state assistance: be of such magnitude or severity as to render
state support of county and municipal efforts to alleviate the danger,
damage, suffering, or hardship faced by the citizens.
B.
Have causes not covered by law: conditions caused by forces beyond
the control of man, by reason of civil disorder, riot or disturbance, or
by factors not foreseen and not known to exist when appropriation bills
were enacted.
C.
§ 48-7 MANHEIM CODE § 48-7
1:42
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER (EOC) — A designated place where
personnel and communications are available to control operations during a
disaster through the implementation of the preparedness plan.
FULL EMERGENCY CONDITION — A situation in which a total mobilization
of all resources of the Emergency Management Agency is required on a
twenty-four-hour basis to cope with the emergency and/or disaster.
GOVERNOR'S PROCLAMATION OF DISASTER EMERGENCY — The
Governor is empowered to declare a state of disaster emergency upon
finding that a disaster has occurred or that the occurrence or the threat
of a disaster is imminent. This proclamation by executive order authorizes
counties and municipalities to exercise vested powers without regard to
time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law (excepting
mandatory constitutional requirements) pertaining to performance of public
works, employing of temporary workers, entering into contracts, incurring
obligations, renting of equipment, purchasing materials and supplies,
levying taxes and appropriation and expenditure of public funds. The state
of disaster emergency continues until the Governor finds that the danger
has passed and terminates it by executive order or proclamation, but no
state of disaster emergency may continue for longer than 90 days unless
renewed by the Governor.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS (HAZMAT) — Any substance or material in a
quantity or form which may be harmful or injurious to humans, domestic
animals, wildlife, economic crops or property when released into the
environment. Hazardous materials are classified as chemical, biological,
radiological, or explosive.
HAZARDS VULNERABILITY ANALYSIS (HVA) — A compilation of natural
and man-made hazards and their predictability, frequency, duration,
intensity, and risk to population and property.
LIMITED EMERGENCY CONDITION — A situation in which a potential
hazard has reached dangerous level and could affect the safety of the
threatened population with very little warning. The Emergency
Management Coordinator will activate the EOC on a twenty-four-hour basis
with selected staff and emergency response personnel. This condition
recognizes a serious situation and provides posture of operational readiness
in place until the situation has been resolved or full emergency condition is
necessary.
LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY (WHEN DECLARED BY THE TOWNSHIP
COMMISSIONERS) — The condition declared by the Commissioners when,
in their judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster requires
coordinated local government action to prevent or alleviate the damage,
loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused. A local emergency arising
wholly or substantially out of a resource shortage may be declared only by
the Governor, upon petition of the local governing body, when he/she deems
the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster to be of sufficient severity
and magnitude to warrant coordinated local government action to prevent
or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused
thereby.
§ 48-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-7
1:43
MASS CARE CENTERS — Fixed facilities suitable for providing emergency
lodging for victims of disasters left temporarily homeless and capable of
providing all essential social services. Feeding may be done within a mass
care center in suitable dining facilities or nearby.
MOBILIZE — To augment staff and resources in order to accomplish the
mission at an indicated location on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis.
PRESIDENTIAL DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY — Any occasion or
instance for which, in the determination of the President, federal assistance
is needed to supplement state and local efforts and capabilities to save
lives and to protect property, public health and safety or lessen or avert
the threat of a catastrophe. Before any federal assistance can be rendered,
the Governor must first determine that the situation is of such severity and
magnitude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of the state and
affected county and municipal governments and that federal assistance is
necessary. As a prerequisite to federal assistance, the Governor shall take
appropriate action under law and direct execution of the Commonwealth
Emergency Operations Plan. The Governor's request for declaration of
a major disaster by the President may be accepted, downgraded to
emergency or denied.
PRESIDENTIAL DECLARATION OF MAJOR DISASTER — Any natural
catastrophe or, regardless of cause, any fire, flood, or explosion which, in
the determination of the President, causes damage of sufficient severity and
magnitude to warrant major disaster assistance to supplement the efforts
and available resources of states, local governments, and disaster relief
organizations in alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering caused
thereby.
PUBLIC INFORMATION STATEMENTS — Public announcements made by
the Township Commissioners' spokespersons via newspapers, radio, or
television to explain government actions being taken to protect the public in
the event of any public emergency. The purpose of the announcement is to
provide accurate information, prevent panic, and counteract misinformation
and rumors.
RECEPTION CENTER — A predesignated site outside the disaster area
through which evacuees needing shelter will be able to obtain information,
services and direction to shelters.
REENTRY — The return to the normal community dwelling and operating
sites by families, individuals, governments, and businesses once the
evacuated area has been declared safe for occupancy.
ROUTE ALERTING — Accomplished by predesignated teams traveling in
vehicles along preassigned routes delivering an alert/warning message.
TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF FORMAL REQUIREMENTS — Each
political subdivision included in declaration of disaster emergency declared
by either the Governor or the governing body of the political subdivision
affected by the disaster emergency is authorized [pursuant to 35 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301, as amended (relating to general authority of Governor)] to exercise
the powers vested under this section in light of the exigencies of the
§ 48-7 MANHEIM CODE § 48-7
1:44
emergency situation without regard to time-consuming procedures and
formalities prescribed by law (excepting mandatory constitutional
requirements pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into
contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary
workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials,
the levying of taxes and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds.
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINTS — Manned posts established at critical road
junctions for the purpose of controlling or limiting traffic. TCPs are used to
control evacuation traffic from the emergency or disaster site.
UNMET NEEDS — Capabilities and/or resources required for supporting
emergency operations but neither available nor provided for at the
respective levels of government.
WEATHER WARNING — Previously expected severe weather is occurring
or is about to occur.
WEATHER WATCH — Indicates that conditions and ingredients exist to
trigger severe weather.
§ 48-8. Training requirements.
§ 48-9. Development and maintenance responsibilities;
enforceability; execution; distribution.
A. Training authority. The Emergency Management Coordinator may
activate this plan as required to evaluate and maintain the readiness
posture of the Manheim Township response teams at least annually
through a tabletop, functional or full-scale operational exercise.
B. Training policy.
(1) Response and recovery training. Realistic training must be
conducted on an as-needed basis to evaluate the response and
recovery actions of the plan.
(a) The Emergency Management Coordinator, in coordination with
the Township response agencies, will decide on the type and
scope of an exercise.
(b) Any request from a local agency for an exercise to test their
capabilities will only be accomplished if required by Township,
county, state or federal law.
(2) Professional development:
(a) Training will be provided to the Emergency Management
Coordinator and any staff on techniques of writing emergency
plans, professional development skills, and security issues
related to emergency preparedness.
(b) Minimum of two state-/federal-sponsored sessions per year or
16 hours of documented training.
§ 48-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-9
1:45
§ 48-10. Emergency Operations Center (EOC).
A. Development and maintenance responsibilities. The Emergency
Management Coordinator is responsible for the development and
maintenance of this plan.
(1) Components will be updated under a five-year schedule and
reviewed at least annually.
(2) An emergency or exercise may determine a need for changes or
upgrade of this plan.
B. Enforceability: enforceable under the provisions of Manheim Township
Resolution No. 2001-31, adopted May 29, 2001.
C. Execution. The plan is executed upon order of the Township
Commissioners or their authorized representatives, the Township
Manager-Secretary and/or the Emergency Management Coordinator.
D. Distribution of the Manheim Township Emergency Operations Plan:
(1) Emergency Management Coordinator.
(2) Mobile Command Post/EOC.
(3) Command Car.
(4) Commissioners Conference Room.
(5) Township Manager-Secretary.
(6) Police Department.
(7) Ambulance Association.
(8) Eden Fire Department.
(9) Neffsville Fire Department.
(10) Southern Manheim Township Fire Department.
(11) Public Works.
(12) Lancaster County EMA.
(13) Lancaster County Haz-Mat Team.
A. Required materials and information. Verify the following materials and
information are available:
(1) Copy of County Emergency Operations Plan.
(2) Copy of Manheim Township Operations Plan.
(3) Copy of EOC/staff officers SOPs.
§ 48-9 MANHEIM CODE § 48-10
1:46
(4) Notification and Resource Manual.
(5) Event Action Log.
(6) Sign In/Out Log.
(7) Manheim Township Organization.
(8) Staff schedule for twenty-four-hour operations.
(9) Action Status Board.
(10) Municipal Map.
(11) Adequate office supplies for twenty-four-hour operation.
B. General.
(1) Mission: to permit coordination and implementation of actions at
the Township level to save lives, protect property, and alleviate
human suffering during periods of natural, man-made, and warcaused
emergencies and disasters.
(2) Staffing: rapid mobilization of key personnel.
(3) Location:
(a) Basement, 1825 Municipal Drive.
(b) Alternate is the Mobile Command Post or the County
Emergency Operations Center.
(4) Guidelines.
(a) The Township Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC)
monitors emergency conditions and recommends to the
President of the Board of Commissioners to mobilize the EOC.
(b) The EOC is mobilized under authority of the President.
(c) The Emergency Management Coordinator functions for the
Commissioners in control of operations and supervising the
EOC staff.
C. Mobilization and operation of the EOC.
(1) Limited emergency condition:
(a) Could affect the safety of Manheim Township with very little
warning.
(b) EMC may mobilize at the Mobile Command Post and open
EOC.
(c) Provide for advanced readiness.
§ 48-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-10
1:47
§ 48-11. Emergency actions and orders during a pandemic. [Added
4-16-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-08]
(2) Full emergency condition:
(a) Situation exceeds the public safety level.
(b) Requires total mobilization of all emergency resources.
(c) Establish twenty-four-hour operation to cope with the major
emergency and/or disaster.
A. General.
(1) During a local disaster emergency declared by the Board of
Commissioners, the Commissioners have the authority and
responsibility to protect the safety, health and welfare of Manheim
Township residents and the general public within the Township.
(2) A local disaster emergency involving a pandemic represents a
particularly dangerous threat to the safety, health and welfare of
the public because it involves a highly contagious disease that is
spread by community contact.
(3) Under the very unique and limited circumstances of a local disaster
emergency involving a pandemic, the Board of Commissioners
needs to have the authority to issue orders, approve actions and
take other steps to contain the pandemic in order to protect the
safety, health and welfare of the public.
(4) The Emergency Management Coordinator and the Township
Manager shall provide input and make recommendations to the
Board of Commissioners regarding what orders, actions and steps
are reasonably required and necessary to adequately protect the
public safety, health and welfare.
B. Authority.
(1) The Pennsylvania First Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 55101, et
seq. grants the Board of Commissioners broad general powers to
protect the safety, health and welfare of persons within the
Township, including adopting ordinances and taking action related
to controlling the spread of a contagious disease. See 53 P.S.
§ 56552 (General Powers), 53 P.S. § 56150 (Public Safety) and
Article XVI (Public Health).
(2) The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services Code, 35
Pa.C.S.A. § 7101, et seq., places the responsibility for direction and
control on the "lowest level of government affected" and authorizes
local political subdivisions to, inter alia, adopt and implement
precautionary measures to mitigate the anticipated effects of a
disaster and to execute and enforce such orders adopted and
promulgated under the Act. See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7504 (a)
§ 48-10 MANHEIM CODE § 48-11
1:48
Chapter 61
FIRE RESCUE VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER'S ASSOCIATION
§ 61-1. Disposition of funds.16
The Municipal Treasurer is directed to pay all monies received from the
Fire Insurance Tax Fund to the Treasurer of Southern Manheim Township
(responsibility for direction and control) and 35 Pa. C.S.A. § 7503
(5), (6) (powers and duties of political subdivisions).
(3) Under Pennsylvania law, the Board of Commissioners has the
authority and responsibility to take action to respond to public
nuisances that threaten the safety, health and welfare of the public.
C. Issuance of emergency orders and actions. During a local disaster
emergency involving a pandemic that poses a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents or to the employees of Manheim
Township or to the general public, the Manheim Township Board of
Commissioners shall have the authority to approve by resolution
emergency actions and orders intended to protect the safety, health and
welfare of the public and Township employees that are put at risk as a
result of the pandemic. Such actions and orders may include, but are
not limited to, temporarily suspending permits, work orders, licenses,
zoning approvals, inspections and other approvals or activities as the
Board of Commissioners determines are needed to respond to the
pandemic.
D. Notice. Notice of a resolution authorizing an emergency order or action
issued by the Board of Commissioners under this section shall be
provided to the public through the posting of the resolution on the
Manheim Township website and by posting the resolution on the front
door of the Manheim Township municipal building.
E. Time limitations on emergency orders and actions. Any resolution by
the Board of Commissioners authorizing an emergency order or action
under this section shall be effective only during the time a local disaster
emergency is in effect within Manheim Township. Moreover, any order
or action shall automatically expire after 30 days unless a new
resolution is approved by the Board of Commissioners extending the
order or action for another 30 days, which the Board can continue to
extend every 30 days if required for the duration of the local disaster
emergency.
F. Judicial review of resolution authorizing an emergency order or action.
Any person aggrieved by a resolution adopted by the Board of
Commissioners under this section may seek judicial review by filing an
appropriate action with the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas
as provided for under the First Class Township Code. See 53 P.S.
§ 56502.1(c).
§ 48-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-1
1:49
Fire Company, Eden Fire Company and Neffsville Fire Company in coequal
percentages.
Chapter 66
FISCAL AFFAIRS
16.Editor's Note: By resolution of 3-10-1931, the Township had recognized the Firemen's
Relief Associations of the Neffsville and Eden Fire Companies. The Firemen's Relief
Association of the Southern Manheim Fire Company was subsequently recognized in 1947.
§ 61-1 MANHEIM CODE § 61-1
1:50
ARTICLE I
Use of Facsimile Signatures
[Adopted 12-14-1992 by Res. No. 1992-53 (Part 2, Ch. 6, Art. I, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 66-1. Use authorized for certain officers.17
Pursuant to Section 804 of the First Class Township Code, Act of June
24, 1931 (P.L. 1206, No. 331), reenacted and amended May 27, 1949 (P.L.
1955, No. 569), as amended ("code"),18 and the provisions of the Uniform
Facsimile Signature of Public Officials Act of July 25, 1961, P.L. 849, as
amended ("Uniform Act"),19 the following officers of the Township are each
hereby authorized to file their manual signatures, certified under oath, with
the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ("commonwealth") and,
after such filing, are authorized to cause instruments of payment and public
securities of the Township, as defined in the Uniform Act, to be executed
with facsimile signatures in lieu of their respective manual signatures:
§ 66-2. Applicability to successors in office.
All individuals hereafter elected or appointed as the holders of such offices
of the Township are each hereby authorized, subject to any additional
requirements of the code or the Uniform Act as may then be in effect, to
so file certified manual signatures with the Secretary of the Commonwealth
and, after the filing thereof, to cause instruments of payment and public
securities of the Township to be executed with facsimile signatures.
A. President, Board of Commissioners.
B. Vice President, Board of Commissioners.
C. Manager-Secretary.
D. Assistant Manager-Secretary.
E. Treasurer.
F. Finance Officer.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55804.
19.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:51
Chapter 75
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
§ 66-2 MANHEIM CODE § 66-2
1:52
ARTICLE I
Discrimination Against Handicapped Persons
[Adopted 2-11-1985 by Res. No. 1985-12 (Part 2, Ch. 6, Art. F, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 75-1. Explanation of procedure.20
The Township adopts the following grievance procedure for those
handicapped individuals of the Township who feel that the Township has
discriminated against them:
A. The following grievance procedure is established to meet the
requirements of the Revenue Sharing Act. It should be used by any
individual who wishes to file a complaint alleging discrimination on the
basis of handicap in employment practices and policies or the provision
of programs, services and benefits by Manheim Township.
B. The grievance should be in written form and contain as much
information as possible about the alleged discrimination (name,
address, phone number, location and description of problem, etc.).
Other arrangements for submission of a grievance, such as a personal
interview or tape recording, will be made available for the visually
impaired or those with motor impairments. It should be submitted by
the grievant and/or his or her designee within 30 calendar days of the
alleged violation to the Township Manager-Secretary, 1840 Municipal
Drive, Lancaster, Pennsylvania 17601; Phone No.: 569-6408; office
hours: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
C. Within 20 working days of receipt of the complaint, the Township
Manager-Secretary will respond in writing (or a method understood by
the complainant) to the complainant and/or his or her designee. The
response will offer a resolution or explain the position of Manheim
Township with respect to the complaint.
D. If the response by the Township Manager-Secretary does not
satisfactorily resolve the issue, the complainant and/or his or her
designee may request a hearing to be held within 20 working days of
receipt of the response before the Manheim Township Commissioners,
1840 Municipal Drive, Lancaster, Pennsylvania 17601; Phone No.:
569-6408; office hours: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., for resolution. Within 45
calendar days of the hearing, the complainant and/or his or her
designee will receive the final resolution in writing (or a method
understood by the complainant) as proposed by the Manheim Township
Commissioners.
E. All complaints received by the Township Manager-Secretary and
responses from the Manheim Township Commissioners will be kept by
Manheim Township for a period of three years. These documents may
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:53
be requested by the Office of Revenue Sharing should an investigation
into alleged discrimination on the basis of handicapped status be
initiated.
§ 75-1 MANHEIM CODE § 75-1
1:54
Chapter 82
INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 75.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 99.
Pension plans and retirement — See Ch. 109.
Personnel — See Ch. 114.
§ 82-1. Indemnification of officers and employees.
Manheim Township, a First Class Township existing pursuant to laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (Township), shall indemnify any person who
was or is a Commissioner, officer, employee or agent of the Township or
any of its boards, commissions, or agencies against all reasonable costs and
expenses (including, without limitation, counsel fees, judgments, penalties,
fines, amounts paid in settlement, etc.) incurred in any actual or threatened
investigation or proceeding (whether civil, criminal, administrative or
otherwise) if such person, in acting as a Commissioner, officer, employee or
agent of the Township, its boards, commissions or agencies:
§ 82-2. Determination of good faith actions.
As to § 82-1A and B above, it shall be presumed that a person acted in good
faith and in a manner such person believed to be in the best interest of the
Township unless and until:
A. Acted in good faith; and
B. In a manner such person believed to be in the best interest of the
Township; and
C. With respect to criminal matters, without knowledge that such actions
were unlawful.
A. It shall be finally adjudged that such person acted in a manner which
such person knew not to be in good faith or knew not to be in the best
interests of the Township; or
B. The Township:
(1) Shall determine that such person acted in a manner which such
person knew not to be in good faith or knew not to be in the best
interests of the Township; and
(2) Shall have received the opinion of its independent counsel that
indemnification may be improper under the circumstances.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:55
§ 82-3. Criminal matters.
As to § 82-1C above, a conviction or judgment (whether after trial or based
on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise) shall not be deemed
an adjudication adverse to the person to be indemnified unless it shall also
be adjudged in such conviction or judgement that such person knew such
actions to be unlawful.
§ 82-4. Intent and obligation; interpretation.
It is the intent and obligation of the Township to indemnify each former
and present Commissioner, officer, employee or agent in accordance with
this chapter and to the maximum extent permitted by law. If any portion of
this chapter is declared to be illegal or unenforceable, then the remaining
portions of this chapter shall be interpreted so as to provide the maximum
indemnity permitted by law.
§ 82-5. Conditions.
Any person entitled to indemnity pursuant to this chapter shall, as a
precondition to such indemnity, inform and consult with the Township prior
to incurring any cost or expense for which indemnity is requested. Payment
of expenses to be indemnified shall be made as and when incurred by the
person to be indemnified, except as otherwise directed by the Township.
The indemnity obligation, as hereinbefore set forth, shall:
Chapter 87
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
A. Be in addition to and supplemental to any right of indemnity pursuant
to any insurance contracts; and
B. Be in addition to and supplemental to any right of indemnity pursuant
to the "Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act"21 or any other right of
indemnity; and
C. Not constitute a waiver of any immunity which might be available to the
person entitled to indemnity.
21.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8541 et seq.
§ 82-3 MANHEIM CODE § 82-5
1:56
ARTICLE I
Workers' Compensation Administration
[Adopted 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-5 (Part 2, Ch. 6, Art. J, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 87-1. Background; establishment of trust; statutory authority.
§ 87-2. Authorization to enter into agreement; conditions.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a
copy of which is attached as the official copy of this article and incorporated
into this article by reference (and which shall be filed with the minutes of
the meeting at which this article was enacted),23 with the intent and effect
that this political subdivision shall be bound by the agreement and shall
join and participate in the trust; provided, however, that if the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry (the "Department") requires any material
changes to the agreement as a condition to the Department's approval of
the trust, then the revised agreement shall again need the approval of
this political subdivision, but no such additional approval shall be needed
in the event of nonmaterial changes to the agreement as required by the
Department.
A. A number of political subdivisions within Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, have investigated whether it would be mutually
beneficial to cooperate with each other in obtaining workers'
compensation insurance.
B. A plan has been presented to establish the Susquehanna Municipal
Trust (the "trust") for the purpose of:
(1) Seeking the prevention or lessening of claims due to injuries of
employees of the trust's members; and
(2) Pooling workers' compensation and occupational disease insurance
risks, reserves, claims and losses and providing self-insurance and
reinsurance therefor.
C. The trust will be established pursuant to an intergovernmental
agreement entitled the "Susquehanna Municipal Trust — Trust
Agreement" (the "agreement").
D. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53
P.S. § 481 et seq.,22 a municipality may enter into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement upon the passage of an ordinance by its
governing body.
22.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed 12-19-1996 (P.L. 1158, No. 177).
See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-3
1:57
§ 87-3. Authority of Township officials.
The President or Vice President of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Manager-Secretary or Assistant Manager-Secretary, is
hereby authorized and directed on behalf of the political subdivision:
§ 87-4. Right of Township to withdraw from trust.
The political subdivision reserves the right to withdraw from the trust (and,
upon such withdrawal, the actions and approvals as set forth above shall
be void) if the approval of the trust by the Department is not obtained by
June 30, 1996, so that the trust may become effective in accordance with
the agreement.
§ 87-5. Ratification of certain prior actions.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of the political
subdivision heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the trust
and/or the political subdivision's participation therein are hereby ratified
and approved in all respects.
§ 87-6. Additional actions authorized.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 87-7. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. To execute and deliver the agreement;
B. To execute and submit to the Department such documents and
information (including, without limitation, any statements of intent to
join the trust) as are necessary or appropriate in connection with the
trust's application for approval by the Department; and
C. To execute and deliver such additional instruments and to take such
further actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the
agreement and the transactions to be effected under the agreement,
including payment to the trust of such amounts as are due by the
political subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement;
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the trust at least until
December 31, 1997, and the term of the agreement, including all
renewal terms, shall be as further set forth therein;
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
Preamble of this article and in the agreement;24
§ 87-3 MANHEIM CODE § 87-7
1:58
§ 87-8. Effect on certain prior actions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred
or any cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
(2) Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under
the agreement shall come from normal and usual budgeted
amounts for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the trust shall be as set forth in the agreement;
E. The trust shall be managed by its own Plan Committee and Board of
Trustees pursuant to the terms of the agreement;
F. All property, real or personal, of the trust shall be acquired, managed,
licensed or disposed of by the trust in accordance with the terms of the
agreement; and
G. The trust created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
24.Editor's Note: A complete copy of Ord. No. 1995-5, including the Preamble, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 87-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-8
1:59

ARTICLE II
Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-13 (Part 2, Ch. 7, Art. A, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 87-9. Reorganization of Committee.
The Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee is being reorganized under the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law25 by the agreement dated September
12, 1995.
§ 87-10. Participating municipalities.
The participating municipalities as of the date in § 87-9 are the Boroughs
of East Petersburg, Millersville, and Mountville, and the Townships of East
Hempfield, East Lampeter, Lancaster, Manheim, Manor, Pequea, West
Hempfield, and West Lampeter.
§ 87-11. Purpose of agreement.
The purpose of the agreement is to provide a forum for the discussion
of intermunicipal challenges or anticipated concerns among the member
municipalities and amicable pursuit of solutions.
§ 87-12. Representation of member municipalities; signatures on
agreement.
Each member municipality shall be officially represented by its legislative
body, its elected executive (if any), and/or any other persons designated by
its elected officials. The appropriate official of each member municipality
shall be authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the municipality.
§ 87-13. Incorporation of agreement by reference.
The agreement is attached to this article and made a part hereof.26
25.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 87-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-13
1:61

ARTICLE III
Police Services Agreement
[Adopted 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
§ 87-14. Background; statutory authority; purpose.
§ 87-15. Approval of amendment.
The amendment is hereby approved on behalf of MT, and the appropriate
officers thereof shall execute and deliver the amendment on behalf of MT.
§ 87-16. Obligation to enter into amendment.
MT's obligation to enter into the amendment and its obligations under the
agreement as amended by the amendment are expressly conditioned upon
approval and execution thereof by LT.
A. Manheim Township ("MT"), as authorized pursuant to § 1502.54 of the
First Class Township Code, of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
("Commonwealth"), and Lancaster Township ("LT"), as authorized
pursuant to § 1903 of the Second Class Township Code, of the
Commonwealth, entered into the Police Services Agreement
("agreement") attached to and made a part of this article with respect
to police services to be provided by MT to and within LT. MT and LT
have determined to enter into the amendment ("amendment") to the
agreement attached to and made a part of this article.27
B. The duration and term of the agreement as amended by the amendment
is set forth therein.
C. The continued purpose and objectives of the agreement are to authorize
and provide for the delegation of authority to furnish and for the
furnishing of police services by MT to and within LT as described, and
subject to the terms and conditions set forth, in the agreement as
amended by the amendment.
D. The costs concerning such provision of police services are as set forth
in the agreement as amended by the amendment.
E. The agreement as amended by the amendment does not provide for the
formation of any entity or new organizational structure.
F. Unless provided for in the agreement as amended by the amendment, it
is not anticipated that any real or personal property will be acquired
pursuant thereto.
G. No new entity is created under or empowered to enter into contracts for
policies for group insurance and employee benefits, including social
security, for employees, under the agreement as amended by the
amendment.
27.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 87-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-16
1:63

ARTICLE IV
Central Lancaster County Council of Governments
[Adopted 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
§ 87-17. Background.
§ 87-18. Approval of agreement.
The agreement is hereby approved on behalf of the municipality, and the
appropriate officers thereof shall execute and deliver the agreement on
behalf of the municipality.
§ 87-19. Obligation to enter into agreement.
The municipality's obligation to enter into the agreement and its obligations
under the agreement are expressly conditioned upon approval and
execution thereof by EHT.
A. This municipality ("municipality") has determined to enter into the
Central Lancaster County Council of Governments Agreement
("agreement") attached to this article,28 with East Hempfield Township
("EHT"), in order to provide for the creation and governance of the
Central Lancaster County Council of Governments and the participation
of the municipality and EHT with respect to the COG as defined in the
agreement.
B. The term of the agreement is indefinite.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as provided in the
agreement.
D. The responsibility for costs concerning the obligations under the
agreement are as set forth in the agreement.
E. The agreement does not provide for the formation of any new entity or
new organizational structure apart from the COG.
F. As permitted and provided for in the agreement, real and/or personal
property may be acquired pursuant to the agreement.
G. No entity is empowered to enter into contracts for policies for group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for
employees, under the agreement.
28.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 87-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-19
1:65

ARTICLE V
Cooperative Maintenance Agreement for Multi-Jurisdictional Signal
System
[Adopted 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-24]
§ 87-20. Background.
§ 87-21. Approval of agreement.
The agreement is hereby approved on behalf of the Township, and the
appropriate officers thereof shall execute and deliver the agreement on
behalf of the Township.
§ 87-22. Obligation to enter into agreement.
The Township's obligation to enter into the agreement and its obligations
under the agreement are expressly conditioned upon approval and
execution thereof by the City.
A. The Township of Manheim ("Township") has determined to enter into
the cooperative maintenance agreement ("agreement") attached to this
article,29 with the City of Lancaster ("City"), in order to provide for the
obligations of the Township and the City with respect to the MJSS30 as
defined in the agreement.
B. The term of the agreement is indefinite.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as provided in the
agreement.
D. The responsibility for costs concerning the obligations under the
agreement are as set forth in the agreement.
E. The agreement does not provide for the formation of any entity or new
organizational structure.
F. Unless provided for in the agreement, it is not anticipated that any real
or personal property will be acquired pursuant to the agreement.
G. No entity is empowered to enter into contracts for policies for group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for
employees, under the agreement.
29.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
30.Editor's Note: MJSS refers to multi-jurisdictional signal system.
§ 87-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-22
1:67
Chapter 99
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 75.
Indemnification — See Ch. 82.
Pension plans and retirement — See Ch. 109.
Personnel — See Ch. 114.
§ 87-22 MANHEIM CODE § 87-22
1:68
ARTICLE I
Manager-Secretary
[Adopted 12-10-1962 by Ord. No. 1962-11 (Part 2, Ch. 2, Art. B, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 99-1. Creation of office.
Pursuant to the powers vested in the Commissioners by Article XV, Section
1502, IV, of the First Class Township Code,31 the Commissioners hereby
create the office of Township Manager-Secretary.
§ 99-2. Participation in general administration.
The Manager-Secretary shall participate in the general administration of
the Township as follows:
§ 99-3. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 12-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-19]
The Manager-Secretary shall be responsible for the administration of the
Township offices, municipal sewer system, Street and Highway Department
and Zoning Department and shall perform the following duties:
A. Attend all Commissioners meetings and any other meetings which he is
requested to attend by the Commissioners.
B. Keep the Commissioners informed on matters affecting public interest
and welfare of the Township.
C. Make recommendations to the Commissioners concerning
improvements and changes relative to the public interest and general
welfare of the Township.
D. Authorize all purchases in the name of the Township in line with daily
routine operation of Township business, such materials and supplies.
E. Check all bills and invoices received by the Township and recommend
the payment of such obligations when found to be in order.
F. Answer all general correspondence addressed to the Commissioners.
A. He shall supervise all Township personnel in the areas mentioned in
§ 99-2.
B. He shall maintain adequate office and departmental records as
prescribed by the Commissioners.
C. He shall supervise and be responsible for the proper maintenance and
care of Township equipment and property.
31.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56504.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-3
1:69
§ 99-4. Compensation. [Last amended 12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-1932]
The compensation of the Township Manager-Secretary shall be established
from time to time by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 99-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted as delegating any
legislative or judicial powers or duties of the Commissioners to the
Manager-Secretary, and the language herein used shall not be construed
as intending delegation of any such powers, nor shall anything herein
contained prevent the delegation of any nonlegislative or nonjudicial
powers or duties of the Commissioners from time to time to the Manager-
Secretary by the Commissioners.
§ 99-6. Administration of certain pension funds. [Added 4-12-1999
by Res. No. 1999-22]
The Commissioners of Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
hereby appoint the Township Manager-Secretary as the Chief
Administrative Officer for the Manheim Township Police Pension Fund and
the Nonuniformed Employees Pension Fund.
D. He shall report to the Commissioners violations of all ordinances
relative to the hereinabove-mentioned areas and the steps taken to
enforce ordinances pursuant to instructions from the Commissioners.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 99-3 MANHEIM CODE § 99-6
1:70
ARTICLE II
Independent Auditor
[Adopted 4-13-1970 by Ord. No. 1970-8 (Part 2, Ch. 2, Art. A, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 99-7. Appointment; qualifications.
Prior to the close of the Township's fiscal year, the Commissioners shall
appoint, by resolution, an independent Auditor, who shall be a certified
public accountant registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public
accountants so registered, or a competent public accountant or a competent
firm of public accountants, for the purpose of conducting an audit of the
Township's accounts.
§ 99-8. Annual audit of accounts.
The Auditor shall make an independent examination of all of the accounts
and accounting records of the Township for the fiscal year then closing.
§ 99-9. Time of appointment; compensation.
The Commissioners shall appoint the Auditor at least 30 days prior to the
close of the fiscal year of the Township, and the compensation of the Auditor
shall be fixed by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 99-10. Powers and duties.
The independent Auditor shall have and possess all the powers and perform
all the duties provided in the First Class Township Code, Act of June 24,
1931, P.L. 1206,33 for elected auditors.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 99-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-10
1:71

ARTICLE III
Tax Collector
[Adopted 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-0434]
§ 99-11. Compensation.
A. Beginning in January, 2014, the date of commencement of the term of
office of the Tax Collector of Manheim Township to be elected in the
municipal election to be held in November 2013, the Tax Collector of
the Township, as tax collector for the Township for all taxes levied by
the Township other than taxes which are levied by the Township under
and pursuant to the Act of December 31, 1065, P.L. 1257, No. 511, as
amended, known as the Local Tax Enabling Act ("Local Tax Enabling
Act"),35 and for which the Township has and shall designate other tax
collectors, shall receive as annual compensation for collection of the
taxes of the Township the sum of $9,000, payable according to the
following schedule:
(1) One thousand three hundred fifty dollars shall be payable at such
time as the Tax Collector shall have made affidavit that all annual
tax notices have been sent pursuant to the Local Tax Collection
Law, 1945, May 25, P.L. 1050, § 6, as amended.36
(2) Three thousand one hundred fifty dollars shall be payable at such
time as the Tax Collector provides to the Secretary the report
provided in § 99-13 of the Code, that shows collections deposited
on behalf of the Township equal to 50% of the base billing.
(3) One thousand eight hundred dollars shall be payable at such time
as the Tax Collector provides to the Secretary the report provided
in § 99-13 of the Code that shows collections deposited on behalf of
the Township equal to 75% of the base billing.
(4) One thousand eight hundred dollars shall be payable at such time
as the Tax Collector provides to the Secretary the report provided
in § 99-13 of the Code that shows collections deposited on behalf of
the Township equal to 90% of the base billing.
(5) Nine hundred dollars shall be payable at such time as the Tax
Collector provides to the Secretary the report provided in § 99-13
of the Code that shows collections deposited on behalf of the
Township equal to 95% of the base billing and any unpaid accounts
have been mailed reminder notices.
B. The total annual compensation due to the Tax Collector, as tax collector
of such Township taxes, shall not be due or paid to the Tax Collector
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Treasurer, adopted 12-14-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-27 (Part 2, Ch. 1, Art. B, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances), as amended,
regarding the Treasurer as Tax Collector.
35.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.6.
§ 99-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-11
1:73
§ 99-12. Maintenance of office; hours.
The Tax Collector of the Township, as tax collector for such taxes of the
Township, shall maintain an office at 1840 Municipal Drive with full-time
hours from March 15 to April 30 and June 15 to June 30. Office hours will
be a minimum of four hours per day the balance of the year.
§ 99-13. Duties and responsibilities.
The Tax Collector of Manheim Township, as tax collector for such taxes of
the Township, shall:
until such time as the Tax Collector shall have made affidavit with
respect to such tax notices, and shall have complied with the
requirements of the Local Tax Collection Law, 1945, May 25, P.L. 1050,
§ 8, as amended.37
A. Deposit in the name of the Township, upon a daily basis, all moneys
collected as such taxes during that day, in a distinct account of the
bank, banking institution or trust company designated by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners of the Township as the depository of
Township funds. The designated depository shall pay interest to the
Township on the average daily balance of the moneys so deposited by
the Township Treasurer, and shall be fully qualified pursuant to, and
comply with, all requirements of the Township Code.
B. Make a true, verified statement, in writing, upon a weekly basis, to the
Secretary of the Township for all such taxes collected for the Township
during that week, giving the names of taxables, the amount collected
from each, along with discounts granted or penalties applied, if any, and
the total amount of taxes received, discounts granted and penalties
applied.
C. Prepare and submit to the Secretary of the Township a monthly tax
collection report that lists the total outstanding taxes at the beginning
of the month and reconciles collections, additions, and exonerations to
arrive at the outstanding taxes at the end of the month. This report is to
be submitted by the 10th of the following month. A list of outstanding
taxable properties with base amounts that are turned over to the
County of Lancaster as delinquent will be provided with appropriate
reports.
D. Transfer to the Township's general fund bank account all taxes received
on a weekly basis during April and on a monthly basis the rest of the
year upon submission of the monthly tax collection report.
37.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.8.
§ 99-11 MANHEIM CODE § 99-14
1:74
§ 99-14. Other services; fees.
The Tax Collector of the Township shall provide written certifications of
such taxes owed to the Township by a taxpayer, process duplicate tax bills,
and process duplicate tax payment receipts, upon the written request of
taxpayers or their agent and upon the payment of the then-current fees as
established by the Board of Commissioners. The Tax Collector shall charge
and collect a fee in penalty for returned checks in the amount of the thencurrent
fee established by the Board of Commissioners. All fees collected by
the Tax Collector under this section shall be tabulated and reported to the
Board of Commissioners at the request of the Board, but, at a minimum, on
a quarterly basis.
§ 99-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-14
1:75

ARTICLE IV
Treasurer
[Adopted 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
§ 99-15. Appointment; compensation.
The Board hereby appoints the Finance Director of the Township as the
Treasurer of the Township. The Finance Director shall serve as Treasurer
at the pleasure of the Board, which, by resolution, may make future
appointments to such appointed office. Should it determine to do so, the
Board may provide, by resolution, for any compensation of such appointed
office holder in addition to such compensation provided to such appointee
as an employee of the Township.
§ 99-16. Deputy Treasurer.
The Board may appoint, by resolution, a Deputy Treasurer pursuant to the
provisions of the Amendment.38
§ 99-17. Fidelity bond.
The Treasurer shall give a fidelity bond in accordance with the
Amendment.39
§ 99-18. Duties.
The Treasurer shall perform all duties authorized and provided for in the
Amendment40 and the Township Code as the same may, in the future, be
further amended, subject to all restrictions provided in the Amendment and
the Township Code, including, without limitation, restrictions applicable to
depositories of Township funds.
§ 99-19. Treasurer as tax collector.
The Treasurer shall serve as tax collector for any taxes levied by the
Township under and pursuant to the Act of December 31, 1065, P.L. 1257,
38.Editor's Note: The preamble to Ord. No. 2013-05 provides the following: "Pursuant to the
power vested in the Board of Commissioners ("Board") of Manheim Township, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania ("Township") by the Act of October 24, 2012, P.L. 1478, No. 188
("Amendment"), amending the First Class Township Code ("Township Code"), the Board
hereby creates the office of appointed Treasurer, appoints an employee of the Township to
such office and confirms the duties of such office."
39.Editor's Note: The preamble to Ord. No. 2013-05 provides the following: "Pursuant to the
power vested in the Board of Commissioners ("Board") of Manheim Township, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania ("Township") by the Act of October 24, 2012, P.L. 1478, No. 188
("Amendment"), amending the First Class Township Code ("Township Code"), the Board
hereby creates the office of appointed Treasurer, appoints an employee of the Township to
such office and confirms the duties of such office."
40.Editor's Note: The preamble to Ord. No. 2013-05 provides the following: "Pursuant to the
power vested in the Board of Commissioners ("Board") of Manheim Township, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania ("Township") by the Act of October 24, 2012, P.L. 1478, No. 188
("Amendment"), amending the First Class Township Code ("Township Code"), the Board
hereby creates the office of appointed Treasurer, appoints an employee of the Township to
such office and confirms the duties of such office."
§ 99-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-19
1:77
No. 511 ("Local Tax Enabling Act"),41 and for which the Township has not
designated others as tax collectors.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 99-19 MANHEIM CODE § 99-19
1:78
Chapter 105
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 346.
§ 105-1. Creation.
Under authority of the First Class Township Code, Act of May 27, 1949,
P.L. 1955, as amended,42 there be and is hereby created in the Township
of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, a Park and Recreation Board,
the members of which shall be appointed in accordance with this article,
and the duties, purposes and functions shall be in accordance with the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 105-2. Composition; appointment of members; terms; vacancies.
The Park and Recreation Board shall be composed of seven persons, all of
which shall be Manheim Township residents, and all of whom shall serve
without pay, and they shall be appointed as follows: Five members shall
be appointees of the Commissioners of the Township of Manheim, and two
members shall be appointees of the Board of Directors of the school district
of the Township of Manheim; members who are first appointed shall serve
for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, from the date
of their appointment. Thereafter, the term of office shall be five years or
until their successors are appointed. Vacancies in such Board occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be for the unexpired term and
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
§ 105-3. Officers.
Immediately after appointment, the members of the said Board shall meet
and elect a Chairman and such other officers as may be necessary for a
period of one year.
§ 105-4. Meetings; quorum.
§ 105-5. Powers and duties.
A. The Park and Recreation Board shall hold regular meetings and shall
designate the time and place thereof and shall keep a record of all its
proceedings.
B. Four members shall constitute a quorum.
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 99-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:79
Chapter 109
PENSION PLANS AND RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 75.
Indemnification — See Ch. 82.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 99.
Personnel — See Ch. 114.
Police Department — See Ch. 125.
A. The Board shall have the authority regulate parks, recreation programs
and youth sports standards of the Township.
B. The Board shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for
the conduct of all business within its jurisdiction.
C. The Board shall be advisory to the Commissioners in regards to
budgetary and financial matters pertaining to parks and/or recreation.
D. The Personnel Committee of the Board shall participate in the interview
process of prospective Board members and submit recommendations to
the Board and the Manheim Township Commissioners.
§ 105-5 MANHEIM CODE § 105-5
1:80
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 11-24-1958 by Res. No. 1958-19 (Part 2, Ch. 5, Art. A, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 109-1. Establishment of police pension fund. [Amended 4-23-1984
by Res. No. 1984-19]
A municipal police pension fund is established for Manheim Township under
the Act of 1956, P.L. 1804, No. 600, as amended,43 to be maintained by:
§ 109-2. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Manheim Township
Police Pension Fund Resolution of 1958."
§ 109-3. Administration. [Amended 4-23-1984 by Res. No. 1984-19]
The municipal police pension fund created by this article, as amended, shall
be managed and administered on behalf of the Township by three individual
trustees, who shall be the President of the Board of Commissioners, the
Commissioner of Public Safety and the Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners; whoever may fill these positions in the future shall
automatically become trustees of the fund. The three trustees may, with
the approval of the Board of Commissioners, appoint a corporate fiduciary
to act with them as co-trustee or may elect a Secretary who may be but
need not be a trustee. The trustees shall administer the pension fund in
accordance with the provisions of a trust agreement to be executed by
the trustees and the Board, which trust agreement may be amended from
time to time by the Board. The trustees shall each year submit to the
Board a report giving a brief account of the operations of the pension fund
during the previous year. The trustees shall not incur any liability for any
action or failure to act, excepting only liability for gross negligence or wilful
misconduct. The trustees shall not be liable to any member or any other
person for payments of any benefits under the pension fund, except to the
extent expressly provided for and only out of the pension fund. The trustees
may, with the approval of the Board, enter into agreements or contracts
A. Annual appropriations by the Township;
B. Payments made by the State Treasurer to the Township Treasurer from
moneys received from taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty
insurance companies for the purpose of pension retirement for
policemen;
C. Gifts, grants, devises or bequests granted to this police pension fund;
and
D. Receipts from investments of the fund.
43.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-3
1:81
with an insurance company to provide the pensions as herein provided or
may make such pensions available through any other means as they deem
advisable.
§ 109-4. Members.
All full-time regular salaried officers of the police force of the Township as
of the effective date of the pension fund shall become and shall be members
of the pension fund. New members of the police force after the effective
date of the pension fund shall become members of the pension fund after
serving a six-month probationary period and receiving their appointment as
full-time salaried members of the police force of Manheim Township.
§ 109-5. Membership qualifications.
The benefits of this police pension fund shall be payable to regular salaried
members of the police force of the Township who have served in this
Township for an aggregate total of at least 25 years, have attained the age
of at least 55 years, and shall be members of the police force and the police
pension fund on attaining the retirement age. Upon retirement from active
duty, such members shall be subject to service, from time to time, as a police
reserve, in cases of riot, tumult or preservation of the public peace, until
unfitted for such service, when they may be finally discharged by reason
of age or disability. A member who will be eligible to retire in the next
succeeding year may make an application to the Board of Commissioners,
on or before October 1 of the current year, for an extension of one year. If
the Board approves, a member may be continued as an active member of
the police force for one year.
§ 109-6. Credit for military service and leave of absence.
Service credit of members of the fund shall include absences because of
illness or disability, a leave of absence from duty not exceeding six months,
properly granted by the Board, unless such a period shall be extended by
a majority vote of the Board, and compulsory service in the Armed Forces
of the United States in time of war, armed conflict or national emergency,
so proclaimed by the President of the United States, provided the officer
returns to duty within six months of his eligibility for discharge or release
from such service, and he shall not lose any rights to pension or benefits
hereunder, provided that, while absent from duty because of disability,
sickness or leave of absence, he regularly makes a contribution to the fund
in the amount that would be deducted from his pay if he were on active
duty; provided further that the leave of absence shall not be granted or used
for the purpose of obtaining or engaging in other employment, in which
event the leave, if already granted, shall be canceled; provided further that
such leave of absence shall not affect any law, ordinance or act of the
commonwealth providing for sick leave or vacation. During the period of
compulsory service by a member in the Armed Forces of the United States,
the Township shall continue the contributions of such member to the fund
for his benefit, as though he were continuing in the service of the Township,
§ 109-3 MANHEIM CODE § 109-6
1:82
which payments by the Township shall terminate on the date such member
shall be eligible for discharge or release from the service.
§ 109-7. Basis for determining pension benefits. [Amended
4-23-1984 by Res. No. 1984-19]
The basis for determining any pension payable under this article and the
insurance contract herein provided for, following the retirement of any
member of the police force of this Township meeting the service and age
qualifications and other provisions herein specified, shall be as follows:
Monthly pension or retirement benefits shall be 1/2 the monthly average
salary of such member during the last 36 months of employment; such
pension or retirement benefits for any month shall be computed as the sum
of:
§ 109-8. Life insurance.
At the time a police officer becomes a member of the fund, the trustee
shall apply for a contract on his life providing for not less than a tenthousand-
dollar death benefit to age 60, at which time the life insurance
feature shall cease and the policy shall be converted into an annuity and
the payments made therefrom to be considered as a portion of the benefits
received under § 109-7C above. If a member who is eligible hereunder for a
contract submits evidence of his insurability at standard rates satisfactory
to the insurer, the contract to be purchased on his life shall, subject to its
terms and provisions, provide a death benefit prior to normal retirement
date of an amount not less than $10,000. If the member is insurable only
with an additional premium to cover extra mortality, the policy shall be
issued for such sum payable on death as can be purchased at the normal
premium rate for the life policy, provided the member may elect to have
the policy issued in the full amount by paying the additional premium.
If a member is totally uninsurable, no life insurance need be carried for
his benefit. The trustees are hereby empowered and directed to purchase
a policy or policies of retirement income annuity insurance, in such an
amount or amounts as will provide for the payment of retirement pension
or disability allowances provided by this article or required by law and are
not limited to the above-stated amount of $10,000. Policies of insurance
presently in force under any existing police pension fund may be transferred
to this fund, at the sole discretion of the trustees, and if transferred, the
trustees are hereby authorized to retain all policies presently in force and to
A. Any pension benefits from pension plans heretofore established by the
private organization or association for the members of the police force;
B. Primary benefits under the federal social security laws for which the
officer may be eligible because of age; and
C. Benefits from the police pension fund or the insurance or annuity
contract provided for pursuant to this article to the extent necessary to
bring the total benefits in any month to 1/2 the aforesaid monthly
average salary.
§ 109-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-8
1:83
make application for the other necessary annuity contracts and/or contracts
of insurance without the necessity of any further resolution or ordinance of
the Township. The normal premiums on the policies of insurance shall be
paid out of the pension fund.
§ 109-9. Death benefits.
At the time of application for an insurance contract, and successively
thereafter, the member shall have the right to select the death beneficiary
thereunder, which must be persons related to such member by blood or
marriage. If no death beneficiary is selected by a member, any death benefit
shall be payable in one sum to his executor or administrator. Each contract
issued shall provide that the Township shall be the owner thereof, with
the power to exercise all rights, privileges, options and elections granted
by or permitted by such contract. Each such contract shall provide for
payment of monthly pension benefits to the member for life, or a tenyear
certain period, beginning at normal retirement date, at which date
the death benefits shall cease. No member shall have any legal right,
title or interest in any contract of insurance issued on his life, and any
such member's interests, beneficial or otherwise, shall be that provided
in accordance with this article and under the contract on such member's
life. No death beneficiary under any contract issued shall have any greater
rights than as provided by the contract. A member shall not be permitted to
anticipate, encumber, alienate or assign any of his rights, claims or interests
in such contract or any part thereof. Neither the contract, nor any part
thereof, nor any payments, benefits, or rights arising therefrom, shall be in
any way subject to the member's debts, contracts or engagements, nor to
any judicial processes to levy upon or attach the same for payment thereof.
§ 109-10. Refund of member contributions; vesting of benefits.
[Amended 4-23-1984 by Res. No. 1984-19]
Should a member be discharged or voluntarily withdraw from service as
a member of the police force of the Township, or otherwise cease to be a
member of the fund, he shall be paid from the fund the full amount of the
deductions from his pay, plus interest as required by law, and the Township
shall have the right and privilege of canceling the policy of life insurance
carried for the benefit of such member, and the proceeds of which shall
be paid into and become a part of the fund, provided that such member
shall have the rights and privilege of electing to retain said insurance policy
by paying the cash surrender value thereof into the fund, and provided
further that any member of the police force of the Township who, before
completing superannuation retirement age and service requirements but
after having completed 12 years of total service, ceases to be employed
as a full-time police officer by the Township shall be entitled to vest his
retirement benefits as provided in the Act of 1979, P.L. 475, No. 99, Section
1, and any amendments thereto.44
44.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 771.
§ 109-8 MANHEIM CODE § 109-11
1:84
§ 109-11. Contributions.
Unless otherwise provided for, members of the police force shall pay into
the fund monthly an amount determined annually by the trustees, equal
to not less than 5% nor more than 8% of monthly compensation. Where
positions covered by the fund are included in an agreement under the
Federal Social Security Act, members shall pay into the fund, monthly, an
amount equal to not less than 2% of that portion of monthly compensation
on which social security allowances are payable and 5% of any monthly
compensation in excess of that on which social security allowances are
payable. The Township Manager-Secretary is authorized to establish a
system of payroll deductions necessary to provide for the contribution to be
made hereunder and necessary for the administration of the fund. Unless
otherwise provided for, the remainder of the needed annual contribution, as
determined by the actuary, shall be paid by the Township, contributing by
annual appropriations.
§ 109-12. Employment of actuary; duties.
The Township may, in its discretion, designate an actuary and/or may
designate an actuary or actuaries of the Massachusetts Mutual Life
Insurance Company, or other insurance company, in that capacity. Such
actuary or actuaries shall determine the present value of the liability on
account of pensions payable under § 109-7 to police officers for service
prior to the effective date of this article. From the amount of this present
value shall be deducted the value of assets transferred to the pension fund
from any existing fund or contract, and the balance shall be known as the
unfunded liability of the pension fund as of the effective date of this article.
The unfunded liability, unless the assets of any existing fund are turned
over to this fund, shall be paid entirely by the Township, provided that it
may be funded over a period not to exceed 25 years. The actuary shall also
determine the amount which shall be contributed annually into the pension
fund for the service of members, subsequent to the effective date of this
pension fund (the future service cost).
§ 109-13. Use of payments made by State Treasurer.
The payments made by the State Treasurer to the Township Treasurer from
taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty insurance companies for
pensions, retirement or disability benefits for policemen shall be used as
follows:
A. To reduce the unfunded liability; or
B. After such liability has been funded, to apply against the annual
obligation of the Township for future service cost; or
C. To the extent that the payment may be in excess of such obligation, to
reduce member contributions.
§ 109-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-14
1:85
§ 109-14. Gifts, grants, devises and bequests to fund.
The pension fund shall be authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or
bequest any money or property, real, personal or mixed, in trust, for the
benefit of the pension fund, and the care, management, investment and
disposal of such trust funds or property shall be vested in the trustees
of the pension fund, if the provisions as stipulated by the donor are not
inconsistent with the provisions of Act No. 600, its supplements and
amendments,45 the pension fund or the resolution creating this police
pension fund. If a donor of funds or property restricts their use in any
manner inconsistent with such provisions, then such fund shall not be
accepted in the pension fund, but shall be set up in a separate fund. Unless
otherwise specifically provided, such monies or the values of such funds or
property, taken into the pension fund, shall be applied against the future
service cost payable by the Township.
§ 109-15. Payments not to be charge on any other fund.
Payments made under the provisions of this article shall not be a charge on
any other fund in the treasury of the Township or under its control, save the
police pension fund herein provided for.
§ 109-16. No deprivation of rights.
No person participating in the police pension fund who becomes entitled
to receive a benefit therefrom shall be deprived of his right to an equal
and proportionate share therein upon the basis upon which he first became
entitled thereto.
§ 109-17. Grievances or complaints.
Any person participating in the pension fund or who has become a
beneficiary thereof and who is dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the
trustees in reference to the rights of such a person may, after notice and at
a time fixed by the trustees, personally appear before the trustees for the
purpose of hearing his or her complaint.
§ 109-18. Inalienability of pension payments.
The pension payments or any other moneys herein provided for shall not be
subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process
and shall be payable only to the member or his designated beneficiary or to
his estate and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer.
§ 109-19. Management and administration expenses.
The expense of management and administration of the pension fund,
including the compensation of the trustees, if any, of the actuary and
the custodian of the fund, if any, exclusive of the payments of retirement
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 109-14 MANHEIM CODE § 109-19
1:86
allowances, shall be paid by the Township by appropriations made by the
Commissioners.
§ 109-20. Payment from other sources.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Commissioners, in their
discretion, to forego the purchase of annuity contracts, in whole or in part,
for or on behalf of any one or more police officers and make any required
pension payments from other Township funds.
§ 109-21. Authority to amend.
The Township reserves the right, through action of its Board of
Commissioners, in accordance with the law, to amend this article and
change the pension fund without the consent of any member or death
beneficiary.
§ 109-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-21
1:87

ARTICLE II
Non-Police Employee Pension Plan
[Adopted 12-23-1974 by Ord. No. 1974-16 (Part 2, Ch. 5, Art. B, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 109-22. Establishment of plan.
A municipal non-police employee pension fund, for the benefit of all full-time
employees of the Township, except police officers and persons compensated
on a fee basis, as constituted on January 1, 1969, shall continue to be
maintained. All part-time employees of the Township who work less than 30
hours per week are expressly excluded from membership in the fund and
are to be completely eliminated from coverages.
§ 109-23. Revenue sources.
§ 109-24. Operation and management of fund.
The operation and management of the fund shall be conducted by the
Fund Commissioners, to be composed of the Chairman, Vice Chairman, and
Secretary of the Board of Township Commissioners. The term of any such
officer or Committee Chairman, as a member of the Fund Committee, shall
be coincident with such officer's or Committee Chairman's term of office.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, each member of the Fund Commissioners
shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed, or elected, and
qualified as a member of the Committee. The Fund Commissioners shall
serve as plan trustees.
§ 109-25. Group annuity contract authorized.
It is hereby determined that the pensions required hereunder shall
hereafter be provided under the terms of a group annuity contract entered
A. The municipal non-police employee pension fund created and
established shall derive the revenue necessary to maintain its operation
in conformity with law from the following sources:
(1) A charge against each member thereof in the amounts set forth in
the plan document.
(2) Any money or property, real, personal, or mixed, in trust for the
benefit of such fund, received by the fund through gift, devise or
bequest.
(3) Any state contributions when and if received.
(4) Annual appropriations made by the Township in the amounts
additionally required to fund the plan.
B. The total of all monies or property derived from the sources above
specified shall constitute the municipal non-police employee pension
fund of the Township.
§ 109-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-25
1:89
into by and between the Fund Commissioners and Aetna Life Insurance
Company, a legal reserve life insurance company, duly authorized to do
business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. By reason of this section,
the municipal non-police employee Fund Commissioners shall be and are
hereby authorized and directed to apply such principal or income in the
fund as may be required to maintain the plan on a currently funded basis.
The Commissioners shall look to the plan actuary in matters pertaining to
the proper funding of the plan as constituted by this article. It shall be the
duty of the Commissioners:
§ 109-26. Execution of papers and documents; continued
implementation.
The proper officers of the Township, i.e., the Chairman of the Board of
the Board of Commissioners, or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman, are
herewith authorized and directed to sign and execute all papers for the
continuation of the plan, to be attested by the Manager-Secretary, and the
Seal of the Township impressed thereon. The Manager-Secretary is hereby
authorized and directed to sign all papers to continuously implement the
proper function of the plan.
A. To hold all monies, property and other assets received by the fund in
trust exclusively for the purposes set forth in this article. The
Commissioners may, however, invest any excess funds in their hands at
any time in securities guaranteed by the United States of America, or
other legal investments as defined and authorized by the Fiduciaries
Investment Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
B. To establish a separate plan document entitled the "Manheim Township
Municipal Non-Police Employees' Pension Plan," setting forth in detail
the pension plan provisions which will be used to implement this
document.
C. To do everything necessary to ensure the proper completion and
submission of Form 5005A to the Department of Community and
Economic Development, as required by the Act of December 6, 1972,
P.L. 1383, No. 293.46
D. To do everything necessary to ensure that the plan would be qualifiable
under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code; however, nothing
herein contained shall be construed to be an irrevocable election to
have the terms of the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 apply to the operation of this plan.
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 730.1.
§ 109-25 MANHEIM CODE § 109-26
1:90
ARTICLE III
Department Head Pension Plan
[Adopted 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-13 (Part 2, Ch. 5, Art. F, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 109-27. Statutory authority; findings; purpose.
A. The Township is empowered by the First Class Township Code, Act of
June 24, 1931, P.L. 1206, No. 331, as reenacted and amended by the Act
of May 27, 1949, P.L. 1955, No. 569, as amended,47 to contract with
certain insurance companies to provide annuities and pensions for any
class or classes of Township employees and to appropriate moneys from
the Township treasury for such purpose; and
B. As empowered by the First Class Township Code, the Township has
established, for the good government of the Township, the office of
Township Manager-Secretary and has established a Police Department,
Department of Public Works and Department of Recreation, which are
managed by employees employed in the capacities of the Chief of
Police, the Director of Public Works and the Director of Recreation;
and48
C. The Board of Commissioners of the Township recognizes that
individuals with the necessary qualifications and experience which the
Township may desire to employ in the capacities of Township Manager-
Secretary, Director of Public Works, Director of Recreation and Chief of
Police, or as the directors or managers of such other departments as the
Township may establish, may be older individuals nearing retirement
age and who, although adequately qualified and experienced to carry
out the duties of such managerial positions, may be too old to
advantageously participate in the existing pension plans of the
Township due to the service requirements of such plans or may be
hesitant to leave existing employment to enter the employment of the
Township in such managerial positions without continuation of or
provision for more advantageous pension benefits by the Township;
and49
D. To promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township, the Board of Commissioners has determined to make
provision for such pension benefits for that class of employees or future
employees of the Township.
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 109-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-28
1:91
§ 109-28. Establishment of plan.
The Manheim Township Department Head Pension Plan ("plan"), in the form
and upon the terms attached to and made a part of this article, is hereby
adopted and established.
§ 109-29. Duties of Manager-Secretary.
The Manager-Secretary is authorized and directed, from time to time, to
investigate and report to the Board of Commissioners as to all actions
necessary or appropriate to implement and administer the plan, including
information as to employees who are or may become eligible to participate
under the plan, the necessity of any funding of the plan by the Township,
and recommendations as to the engagement of any plan administrator or
actuary and as to the purchase of any annuities or pensions.
§ 109-30. Effect on other pension plans.
The establishment and adoption of the plan by enactment of this article
is not intended to nor shall it be construed to in any way amend, modify,
supersede or replace any other pension plan or plans which have previously
been established by the Township.
§ 109-28 MANHEIM CODE § 109-30
1:92
Chapter 114
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 75.
Indemnification — See Ch. 82.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 99.
Pension plans and retirement — See Ch. 109.
§ 109-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-30
1:93

ARTICLE I
Equal Employment Opportunity Policy
[Adopted 4-23-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-4 (Part 2, Ch. 6, Art. E, Sec.
2-6072, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 114-1. Adoption of policy. [Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-5]
The Board of Commissioners, having reviewed an equal employment
opportunity policy at its regularly scheduled meeting of April 23, 1979,
hereby adopts that policy respecting Township employment practices and
appoints an Equal Rights and Opportunities Director, as set forth therein,
as follows:
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF MANHEIM
LANCASTER COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
(1) To comply with federal laws (including LEAA Equal Employment
Opportunity Guidelines, 28 CFR 42.301 et seq., Subpart E), state laws
and the requirements of the Governor's Justice Commission of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Township of Manheim declares
itself to be an equal employment opportunity employer. As such, the
Township does not discriminate against individuals or groups because
of race, color, national origin, religion, age, sex, marital status or
nonrelevant handicaps and disabilities. The Township's commitment to
nondiscrimination extends to employees, prospective employees and
the community.
(2) The Township Manager-Secretary is hereby designated as the Equal
Rights and Opportunities Director. It is the Director's responsibility to
make certain that all Township employment practices are free from
discrimination on the basis of those conditions stated in the policy.
The Director's responsibility shall include instruction of appropriate
persons in the provisions of the laws and regulations concerning equal
employment opportunity and fair employment practices. The Director
can be reached at 1840 Municipal Drive, Lancaster, Pennsylvania
17601, or by telephone at (717) 569-6408.
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-1
1:95

ARTICLE II
Ethics
[Adopted 4-14-1980 by Res. No. 1980-23 (Part 2, Ch. 6, Art. E, Sec.
2-6074, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 114-2. Adoption of standards.50
Pursuant to the Public Official and Employee Ethics Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 1101
et seq., and to the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Ethics
Commission, the following matters are hereby approved:
A. The definitions as used in the Public Official and Employee Ethics Act
and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto are
incorporated herein.
B. The persons who occupy the positions set forth in Exhibit A are deemed
to be public officials, and such persons shall file a statement of financial
interests as public officials.
EXHIBIT A
Public Officials
Township Commissioners
C. The persons who occupy the positions set forth in Exhibit B are deemed
to be public employees, and such persons shall file a statement of
financial interests as public employees.
EXHIBIT B
Public Employees
Manager-Secretary
Director of Planning and Development
Assistant Manager-Secretary
Chief of Police
Director of Parks and Recreation
Township Solicitor
Township Engineer
Township Auditor
Any other Township employee who may be ruled eligible to file due to
further interpretation or amendments to this Act
D. Statements of financial interest which are required to be filed with this
governmental body shall be filed with the Township Manager-Secretary
at the Township office, 1840 Municipal Drive, Lancaster, Pennsylvania
17601. Such statements shall be available for public inspection and
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 114-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-2
1:97
copying during normal business hours. Photocopies of such statements
will be made available to persons who request and pay for copies
thereof at the actual cost of such copies, which is hereby determined to
be $0.25 per page.
§ 114-2 MANHEIM CODE § 114-2
1:98
Chapter 120
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 120-1. Establishment; membership; duties; vacancies.
A Township Planning Commission, composed of nine members, appointed
in the manner provided by law, is hereby created and established in and
for the Township. The Township Planning Commission shall perform all of
the duties and may exercise any and all of the powers vested by law in
planning agencies in townships, provided that the individuals constituting
the Township Planning Commission now functioning in the Township shall
constitute the Planning Commission hereby created, and nothing in this
chapter shall affect the tenure of the present Township Planning
Commission. All vacancies hereafter occurring in the Planning Commission,
regardless of their cause, shall be filled in accordance with the provisions
of the law governing planning agencies in townships at the time of the
occurrence of the vacancy.
Chapter 125
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pension plan — See Ch. 109, Art. I.
§ 114-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1
1:99

ARTICLE I
Organization; Membership; Procedures
[Adopted 8-28-1972 by Ord. No. 1972-2 (Part 10, Ch. 2, Art. A, Secs.
10-2001 to 10-2006, and Art. B, Secs. 10-2011 to 10-2015, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 125-1. Control of Department; Chief of Police. [Amended
6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-11]
The Township Manager-Secretary is hereby appointed to direct and control
the Police Department of the Township, on behalf of the Board of
Commissioners, and, subject to such direction, the Police Department shall
be headed and supervised by the Chief of Police. The Chief shall deploy
Department personnel as needed to achieve maximum efficiency and
control and shall organize the Department as may be necessary to properly
accomplish the Department's mission. He shall conduct staff meetings and
inspections to evaluate and improve the performance and efficiency of the
Department. He shall issue orders, directives and procedural directives
and delegate duties to be carried out by the personnel of the Department,
including the appointment of a command officer to act during periods when
he intends to and shall be temporarily absent from duty for reasons other
than illness or incapacity. He shall not be influenced in the performance of
any of his duties by any consideration of race, religion, color, sex, politics
or creed. The Chief of Police shall make regular and periodic reports of the
activities of his Department to the Board of Commissioners, through the
Township Manager-Secretary.
§ 125-2. Lieutenants.
The position and rank of Lieutenant shall be the second highest rank in
the Department. Officers shall qualify for the position in accordance with
the civil service provisions of the First Class Township Code51 and the civil
service rules and regulations of the Township. The Lieutenants shall assist
in the direction of the Department as ordered and directed by the Chief of
Police.
§ 125-3. Sergeants.
The officers of the Department shall qualify for the rank of Sergeant in
accordance with the civil service provisions of the First Class Township
Code and the civil service rules and regulations of the Township. Sergeants
shall be in command of the several squads of police officers and shall be
assigned to such other duties as directed by the Chief of Police or superior
officer.
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-4
1:101
§ 125-4. Specialists.
There shall exist in the Police Department a nonpromotional position of
specialist, entitling the officer holding such a position to an appropriate
increase in salary for specialized services rendered to the Department.
Having the classification of specialist shall be detectives, traffic safety
officers, youth officers, and such other specialist classifications as may be
hereafter designated by the Commissioners upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police.
§ 125-5. Patrolmen.
All other officers of the Police Department who have qualified for such
position under the civil service provisions of the First Class Township
Code and the civil service regulations of the Township shall be designated
patrolmen. They shall perform such police duties as are assigned to them by
the Chief of Police or superior officer.
§ 125-6. Duty.
Every member of the Police Department shall be subject to duty 24 hours
each day and may be called to duty by the Chief of Police or superior officer.
§ 125-7. Uniforms and equipment.
Police officers shall wear uniforms and carry and be supplied with
equipment as directed by the Commissioners upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police. Regulations relative to the nature of the uniforms to be
worn and equipment to be carried, and regulations relative to the care
and maintenance of uniforms and equipment, shall be made in the form of
orders of the Chief.
§ 125-8. Police headquarters.
There shall be one police headquarters, the location of which shall be at
the Township Municipal Building. All records, files, documents and papers
pertaining to the Police Department shall be kept and maintained at
headquarters.
§ 125-9. Temporary absence of Chief of Police. [Amended 6-11-1984
by Ord. No. 1984-11]
If the Chief of Police shall be temporarily absent from his duty by reason
of illness or incapacity, unintentionally absent for any reason, or in the
event the Chief of Police shall have failed to appoint a command officer
during an intentional, temporary absence, the Township Manager-Secretary
shall appoint a Lieutenant of the Police Department to serve in his place
as Acting Chief of Police, such appointment to be subsequently reviewed
and confirmed, if approved, by the Board of Commissioners as soon as
possible. The officer so appointed shall be subject to all of the duties and
responsibilities of the office of Chief of Police. He shall not be entitled to any
§ 125-4 MANHEIM CODE § 125-9
1:102
increase in his salary or compensation by reason of such appointment or
the performance of his duties in such office; provided, however, that he may
receive such additional compensation for the entire period of such service
as the Commissioners shall then determine.
§ 125-10. Report of illness and injuries.
All members of the Department, when sick, must still report to the
headquarters by telephone or other suitable means of communication one
hour before their tour of duty begins and shall also report one hour before
the tour of duty begins before their return to duty, if so requested by the
Chief, and deliver a physician's written certification as to the illness and
length of time the same rendered them unfit for duty; otherwise, they shall
be considered as absent without leave and shall forfeit any rights to sick
leave. When any member of the Department is injured in the line of duty,
he shall, within 24 hours after such injury, submit or cause to be submitted
a report of the injury and the circumstances surrounding it to the Chief of
Police and superior officer.
§ 125-11. Rules and regulations constitute orders. [Amended
6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-11]
All rules and regulations as set forth in this article are constituted orders
of the Board of Commissioners of the Township, issued and directed to the
Township Manager-Secretary and the Chief of Police and to all members of
the Police Department.
§ 125-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-11
1:103

ARTICLE II
Off-Duty Police-Related Services
[Adopted 2-12-1972 by Res. No. 1973-7 (Part 10, Ch. 2, Art. B, Sec.
10-2016, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 125-12. Authorization; insurance coverage; compensation;
requests for services.
The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes regulations authorizing
employment of members of the Township police force and auxiliary
policemen to provide police-related services on off-duty hours, as requested,
subject to assignment and approval of the Chief of Police or his designated
officer.
A. The officers serving in this capacity would be covered under the
existing Township insurance program.
B. The Township Commissioners are authorized to establish the rate to be
charged the party requesting the service, also the rate to be paid to the
officer serving in this capacity.
C. The responsible party requesting the services shall be required to file a
written request, on a form furnished by the Township, 48 hours prior to
the date of requested services, also assuming responsibility of payment
to the Township.
§ 125-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-12
1:105

ARTICLE III
Special School Police Unit
[Adopted 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-2 (Part 10, Ch. 2, Art. C, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 125-13. Findings; declaration of policy.
The Manheim Township Board of Commissioners, having received a request
from the Board of School Directors of the Manheim Township School
District to provide school crossing guards for the purpose of controlling
and directing traffic at and near certain schools of the Manheim Township
School District located within Manheim Township, hereby finds and
declares that it shall be the policy of Manheim Township to provide school
crossing guard services as requested by the Board of School Directors of
the Manheim Township School District.
§ 125-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them:
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY — A local entity established by the
Manheim Township Board of Commissioners and operated exclusively to
provide services to the Manheim Township School District.
SPECIAL SCHOOL POLICE UNIT — The educational service agency
established in Manheim Township to provide school crossing guards for
the purpose of controlling and directing traffic at or near schools of the
Manheim Township School District located within Manheim Township.
§ 125-15. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to the provision of school crossing guards by
Manheim Township to the Manheim Township School District.
§ 125-16. Establishment; school crossing guards.
A. A Special School Police Unit is hereby established in and for Manheim
Township.
B. The Manheim Township Board of Commissioners may appoint school
crossing guards, by resolution, who shall have the duty of controlling or
directing traffic at or near the schools of the Manheim Township School
District located within Manheim Township.
C. Such officers shall be in uniform and shall be authorized only in the
management of traffic and pedestrians.52
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 125-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-16
1:107
§ 125-17. Designation as educational service agency.
The Manheim Township Special School Police Unit is hereby established as
an educational service agency to be operated exclusively for the purpose of
providing service to the Manheim Township School District.53
§ 125-18. Supervision and control.
The school crossing guards employed by the Manheim Township Special
School Police Unit shall be under the direction and supervision of the Chief
of Police of Manheim Township.
§ 125-19. Compensation.
The school crossing guards employed by the Manheim Township Special
School Police Unit shall be compensated according to the direction of
the Board of Commissioners of Manheim Township. Reimbursement for
the cost of the individuals filling the posts at locations requested by the
Board of School Directors of the Manheim Township School District shall
be determined by mutual written agreement of both the Manheim Township
Board of Commissioners and the Manheim Township Board of School
Directors. In the event the Board of Township Commissioners and Board of
School Directors are unable to agree upon the ratio of reimbursement, each
Board shall pay the amount mandated in the First Class Township Code54
for such positions.
D. Such officers shall serve at the pleasure of the Manheim Township
Board of Commissioners, shall not come within the civil service
provisions of the Township Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and shall not be eligible to join any police pension fund maintained for
the Manheim Township Police.
53.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 10-2036, Duties, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
54.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
§ 125-16 MANHEIM CODE § 125-19
1:108
ARTICLE IV
Warrantless Arrests
[Adopted 9-9-1996 by Res. No. 1996-52 (Part 10, Ch. 2, Art. B, Sec.
10-2017, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 125-20. Findings.
§ 125-21. Procedures.
Prior to making an arrest under 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, any police officer shall
ensure that:
§ 125-22. Duties of police following arrest.
Following an arrest pursuant to Title 42 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes, the officer shall forthwith satisfy the procedures set forth in
Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure 71 (procedure following arrest
without warrant).
A. On November 17, 1995, the Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania signed an Act known as "Act 25 of 1995" to take effect in
60 days; and
B. Title 42 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes was amended by
adding 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, authorizing an arrest without a warrant for
certain specific summary offenses; and
C. 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902(b) provides that the governmental body must
promulgate guidelines to be followed by a police officer when making a
warrantless arrest thereunder.
A. He/she has probable cause to believe that at least one of the following
summary offenses is being committed:
(1) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (disorderly conduct);
(2) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 (public drunkenness);
(3) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 (obstructing highways and other public
passages);
(4) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (purchase, consumption, possession or
transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages);
B. The suspect's conduct is ongoing;
C. The conduct constituting the offense is in the officer's view; and
D. The conduct imperils the personal security of any person or endangers
public or private property.
§ 125-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-22
1:109
Chapter 133
PROPERTY, UNCLAIMED
§ 125-22 MANHEIM CODE § 125-22
1:110
ARTICLE I
Disposal of Unclaimed Bicycles
[Adopted 11-8-1982 by Res. No. 1982-29 (Part 2, Ch. 6, Art. B.2, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 133-1. Donation authorized.
The Board of Commissioners of this Township, pursuant to 72 P.S. § 1301.1
et seq., authorizes the Township to donate unclaimed bicycles being held by
the Township to a charitable organization after they have been held for the
required time period.
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-1
1:111
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 160
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Rescue Volunteer Firefighter’s
Association — See Ch. 61.
Police Department — See Ch. 125.
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 259.
§ 133-1 MANHEIM CODE § 133-1
1:112
ARTICLE I
Alarm Systems
[Adopted 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-0855]
§ 160-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the
following meanings, unless it is apparent from the context that a different
meaning is intended:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — The person or persons designated by the
Police Department to administer the provisions of this chapter. The alarm
administrator establishes, implements, and oversees all procedures relating
to alarms.
ALARM AGENT — Any person who is self-employed in or employed by an
alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of
the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving, or installing on or in any building, structure or facility
any alarm system. Exemption: This definition does not include a person who
engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location
and who neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed,
nor designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm
system in a specific location.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by any individual, including
a person self-employed, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling,
leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained,
serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system
in or on any building, structure or facility or employing alarm agent(s).
Exemption: This definition does not include a person who engages in the
manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who
neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor
designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm
system in a specific location.
ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS — A class conducted for the purpose
of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and
maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
APPLICANT — Any person, firm or corporation who or which files an
application for an alarm registration as provided in this article.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE (ALARM SYSTEM) — Any mechanical
or electrically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and
related hardware which is designed or used for the detection of an
unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or for alerting
others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or
facility, or both, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message
55.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Alarm Systems, adopted
1-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-1 (Part 6, Ch. 2, Art. C.1, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances).
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-1
1:113
when activated. Automatic protection devices include, but are not limited
to, audible alarms, automatic dialing devices, alarms connected directly
to communication centers and proprietor alarms. Automatic protection
devices may be identified as "APDs." Exemption: The following devices shall
not be included under the definition of APDs:
COMMUNICATION CENTER — Lancaster County Wide Communications
and/or other rooms which house auxiliary communication equipment.
FALSE ALARM — An activation of an automatic protection device (APD)
signal, necessitating a response by the Manheim Township Police
Department, where an emergency situation does not exist. The term does
not include alarms caused by acts of nature or utility service interruptions.
NOTICE — A written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee,
or given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person
to be notified at his last known address, return receipt requested. Service
of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or
upon delivery by the United States Postal Service.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Manheim Township Police
Department, or his designated representative.
POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Manheim Township Police
Department.
PROPRIETARY ALARM — Any alarm system which sounds within the
protected premises or control center under the supervision of the proprietor
of the protected building, structure, or facility. If police response is expected
or is a result of that proprietary alarm signal or message, it thereby
becomes an APD, as defined in the definition of "automatic protection
device" in this section.
REGISTRATION NUMBER — A unique individual number assigned to an
alarm user as part of the alarm registration.
Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are
audible, visible, or perceptible outside of the protected building,
structure or facility, such as those systems designed for the detection of
equipment malfunctions.
A.
Devices which are designed for the notification of a condition of fire and
are provided for the evacuation of occupants of industries, institutions
and other similar premises or devices designed to signal the flow of
water in an automatic fire sprinkler system.
B.
Devices which are designed for and installed upon motorized vehicles
or trailers.
C.
Devices maintained and operated by the Manheim Township Police
Department and used for the detection of unlawful acts.
D.
§ 160-1 MANHEIM CODE § 160-1
1:114
RESPONSE ASSESSMENT FEE — A fee charged for each and every false
alarm activation to which the Police Department responds. Exemption: No
fee shall be charged if:
SUBSCRIBER (ALARM USER) — A person who has an APD installed on
realty in which the subscriber has an interest or who is applying for the
installation of an APD.
§ 160-2. Registration requirements; unlawful activities.
A. The alarm is received indicating line trouble; or
B. Caused by acts of nature.
A. Business registration required. It is unlawful for any person to engage
in, conduct or carry on an alarm business at any time within the limits
of the Township of Manheim without first applying for and receiving an
alarm business registration in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
B. Agent identification required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in
or conduct business or operate as an alarm agent at any time within the
limits of the Township of Manheim, unless connected with and carrying
identification from a business that has been issued a business
registration in accordance with the provisions of this article. Agent
identification must be carried at all times while engaged in alarm
business activities and must be displayed to any police officer upon
request.
C. Alarm user registration required. It is unlawful for any person to use an
automatic protection device (alarm system) at any time within the limits
of the Township of Manheim without first applying for and receiving an
alarm user registration in accordance with the provisions of this article.
D. Suspension or revocation. It is unlawful for any person to possess and
use an automatic protection device (alarm system) requiring a
registration under this article or engage in, conduct or operate in a
manner requiring registration under this article at any time within the
limits of the Township of Manheim when their privilege to do so has
been suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
E. Testing prohibited without permission. It is unlawful for any person to
conduct any test or demonstration of any automatic protection device
designed to make direct connection to the police communications
center at any time within the limits of Manheim Township without first
obtaining permission from the Police Department. Such permission is
not required where the equipment to be tested or demonstrated is
connected to an intermediary and the receipt of the alarm or signal is
not relayed to the Police Department by any means.
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-2
1:115
§ 160-3. Alarm registration required.
F. Automatic dialing device prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
install, program, use or interconnect an automatic dialing device
programmed to automatically transmit a request for emergency
response directly to the Manheim Township Police Department's
communications center via any telephone trunk line.
A. An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm
system without a valid alarm registration. A separate registration is
required for each alarm site having a distinct address of business name.
A registration fee including a completed alarm registration application
shall be received and approved by the alarm administrator prior to any
alarm system activation. A thirty-day grace period shall be granted from
the date of all new alarm installations or takeovers between two alarm
users, to accommodate the registration application process. Residential
alarm users who are age 65 or older and are the primary resident of the
property and if no business is conducted in the residence may obtain an
alarm registration from the police department according to this chapter
without payment of a fee.
B. An application for an alarm registration will be in a format as
determined by the Police Department. The information required on
such forms shall be determined by the alarm administrator.
Registration applicants acknowledge that the police response may be
influenced by factors, including, but not limited to, the availability of
officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions,
emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions, and
staffing levels.
C. Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to all sections of
this chapter and are subject to all fees, fines, suspensions, penalties, or
other requirements that are applicable.
D. All fees shall be collected by the alarm administrator.
E. Existing alarm systems. Any alarm system that has been installed
before the effective date of this chapter shall be registered and a
registration fee collected by the alarm administrator.
F. New alarm systems.
(1) An alarm installation company shall not install an APD unless or
until the system has been registered.
(2) In the case of a self-installed alarm system, it is the responsibility of
the property owner to register the alarm with the Township.
(3) Failure of an alarm user to submit the registration fee within 30
days after an alarm has been installed shall result in the alarm
system being classified as nonregistered and late charges being
assessed.
§ 160-2 MANHEIM CODE § 160-3
1:116
§ 160-4. Alarm registration, renewal, and false alarm fees.
G. The issuance of an alarm registration does not create a contract
between the police department and/or Manheim Township and any
alarm user, alarm installation company, or monitoring company, nor
does it create a duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, on the
police department to respond to any alarm. Any and all liability and
consequential damage resulting from the failure of the police
department to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby
disclaimed and full governmental immunity as provided by law is
retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user
acknowledges that the police department response is influenced by the
availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather
conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior response
history, and administrative actions.
A. An alarm registration for a commercial site shall expire one year from
the date of issuance and must be renewed annually by the alarm user.
An alarm registration for a residential site shall expire three years from
the date of issuance and must be renewed prior to its expiration. The
alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user of the need to renew
their registration 30 days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is
the responsibility of the alarm user to submit the updated information
and renewal fees prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to
renew shall be classified as use of a nonregistered alarm system and
subject the alarm site to a suspension and late charge.
B. Registration fees shall be collected based on the registration period.
The amount of the registration and renewal fees required are
established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
C. Alarm users who fail to make payment for an alarm registration prior to
the registration's expiration date will be assessed a late charge as
established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
D. No refund of a registration or renewal fee will be made.
E. Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and
the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall issue a
registration number or registration renewal to the applicant unless:
(1) The applicant has failed to pay any fee or fine assessed under this
chapter; or
(2) An alarm registration for the alarm site has been suspended, and
the condition for the suspension has not been corrected; or
(3) Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause
for refusal to issue an alarm registration.
F. Exemptions from fees.
§ 160-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:117
§ 160-5. Alarm registration suspension and reinstatement.
(1) Government entities, including but not necessarily limited to the
Township, County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Federal, and
School Districts, must obtain alarm permits for alarm systems on
property under their control within the boundaries of the Township,
but are exempt from payment of all fees under this ordinance.
(2) Residential alarm users who are over 65 or older and are the
primary resident of the residence and if no business is conducted in
the residence may obtain an alarm registration without payment of
a fee. They are not exempted from the alarm response fee.
G. The alarm administrator may assess the alarm user a fine for a false
alarm occurring at the alarm user's alarm site. The amount of the fine
shall be established by the Board of Commissioners. Notice of the right
to appeal under this chapter will be included with notice of any fine.
H. All alarm fees are due within 30 days of written notice unless otherwise
noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners shall be imposed for each fee or fine that is not
paid within 30 days.
I. The alarm administrator may waive the false alarm fine for the first
chargeable false alarm during each of a residential alarm user's oneyear
registration period, pending the successful completion of the
online alarm user awareness class available through the alarm
administrator. In order to have the fine waived, the alarm user shall
have successfully completed the class within 30 days of the fine notice.
Alarm users without online access may request the online school and
test be mailed to them. Commercial alarm users are not eligible for the
alarm user awareness class.
J. Alarm users who have obtained a valid alarm registration prior to a
false alarm activation are granted a thirty-day grace period from the
initial date of registration for familiarization and/or adjustment of a
mechanical malfunction of the alarm system, during which time the
false alarm activation will not be conducted, nor a fine assessed. This
only applies to new alarm system installations or new alarm user
takeover conversions.
A. Any registration may be suspended by the Chief of Police for any of the
following reasons:
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The failure to comply with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to this article.
(3) There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration
application.
§ 160-4 MANHEIM CODE § 160-5
1:118
§ 160-6. Transfer of registration prohibited.
§ 160-7. Duties of alarm users.
(4) The alarm user has had four or more false alarms within the oneyear
registration period, except that the alarm administrator may
waive a suspension of a registration upon receipt of documentation
showing reasonable attempts to address the issue resulting in the
false alarms.
(5) The alarm user fails or refuses to pay an alarm registration or
renewal fee, false alarm fine, late charge, or any other fee, fine or
charge assessed under this article.
(6) Where any alarm business official is convicted of a crime which
reflects unfavorably upon his/her fitness to be in the alarm
business.
B. It is a violation of this section for a person to operate an alarm system
during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended.
C. In addition to the false alarm response fee, a supplemental fine shall be
imposed on a person operating a suspended alarm system. The amount
of the fine shall be established by the Board of Commissioners.
D. An alarm user whose registration has been suspended may obtain
reinstatement of the registration by the alarm administrator if the user:
(1) Pays a reinstatement fee as established by the Board of
Commissioners;
(2) Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other
charges;
(3) Submits a written notice from an alarm installation company
stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if
necessary) by the alarm installation company;
(4) The alarm user successfully completes an alarm user awareness
class and test.
A. An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm
site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator and their alarm
company of any change to the information listed on the alarm
registration application within the business days after such change.
B. Exceptions may be made in the discretion of the alarm administrator
when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the
original registration holder or successors in interest to the property for
which the alarm registration has been issued.
A. An alarm user shall:
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-7
1:119
§ 160-8. Audible alarms.
(1) Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms;
(2) Make every reasonable effort to arrive at the alarms system's
location within 30 minutes after being requested by the monitoring
company or police in order to:
(a) Deactivate an alarm system;
(b) Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
(c) Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
(3) Provide the monitoring company with the updated names and
phone numbers of at least two persons who are able and have
agreed to:
(a) Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
(b) Respond to the alarm site at any time; and
(c) Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm
system if necessary.
(4) Not activate the alarm system for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to
report.
(5) Notify their monitoring company of any suspension of police
response (as provided for under this chapter) and request the
monitoring company not make a burglar alarm dispatch.
B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic voice
dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to
automatically dial a telephone line leading into the police department
or the Township and then transmit any prerecorded signal.
C. An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for each
alarm system at each alarm site.
A. No alarm system shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle
siren or civil defense warning. The Chief of Police shall make the final
determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this
section.
B. After the effective date of this ordinance, no one shall install, modify, or
repair an alarm system in Manheim Township that has a siren, bell, or
other signal that is audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site
that sounds for longer than 15 consecutive minutes after the alarm is
activated, or that repeats the fifteen-minute audible cycle more than
two consecutive times during a single armed period.
§ 160-7 MANHEIM CODE § 160-8
1:120
§ 160-9. Appeal procedure.
C. In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset itself or
continues to activate for more than 60 minutes and the responsible
person listed on the alarm registration or other responsible person
cannot or will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued
activation of the alarm is creating a disturbance, the police department
may cause the alarm to be silenced in a manner determined appropriate
for the circumstances. The alarm user shall be held responsible for the
actual costs involved to abate the malfunctioning alarm up to a
maximum of $300. The Township, its employees or agents shall not be
responsible or liable to damage resulting from such disconnection.
A. If the alarm administrator assesses a fee or fine, suspends an alarm
registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of a
registration, the alarm administrator shall send notice of the action and
a statement of the right to appeal to the affected alarm user.
B. The alarm user may appeal any action in Subsection A above to the
Police Chief or his designee by setting forth in writing the reasons for
the appeal and delivering the appeal to the Police Chief or his designee
within 20 days after receipt of notice of the action. Failure to deliver the
appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right to appeal.
C. The procedure for an appeal to the Police Chief or his designee is as
follows:
(1) The alarm user shall file a written request for appeal by paying an
appeal fee and setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal
must be entitled "Appeal from Alarm Administrator's Action." The
appeal fee shall be in an amount established by the Board of
Commissioners and will be returned to the appealing party if the
appeal is successful.
(2) The Police Chief or his designee shall conduct a hearing on the
appeal within 30 days after the receipt of the request for appeal
and appeal fee and shall consider the evidence submitted by the
appealing party and the alarm administrator. The Police Chief or
his designee must base the decision on the preponderance of the
evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision
within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall
affirm or reverse the decision or action taken by the alarm
administrator.
(3) The filing of an appeal stays any action by the alarm administrator
to suspend an alarm registration or require the payment of a fee or
fine until the appeal process has been exhausted. This provision
applies only to the action of the alarm administrator that is the
subject of the appeal. This provision does not operate as a bar to
enforcement actions on violations of this section that occur
thereafter.
§ 160-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-9
1:121
§ 160-10. Confidentiality.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this article shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspections and
shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to
persons charged with the administration of this article.
D. The alarm administrator or the Police Chief may adjust the count of
false alarms or assessed fees based on the occurrence of multiple
alarms within a twenty-four-hour period, which may be considered as
one false alarm if the alarm user has taken corrective action, unless the
false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user.
E. The alarm administrator of the Police Chief may waive all or part of a
false alarm fine due to extenuating circumstances or to encourage
corrective action.
§ 160-9 MANHEIM CODE § 160-10
1:122
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)56
§ 160-11. through § 160-13. (Reserved)
56.Editor’s Note: Former Art. III, Rules and Regulations, adopted 12-12-1983 by Res. No.
1983-48, was repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08.
§ 160-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-11
1:123

ARTICLE III
Fire Alarms
[Adopted 6-8-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-0957]
§ 160-14. Scope; title; purpose.
§ 160-15. Applicability.
A. Title. This article shall be known as the "Fire Alarm Ordinance of
Manheim Township."
B. Scope. This article shall regulate all matters concerning the design,
installation, repair, testing, monitoring and operation of all fire alarm
systems and related devices; and prescribing penalties for violations
hereof.
C. Purpose. This article shall be construed to secure its expressed intent
which is to ensure public safety, health, and welfare by controlling the
design, installation, testing, and repair of fire alarm systems installed
and operating within Manheim Township; thereby, reducing the service
demands on MTFR and improving public safety.
A. General. The provisions of this article shall apply to all matters affecting
or relating to fire alarm systems and fire alarm contractors and shall
apply equally to new and existing buildings and conditions. This
includes all required and nonrequired fire alarm systems.
B. Matters not provided for. The Manheim Township Board of
Commissioners hereby provide for determination of matters not
provided for herein by authorizing certain actions by the Building Code
Official.
(1) Administrative orders may be issued by the Building Code Official
to clarify ordinance or building code questions and to establish
departmental policy where no specific criteria exists, or where
administrative guidance is needed to establish a methodology to
resolve recurring problems.
(2) Standard design bulletins will be issued where code criteria leave a
specific aspect of the design installation to the judgment of the
Building Code Official or the authority having jurisdiction.
Standard design bulletins shall set specific design criteria where
necessary.
C. Continuation of unlawful use or practice. The continuation of use of a
fire alarm system or the designing, installation, testing, repair and
maintenance of fire alarm systems by any person(s), firm, or
corporation contrary to the provisions of this article shall be deemed a
violation and subject to the fees and penalties prescribed in this article
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Fire Alarms, adopted
8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15.
§ 160-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-15
1:125
§ 160-16. Enforcement.
and/or the PA UCC Building Code Ordinance. Each day that an unlawful
use or practice continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
D. Other regulations. When the provisions herein are more restrictive than
other regulations, this article shall control, but in any case, the most
rigid requirements of any other applicable code or regulation shall
apply whenever a conflict exists.
E. Referenced standards. The standards referenced in this article and
those listed in the appendixes of any building or fire codes as adopted
or amended by Manheim Township shall be part of the requirements of
this article. Where differences occur between provisions of this article
and other standards, the provisions of this article shall apply.
A. General. The Building Code Official and the Code Officials shall enforce
all of the provisions of this article and shall act on any question relative
to the manner of design, installation, testing, repair, materials,
equipment, and devices, or any related issues pertaining to fire alarm
systems, except as otherwise specifically provided for by statutory
requirements or by this article. The Fire Officer is the authorized
representative of MTFR in charge at a fire or incident scene.
B. Application and permits. The Building Code Official shall receive permit
applications, plans, specifications, monitoring/supervisory information,
permit fees and shall issue permits for the installation of, additions,
extensions or alterations to fire alarm systems. A Code Official shall
inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and
enforce compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Inspections. The Building Code Official or a Code Official shall make all
required inspections of premises to enforce compliance with the
provisions of this article and/or the PA UCC Building Code Ordinance.
Inspections shall include, but are not limited to, a final acceptance test.
D. Fire alarm activation reports. The Fire Officer in charge of any incident
involving a fire alarm system shall be responsible for executing a fire
alarm activation report. A copy of the fire alarm activation report shall
be forwarded to the Building Code Official.
E. Rule-making authority. The Building Code Official shall have power as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare to
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement
the provisions of this article as authorized by the Board of
Commissioners of Manheim Township to secure the intent thereof and
to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other
conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or
fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this article or
in building and fire codes as adopted and amended by Manheim
Township.
§ 160-15 MANHEIM CODE § 160-16
1:126
§ 160-17. Definitions.
Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this article
and are defined in the building, fire, mechanical and electrical codes, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes as
adopted by Manheim Township. Definitions found in NFPA standards for fire
protection and electrical installations shall apply in this article, when not
otherwise specifically defined.
ADDRESSABLE DEVICE — An initiation device capable of transmitting
detailed information about the alarm signal to a supervising station.
AGENT — Any person who shall have charge, care or control of any building
as representative of the owner, including an executor, administrator, trustee
or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person representing the
actual owner shall comply with the provisions of this code to the same
extent as if that person were the owner.
ALARM — Any audible or visible signal indicating existence of a fire or
emergency that requires response on the part of the MTFR. Included in this
are the alarm devices by which fire and emergency signals are received.
ALARM MALFUNCTION — The activation of any alarm which results in the
response of the MTFR caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation, or lack of proper maintenance or the inability of MTFR to
determine the cause of an alarm activation.
ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE — A fire alarm system component such
as a bell, horn, speaker, light, or text display that provides audible, tactile
or visible outputs or any combination thereof.
ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE — A feature of automatic fire detection
and alarm systems to reduce unwanted alarms wherein smoke detectors
report alarm conditions for a minimum period, or confirm alarm conditions
within a given time period, after being automatically reset, in order to be
accepted as a valid alarm initiation signal.
ANNUNCIATOR — A unit containing one or more indicator lamps,
alphanumeric displays, or other equivalent means in which each indication
provides status information about a circuit, condition, or location.
APPROVED — Approved by the Building Code Official or a Code Official.
AUTOMATIC — A device or system providing an emergency function
without the necessity for human intervention and activated as a result of
a predetermined temperature rise, rate of temperature rise, or combustion
particles.
F. Department records. The Building Code Official shall keep official
records of permit applications received, permit approvals, fees
collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued,
including fire alarm activation reports issued and received.
§ 160-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-17
1:127
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL (BCO) — The construction code official who
manages, supervises and administers building code enforcement activities
under the PA Uniform Construction Code.
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — An approved, listed device which is
intended to detect invisible particles of carbon monoxide. This device is not
classified as a fire alarm initiating device. If carbon monoxide detectors are
supervised by a central station, then such alarm shall transmit as a distinct
carbon monoxide alarm.
CARBON MONOXIDE DISTINCTIVE SIGNAL — Audible carbon monoxide
notification appliances are to conform to the requirements of NFPA 720 and
are to be distinctive from similar appliances located in the same area.
CERTIFICATED SYSTEM — A fire alarm system that complies with all
the requirements for central station service as outlined in NFPA 72 and
documented by a NRTL, such as UL, FM or Intertek-ETL. A system installed
under such a program is identified by the issuance of a certificate by a NRTL
and is designated as a certificated system.
CODE OFFICIAL — The subordinate or designee of the Building Code
Official.
EMERGENCY VOICE/ALARM COMMUNICATION SYSTEM — A dedicated
system for originating and distributing voice instructions, as well as alert
and evacuation signals pertaining to an emergency, to the occupants of a
building.
FALSE ALARM (UNWANTED ALARM) — An alarm malfunction or malicious
fire alarm as defined herein.
FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION REPORT — A form for completion by a Fire
Officer when responding to an Alarm. Where an alarm malfunction occurs,
the fire alarm activation report including the affidavit of service/repair shall
be completed by a licensed fire alarm company and by the owner/occupant.
FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL — A manually operated device used to initiate
an alarm signal.
FIRE ALARM CONTRACTOR — A contractor proficient in the installations
of fire alarm systems, devices and code standards which govern the
application, design, installation, testing, repair, maintenance and operation
of fire alarm systems.
FIRE ALARM SIGNAL — A signal initiated by a fire alarm initiating device
such as a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector, carbon monoxide
detector, sprinkler water flow switch or other device.
PRIME CONTRACTOR — The one fire alarm contractor contractually
responsible for providing central station services to a subscriber as
required by this article. The prime contractor can be either a listed
central station or a listed alarm service local company. Residential
fire alarm contractors are not required to be listed for central station
service.
A.
§ 160-17 MANHEIM CODE § 160-17
1:128
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A system or portion of a combination system that
consists of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the
status of fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate
the appropriate response to those signals.
FIRE OFFICER — A representative of Manheim Township Fire Rescue
(MTFR) and the Officer-In-Charge responding to an automatic fire alarm or
call for emergency service assistance at a building or property in Manheim
Township.
HEAT DETECTOR — A fire detector that detects either abnormally high
temperature or rate of rise, or both.
INITIATING DEVICE — A system component that originates transmission
of a change of state condition, such as in the smoke detector, manual fire
alarm box, or supervisory switch.
LISTED — Equipment, materials, products or services included in a list
published by an organization acceptable to a Code Official or the Fire Code
Official and concerned with the evaluation of products or services that
maintains periodic inspection of products of listed equipment or materials
or periodic evaluation of services and whose listing states either that the
equipment, material, product or service meets identified standards or has
been tested and found suitable for a specific purpose.
LOCK BOX — A secure, tamperproof device with a lock, operable only by
the fire department master key; containing entry keys, entry fobs, access
cards and/or other devices that may be required for access to a structure
in an emergency. Supra Safe 2HSR/TS (surface mount) or 2HS/TS (recessed
mount) are approved lock boxes for Manheim Township. All lock boxes are
to be purchased with a tamper switch.
MAGNETIC DOOR HOLD-OPEN RELEASE APPLIANCE — A device
designed to hold open doors under normal conditions and allow the doors to
close during smoke and fire conditions.
MALICIOUS FIRE ALARM — The activation of any alarm which results in
the response of the MTFR caused by the negligence or intentional misuse of
the system by the owner or his employees, or agents; or any other activation
not caused by heat, smoke or fire, exclusive of an alarm malfunction. An
alarm is not considered a malicious fire alarm if the alarm is activated due
to causes beyond the control of the owner.
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP FIRE RESCUE (MTFR) — A career fire rescue
system, which provides the primary fire and rescue services within
Manheim Township.
NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED TESTING LABORATORY (NRTL) — The term
used by the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) to identify third-party organizations that have the necessary
qualifications to perform safety testing and certification of products covered
within OSHA and each organization's scopes.
§ 160-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-17
1:129
NONREQUIRED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any fire alarm system not
required by this article or by building or fire codes in effect in Manheim
Township.
REQUIRED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A fire alarm system required by this
article and any building or fire codes in effect in Manheim Township.
RUNNER — A person other than the required number of operators on duty
at central, supervising, or runner station available for prompt dispatching,
when necessary, to a protected premise.
RUNNER SERVICE — The service provided by a runner at a protected
premise, including restoration, resetting, and silencing of all equipment
transmitting fire alarm, supervisory or trouble signals to an off-premise
location.
SHALL — Indicates a mandatory requirement.
SMOKE DETECTOR — An approved, listed device that senses visible and
invisible particles of combustion.
SUBSCRIBER — The recipient of a contractual supervising station signal
service(s). In case of multiple, noncontiguous properties having single
ownership, the term refers to each protected premises or its local
management.
SUPERVISING STATION SERVICE —
SUPERVISORY SIGNAL — A signal indicating that need of action in
connection with the supervision of systems, processes or equipment. A
supervisory condition occurs when one system supervises another system,
process or equipment for failure or impairment to operation of the
supervised system, process or equipment has occurred.
CENTRAL STATION SERVICE — A system or group of systems in which
the operations of circuits and devices at a protected property are
signaled to, recorded in, maintained by, and supervised from a listed
central station (such as UL, FM or ETL-Intertek) having competent and
experienced operators who upon receipt of a signal, take such action as
required by NFPA 72 currently in effect or as subsequently amended.
Related activities at the protected property such as equipment
installation, inspection, maintenance, and runner service are also the
responsibility of the central station or a fire alarm contractor. Central
station service is controlled and operated by a person, firm or
corporation whose business is the furnishing of such contracted
services or whose properties are the protected premises.
A.
PROPRIETARY SUPERVISING STATION SERVICE — An installation of
an alarm system that serves contiguous and noncontiguous properties,
under one ownership, from a proprietary supervising station located at
the protected premises, or at one of multiple noncontiguous protected
premises, at which trained, competent personnel are in constant
attendance.
B.
§ 160-17 MANHEIM CODE § 160-17
1:130
TROUBLE SIGNAL — A signal initiated by the fire alarm system or device
indicative of a fault in a monitored circuit or component.
§ 160-18. New systems.
A. Fire alarm systems for new buildings. Fire alarm systems for new
buildings shall be installed as provided in the building, fire and other
applicable codes in effect in Manheim Township. Permits shall be
applied for and obtained as provided in this article.
B. Fire alarm systems in new R-3 occupancies. Manual fire alarm and
automatic smoke detection systems are to be installed in new R-3
occupancies as is required for Group R-4 occupancies.
C. New, nonrequired systems. Manual fire alarm systems and automatic
smoke detection systems, if installed, shall meet requirements for
required systems. Nonrequired system certification is at the discretion
of the Code Official.
D. Supervising station service. All newly installed, required fire alarm
systems shall be either:
(1) Central station service. Central station service fire alarm systems
shall be certificated by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory
(NRTL), examples of which are Underwriter's Laboratories (UL),
Factory Mutual (FM), and Intertek-ETL (ETL).
(2) Proprietary supervising service. Proprietary station alarm systems
shall comply with the operating procedures set forth in NFPA 72.
The Building Code Official reserves the right to require proprietary
systems, both new and existing, to be listed and certificated for
proprietary service by a NRTL. UL (UUKA) proprietary fire alarm
monitoring station certification is one example of proprietary
station system certification.
E. Multiple-tenant buildings - central station service. New and existing
multiple-tenant buildings required to have a fire alarm system shall be
monitored and have inspections, testing, maintenance and runner
service provided by one listed central station service company.
(1) Exception. Buildings with an anchor store, from which other stores
are separated by a code compliant fire wall or fire barrier, may
contract with a different listed central station service company.
Separately contracted alarm systems are not permitted to be
interconnected.
F. Magnetic door hold-open release appliances. Door hold-open devices
are to be installed on fire rated doors installed as part of a fire rated
assembly that, in the opinion of the Code Official, are likely to be
propped in the open position. Fire rated doors with hold-open devices
shall automatically close and latch upon activation of a fire alarm due to
smoke or fire conditions (alarm signal transmission or local interlock
§ 160-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-18
1:131
between alarms in close proximity of the doors). Magnetic hold-open
devices do not need to be connected to a circuit with secondary power.
G. Exterior water supply control valves. Control valves installed in the
exterior between a sprinkler system water supply and the sprinkler
system are to be supervised through the fire alarm system or they are to
be locked in the open position. Approval to lock water supply control
valves is at the discretion of the Building Code Official and shall be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
H. Elevator sump oil alarms. When provided, elevator oil sensing alarms
shall transmit a supervisory signal to an approved central station or a
constantly attended location. In the absence of a fire alarm system and
a constantly attended location, an audible oil alarm is to be provided at
a location determined by the Code Official.
I. Two-way communication systems.
(1) When provided, two-way voice communication systems shall
communicate voice communications by one of two methods:
(a) Constantly attended location. Communicate to a constantly
attended remote off-premise location, staffed seven days a
week, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. The voice
communication shall not be transmitted to voice-recorded only
attended locations.
(b) Central control point on-premises. Communicate directly to a
central control point on-premises that is approved by the Code
Official. Upon any activation of a fire alarm signal from the
structure where the two-way communication system is
installed, the owner's emergency evacuation plan shall require
a property owner or owner's agent to remain at the designated
on-premises central control point to communicate with the
occupants at the two-way communication system. This onpremises
central control point shall be manned until complete
occupant evacuation of the facility is verified or when told to
evacuate by the on-scene Fire Officer.
(2) Any requests for assistance from occupants at a two-way
communication system, whether received at the constantly
attended, remote location or the on-premises central control point,
shall be communicated to the emergency service personnel at the
scene who are providing assistance.
J. Alarm annunciation. Alarm annunciators, when deemed necessary by
the Code Official, are to be installed to ensure an efficient response to
an alarm. Location of alarm annunciation is at the discretion of the
Code Official.
K. Alarm verification. Smoke detectors are not to be programmed for
alarm verification. At the discretion of the Code Official, alarm
§ 160-18 MANHEIM CODE § 160-18
1:132
§ 160-19. Existing systems.
§ 160-20. Repairs and maintenance.
verification features may be needed if conditions warrant. Alarm
verification requests will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
A. Additions or alterations to or rehabilitation of structures. Enclosed
additions or interior alterations to, change in use of, or major
rehabilitation of any building shall require that existing fire alarm
systems conform to the requirements prescribed in the International
Existing Building Code.
B. Indication of central station service - additions or alterations of existing
systems. Existing, required fire alarm systems shall be certificated at
the discretion of the Building Code Official when substantial additions
or modifications are made to the fire alarm system.
C. Extension of fire protection system features. At the discretion of the
Building Code Official, certain features of fire alarm and detection
systems required for new systems, shall be extended into and added to
an existing fire alarm system. Features to be extended may include
manual fire alarm systems and emergency voice/alarm communication
systems. Integration of fire alarm system features shall be evaluated on
a case-by-case basis to ensure that the new system performs its
intended function.
D. Existing, nonconforming systems. Any fire alarm system installed prior
to the adoption of this article should be upgraded or improved to
provide a minimum level of protection as directed by the Building Code
Official or a Code Official.
E. Existing, nonrequired systems. All nonrequired fire alarm systems
should provide a minimum level of protection as directed by a Code
Official. All nonrequired fire alarm systems shall be maintained and
remain in service unless approval to discontinue the system(s) is
received in writing from the Building Code Official. Any approved,
discontinued system and related equipment shall be completely
removed from the structure so as not to give a false indication that the
building, area or space is protected by a fire alarm system.
A. General. All fire alarm systems, devices, and service equipment
installed in or on any structure in Manheim Township shall be
maintained in operational condition. It shall be unlawful for any
person(s) to reduce or interfere with the operational effectiveness of a
fire alarm system.
(1) This requirement shall not prohibit a fire alarm company from
temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where
necessary to test, make repairs, make alterations, extensions or
additions to the system. Alterations, extensions or additions to fire
§ 160-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-20
1:133
§ 160-21. Lock box requirements.
alarm systems shall be done under a building permit. The Building
Code Official or a Code Official shall be notified per the current
fire watch administrative order when fire alarm systems are
disconnected for testing, repairs, alterations, extensions or
additions.
B. Maintenance. It shall be the duty of the building owner(s) to install,
test, repair and maintain the following systems in accordance with the
applicable NFPA standard in effect: automatic fire detection devices
(including smoke, carbon monoxide and heat detectors); fire alarm
systems; manual fire alarm systems; automatic fire sprinkler systems
including fire pumps and standpipes; fire suppression systems other
than sprinklers; when such systems and/or devices are required per the
International Building Code or Manheim Township Ordinances.
(1) It shall be the duty of a tenant or lessee to maintain all required fire
alarm systems and/or related components noted above when so
required as part of a written lease agreement or a written
maintenance agreement.
A. When required. All occupancies installing a fire alarm system, having
connection to a central station, shall install an approved Supra Safe
2HSR/TS (surface mount) or 2HS/TS (recessed mount) lock box for the
premises being protected. Lock box location(s) shall be approved by the
Building Code Official and the Manheim Township Fire Chief.
(1) Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
B. Existing installations. Existing facilities with a fire alarm system, having
connection to a central station, shall install a Supra Safe 2HSR/TS
(surface mount) or 2HS/TS (recessed mount) lock box.
(1) Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
C. Lock box installation. Lock boxes shall be installed as follows:
(1) At a location approved by the Code Official;
(2) At a height no less than four feet above finished grade and no more
than six feet above finished grade.
D. Lock box supervision. All lock boxes shall be electrically supervised and
shall have the tamper switch connected to the fire alarm panel to
indicate a supervisory signal. The supervisory signal shall report to the
central station for owner/occupant/subscriber notification. MTFR and/
or Manheim Township Police Department are not to be contacted for
supervisory signal transmission.
E. Premises keys/lock box contents. Keys, fobs, access cards, etc. that
provide immediate access to the premises and to fire protection related
equipment shall be identified as to the door(s) they operate. Keys and
§ 160-20 MANHEIM CODE § 160-21
1:134
§ 160-22. Application for permit.
box contents shall be inspected periodically by the owner/occupant of
the premise to ensure that keys operate all doors necessary for MTFR
access to all areas of the building. The property owner or authorized
agent shall be responsible for maintaining a current set of keys in the
lock box which are capable of unlocking entrance, exterior and interior
doors in the building(s) and/or tenant space(s).
F. Alarm annunciation. Alarm annunciators, when deemed necessary by
the Code Official, are to be installed to ensure an efficient response to
an alarm. Location of alarm annunciation is at the discretion of the
Code Official. If a lock box is present, alarm annunciation is to be in
close proximity to the lock box.
A. When permit is required. It shall be unlawful to alter or add to existing
fire alarm systems or to install a fire alarm system or related
components of a fire alarm system for which provisions are made or the
installation of which is regulated by this article, without first filing the
appropriate application, paying the applicable fee, and submitting the
required design information to the Department of Code Compliance and
obtaining the required permit. Repairs as defined by § 160-19 of this
article, which do not involve any violation of the Ordinance, shall not
require a permit.
(1) Minor repair work. A Code Official is permitted to waive the
requirement for filing plans when repair work of a minor nature is
involved.
B. Form of application. The application for a permit shall be submitted in
such form as the Building Code Official prescribes and shall be
accompanied by the required fee as prescribed by the current Fee
Resolution of the Manheim Township Board of Commissioners.
C. By whom application is made. Application for a permit shall be made by
a property owner, a property owner's agent or the prime contractor.
D. Qualifications of fire alarm contractors. Fire alarm contractors shall
demonstrate a knowledge of and proficiency in fire alarm systems,
devices and code standards which govern the application, design,
installation, testing, repair, maintenance and operation of fire alarm
systems. Refer to § 160-22E and F for more specific contractor
requirements.
E. Commercial/industrial/nonresidential fire alarm permit submittal
requirements. The permit application, permit fee, and completed fire
alarm submittal guide for commercial fire alarm systems (including
multiple-family dwellings), shall be submitted. Two copies of floor
plans/shop drawings, riser diagrams, equipment technical data sheets,
manufacturer's specification data sheets, battery calculations (if
applicable), voltage drop calculations (if applicable) and other pertinent
§ 160-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-22
1:135
information shall be submitted. Plans shall be drawn to scale or clearly
dimensioned, with enough clarity and detail to show the nature and
character of work to be performed.
(1) Required system submittals. Required fire alarm systems
submissions shall be made by one of the following:
(a) NICET Level III or IV engineering technician. NICET plans are
to bear the NICET technician's certification number, level, field
of certification and the expiration date of their certification.
(b) Pennsylvania professional engineer. Engineered plans are to
bear the original or digital seal and signature of the licensed
design professional.
(2) Indication of central station service. The prime contractor shall
submit valid UL central station UUFX Certificate(s) of Compliance,
FM 3011 central station certificate(s) of compliance or other
approved NRTL certificates legitimizing central station service.
(3) Central station service scope. The prime contractor shall submit a
summary as to how all six aspects of central station service will be
provided. If subcontractors are to be used to satisfy aspects of
central station service, those signed and dated contracts are to be
submitted for review and approval.
(4) Runner service verification. The prime contractor shall submit a
valid UL central station UUFX Certificate(s) of Compliance, FM
3011 central station certificate(s) of compliance or other approved
NRTL certificates for the proposed fire alarm system runner.
Runner service is to arrive at protected premises within two hours
of receipt of an alarm signal.
(5) Fire alarm system plan and specification deferral. A fire alarm
system to be installed as part of a new commercial building permit
may be a deferred submittal. The Manheim Township fire
protection/detection system release form shall be submitted when
making application for the building permit to acknowledge the fire
alarm system plan deferral. A separate permit application is not to
be submitted when submitting a fire alarm system package under
an active commercial building permit.
F. Residential fire alarm permit submittal requirements. Plans and
specifications are not required to be submitted for one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses; however, after the application for a permit
and fee are submitted, a preliminary inspection shall be scheduled with
a Code Official and the permit applicant for the purpose of determining
the locations of smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors,
notification appliances, and related equipment in the structure prior to
their installation.
§ 160-22 MANHEIM CODE § 160-22
1:136
§ 160-23. Final inspection approval.
(1) Exemption from central station service. Fire alarm systems
installed in one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, which
transmit fire alarm signals off site, are not required to be listed for
central station service. Such fire alarm systems shall be monitored
by a UL, FM, Intertek-ETL or other listed central station.
G. Action on application. A Code Official shall examine or cause to be
examined all applications and plans for permits within a reasonable
time after filing. If the application or plans and specifications do not
conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the Code Official
shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If
the Code Official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this article and all laws applicable thereto, the Code
Official shall issue a building permit for the installation of the fire alarm
system. Approvals of alarm systems as a deferred submission
authorizes installation of the alarm system under a valid, previously
issued building permit.
H. Compliance with Code. The building permit shall be a license to
proceed with the work as approved by a Code Official and shall not be
construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the
provisions of this article except as specifically stipulated by
modification approved in writing by the Building Code Official.
A. Fire alarm testing requirements. Prior to scheduling a Manheim
Township Official for a final fire alarm inspection, 100% of the
completed system is to be tested to verify fully complaint operation and
signal transmission.
B. Test plan. A test plan is to be provided at time of final inspection. The
test plan is to be a comprehensive narrative as to how the fire alarm
system is to be tested. Without a test plan, concealed initiating devices
for example, may be missed by service providers.
(1) Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
C. Record of completion. Prior to or at the time of final fire alarm
inspection, a system record of completion is to be submitted for review
and approval.
(1) Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
D. Record of inspection and testing. Prior to or at the time of final fire
alarm inspection, a system record of inspection and testing, is to be
submitted for review and approval.
(1) Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
E. Documentation for central station service. The prime contractor listed
for central station service, shall provide a fire alarm system certificate
§ 160-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-23
1:137
§ 160-24. Disposition of signals.
at the final inspection. The fire alarm system certificate is also to be
physically posted within three feet of the protected premises fire alarm
control panel.
(1) Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
A. Alarm signals. Alarm signals received by a supervising central station
shall transmit such signals to Lancaster County Wide Communication.
(1) Alarm signal content. Alarm signals transmitted to a supervisory
station shall be by addressable device or zone identification.
(2) Dispatch prior to verification. It shall be a violation of this article
for any Central Station monitoring company or its employees to
verify any fire alarm signals received prior to dispatching MTFR
through Lancaster County Wide Communications.
(3) Carbon monoxide signals. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be
programmed and transmitted as alarm signals. Carbon monoxide
alarm signals shall be addressed as "carbon monoxide" to ensure
proper emergency dispatch.
(a) Exception: Carbon monoxide alarms installed as part of an
exhaust or ventilation system are exempt from signal
transmission.
(4) Sprinkler system waterflow signals. The activation of a water flow
switch installed as part of a sprinkler system shall be programmed
and transmit as an alarm signal.
(5) Fire suppression systems other than sprinklers. The activation of a
fire suppression system other than sprinklers shall be programmed
and transmit as an alarm signal.
(6) Alarm signal runner service. Dispatch of a runner or technician to
the protected premises to arrive within two hours after receipt of
an alarm signal.
(7) Subscriber notification to alarm signal transmission. The central
station shall notify the fire alarm system subscriber as to the
transmission of fire alarm signals within four minutes of signals
being received at the central station.
B. Supervisory signals. Supervisory signals received by a supervising
central station shall forward such signals to the fire alarm system
subscriber.
(1) R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 single- and multiple-station smoke alarm
signals. Where provided, monitored single- and multiple-station
smoke alarms installed as part of a building fire alarm system in
dwelling units or sleeping units shall not activate alarm notification
§ 160-23 MANHEIM CODE § 160-24
1:138
appliances outside of the dwelling unit or sleeping unit and shall be
programmed and transmit as supervisory signals.
(2) Fire pump operation signals. The operation of a fire pump
associated with a fire sprinkler system shall be programmed and
transmit as a supervisory signal. Where provided, the fire pump
suction, discharge and bypass valves, and the isolation valves on
the backflow prevention device or assembly shall be supervised.
(3) Duct detector signals. Detectors placed in environmental air ducts
or plenums shall be programmed and transmit as supervisory
signals.
(4) Lock box signals. Lock box tamper switch signals shall be
programmed and transmit as supervisory signals.
(5) Oil sensing signals. Elevator sump oil sensing signals shall be
programmed and transmit as supervisory signals.
(6) Supervisory signal runner service. Dispatch of a runner or
technician to the protected premises to arrive within two hours
after receipt of a supervisory signal.
(7) Subscriber notification to supervisory signal transmission. The
central station shall notify the fire alarm system subscriber as to
the transmission of supervisory alarm signals within four minutes
of signals being received at the central station.
(8) Out of service notification - fire watch. When a required fire
protection system is impaired for more than four hours, the
Building Code Official or a Code Official, shall be notified
immediately and a fire watch is to be instituted per the fire watch
administrative order.
C. Trouble signals. Trouble signals received by a supervising central
station shall forward such signals to the fire alarm system subscriber.
(1) Trouble signal maintenance service. Dispatch of a service
technician to the protected premises to arrive within four hours
after receipt of a trouble signal to initiate maintenance.
(2) Subscriber notification to trouble signal transmission. The central
station shall notify the fire alarm system subscriber as to the
transmission of trouble alarm signals within four minutes of signals
being received at the central station.
(3) Out of service notification - fire watch. When a required fire
protection system is impaired for more than four hours, the
Building Code Official or a Code Official, shall be notified
immediately and a fire watch is to be instituted per the fire watch
administrative order.
§ 160-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-24
1:139
§ 160-25. Violations.
D. Test signals. Test signals received by a supervising central station shall
be acknowledged and recorded. Test signals not received by the central
station shall be investigated and handled as a trouble signal and the
protocol of Subsection C shall be followed.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever a Code Official observes an apparent or
actual violation of a provision of this article, the Code Official shall
prepare a written notice of violation describing the condition which
requires corrective action. The notice shall specify the violation and
time limitations for the required repairs or improvements to be made to
the fire alarm system. Failure to comply with the provisions of the
notice of violation shall subject the violator to the penalties herein.
B. Service of notice. The written notice of violation of this article shall be
served upon the owner, the occupant, an agent of the owner or any
other person responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice
of violation shall be served either by certified mail to the last known
post office address, delivered in person, or by delivering it to and
leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of or responding to
the premises on behalf of the responsible party. Posting a copy in a
conspicuous place at the main entrance door shall be deemed the
equivalent of personal delivery.
C. Legal action. Nothing herein shall prevent the Building Code Official
from filing a civil complaint or a nontraffic citation against a party
without issuing a notice of violation where circumstances require
prompt action because of a threat to health, safety and welfare or
where a fire alarm system is taken out of service or offline without
notice to the applicable listed central station.
D. Tampering with systems. Any person(s) who tampers with or, interferes
with the effectiveness of any fire alarm system or related component,
shall be in violation of this article.
E. Penalty for violations. Any person(s), firm or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this article or failing to comply with any order
issued pursuant to any section thereof shall, upon being found guilty of
a civil offense, be liable for a fine of not less than $100 or not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
(1) Failure to pay any fee as prescribed herein shall constitute a
violation.
F. Fines collected. All fines and fees collected under this article shall be
deposited into the Manheim Township General Fund.
G. Alarm reset. Once an automatic, fire alarm has initiated and caused the
response by MTFR, it shall be unlawful for any person(s) to reset the
§ 160-24 MANHEIM CODE § 160-25
1:140
§ 160-26. Unpaid fee charges.
Should any fee assessed pursuant to this article remain unpaid in excess
of 90 days from the date the charge is billed, the owner shall also be
responsible for any collection costs including attorneys' fees incurred by
Manheim Township.
§ 160-27. Repeal.
Except to the extent that proceedings involving a notice of violation or
a subsequent prosecution pursuant to Ordinance 2014-15 are still in
existence, the provisions of Ordinance 2014-15 or any other ordinance that
are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 160-28. Severability.
In the event any part or provision of this article is held to be illegal or
void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other
parts or provisions thereof, which are determined to be legal; and it shall be
presumed that this article would have been passed without such illegal or
invalid parts or provisions.
alarm panel, until the authorization of the Fire Officer has been
obtained.
§ 160-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-28
1:141
Chapter 167
ANIMALS
§ 167-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Manheim Township Animal Control
Ordinance."
§ 167-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person(s) appointed by Manheim
Township, as provided in § 167-14, who shall have the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Pennsylvania Dog Law.58
ANIMALS — Includes all mammals, birds, fowl and reptiles normally or
ordinarily domesticated (including household pets such as dogs and cats)
or raised in this area or climate as livestock or for work or for breeding
purposes. Such term shall not include fish.
AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, park or any other
public land, or upon property of another person other than the owner, and
not being accompanied by and under the control of the owner or any other
person having custody of such animal.
DANGEROUS DOG — Any or all of the following:
OWNER — Includes every person, proprietor, corporation, partnership or
association that actually owns an animal or who has an animal in his or its
care or permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by
him or it. The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any
animal shall also be deemed the owner of such animal.
WILD/EXOTIC ANIMAL — A wild, dangerous, or undomesticated animal or
venomous reptile which is not of a species customarily used as an ordinary
house pet or livestock and which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo
or which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other
country or which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of
Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults (which assaults shall
include dogs at large approaching any person upon the streets,
sidewalks or other public grounds or places in a threatening or
terrorizing manner without provocation), or otherwise attacks a human
being without provocation;
A.
Any dog which is deemed a dangerous dog under and pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Dog Law.59
B.
58.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 160-28 MANHEIM CODE § 167-2
1:142
bodily harm or property damage, irrespective of its actual or asserted
state of tameness or domestication. This definition includes animals bred or
raised in captivity and hybrids of wild/exotic animals, but not fish or birds.
§ 167-3. Nuisances prohibited; animal waste.
§ 167-4. Rabies vaccinations required.
All dogs and cats, to include outside cats, in Manheim Township shall be
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the state rabies law.
§ 167-5. Dangerous dogs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person(s), corporation, partnership or other
entity whatsoever to harbor, care for, shelter or maintain any animal in
such a manner as to disturb or unduly annoy the public through the
animal's noise, barking, smell, mischief or other harmful propensities.
All animal pens or other areas in which animals are kept shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition free of offensive, obnoxious or foul
odors.
B. It shall be unlawful to own, possess, harbor, control or keep any animal
which makes noise repeatedly for a period of 15 minutes during the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. or repeatedly for a period of five
minutes during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., regardless of
whether the animal is physically situated in or upon private property.
Said noise shall constitute a nuisance, provided that, at the time the
animal is making such noise, no person is trespassing or threatening to
trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal is
legitimately situated, nor is there any other legitimate cause which
justifiably provoked the animal.
C. No owner, custodian or keeper of any animal shall allow or permit any
such animal to deposit excrement (defecate) upon any property not
owned or leased by the owner, custodian or keeper of such animal,
without immediately picking up such excrement. This subsection shall
not apply to horses being used for transportation in the public streets or
alleys or other public property within the Township.
A. Any person who owns or who has custody of a dangerous dog shall
register the dog with the Manheim Township Police Department on a
form provided by the Police Department. Upon registering a dangerous
dog, the owner or custodian shall display, in a conspicuous manner, a
sign on his premises warning that there is a dangerous dog on the
premises. The sign shall be visible and legible from the sidewalk and
street and shall comply with all other applicable laws, including but not
limited to the Manheim Township Sign Ordinance.60
60.Editor's Note: The Sign Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-5
1:143
B. The owner or person having custody of a dangerous dog shall confine
such dog by one of the following methods if outside, which shall be
inspected and approved by the Animal Control Officer:
(1) A pen or structure with sides and a secure top. Pens must have
bottoms secured to the sides or the sides must be imbedded in the
ground no less than two feet. Use of this option is subject to all
other applicable laws.
(2) A fence at least six feet high above the ground and imbedded in the
ground no less than two feet. This fence must prevent any
possibility of the dog's escape and must have signs conspicuously
placed around the entire perimeter of the fence. The use of this
option is subject to all other applicable laws.
C. The owner or person having custody of a dangerous dog shall not
permit such dog to go beyond confined bounds of the owner's premises
unless the dog is securely leashed and muzzled. This leash shall be no
more than four feet in length. Dangerous dogs shall have a tag on their
collar that will be issued to the owner at the time of registration. No
dangerous dog shall be permitted to go beyond the confined bounds of
the owner's premises or the premises of the person having custody
without wearing this tag.
D. Any owner of a dangerous dog that transfers ownership of such dog
shall notify the Manheim Township police of the transfer and the new
location of the dog. The Manheim Township police may then notify the
responsible municipality. If the new owner resides in Manheim
Township, he/she shall register the dangerous dog with the Manheim
Township police. The designation of dangerous dog shall transfer with
ownership of such animal.
E. Any dog which is a dangerous dog and not registered with the Manheim
Township police as a dangerous dog may be immediately seized and
detained as provided in § 167-8 by the Animal Control Officer or the
Manheim Township police, who shall turn the dangerous dog over to an
approved animal shelter until the dangerous dog is registered and the
owner complies with other applicable provisions of this section. Upon
such seizure, the Animal Control Officer shall, by written notice sent by
both regular and certified mail and by personal notification, if possible,
notify the owner of such seizure and detention and the requirements to
register the dog within 10 days of the date of the seizure. The dog shall
continue to be detained until such time as the dog is registered in
accordance with this chapter. Should the owner fail to register the dog
with the Manheim Township police as a dangerous dog within such tenday
period, the owner may be prosecuted before the local Magisterial
District Judge to have said dog be deemed a dangerous dog in
accordance with the Dog Law.61 All animal shelter fees for seized and
detained dangerous dogs shall be paid by the owner.
61.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 167-5 MANHEIM CODE § 167-5
1:144
§ 167-6. Wild/exotic animals.
No person shall own, harbor, maintain or control a wild/exotic animal or
hybrids of wild/exotic animals within Manheim Township.
§ 167-7. Animals at large; leash requirements.
§ 167-8. Seizure and detention.
F. Any dog determined to be dangerous by the Animal Control Officer may,
by written notice sent by both regular and certified mail to the owner,
notify the owner of the requirements to register that dog as a
dangerous dog with the Manheim Township police within 10 days of
such notice. The dog may be detained by the Animal Control Officer
until such time that the dog has been registered.
G. No dog may be declared a dangerous dog for inflicting injury or damage
on any person committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises
occupied by the owner of the dog, or teasing, tormenting or abusing or
assaulting the dog, or committing or attempting to commit a crime. No
dog may be declared dangerous for taking any action to defend or
protect a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an
attack or assault.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any
animal or the parent or guardian of any minor owning or having custody
of any animal to allow the animal to go beyond the boundaries of their
premises or to run at large over the streets or public grounds or upon
the property of anyone other than the owner or person having custody
of such animal. It shall also be unlawful for the owner or person having
custody of such animal to permit such animal to pose a danger to
pedestrians using adjacent sidewalks and streets.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog
traveling on the streets or public grounds to have the animal on a leash
at all times.
A. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or any police officer of
the Township to seize any animal running at large and to convey it to an
approved animal shelter, as provided in § 167-16, where it shall be
detained and impounded in a humane manner.
B. Upon seizure, the Animal Control Officer or police officer of the
Township shall complete a seizure form approved by the Chief of Police.
Upon detention and impoundment, the keeper of the approved shelter
to which the animal is delivered shall make a complete registry entering
the breed, color, and sex of the animal and indicate whether the animal
is licensed. The registry shall be made upon a form approved by the
Chief of Police. If the animal is licensed, the keeper of the approved
shelter used shall communicate with the Treasurer of Lancaster County
§ 167-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-8
1:145
§ 167-9. Notice of detention.
If the owner of a detained animal can be identified by license tag or
other means, the owner shall be given immediate notice, either in person
or by phone or by both regular and certified mail, of the detention and
impoundment by the keeper of the shelter to which the animal was
delivered. If the owner is unknown, written notice of the impoundment shall
be posted at the shelter and at the Manheim Township Police Department
for a period of 10 days from the day of seizure, describing the animal, the
place and time of seizure and the location of impoundment.
§ 167-10. Redemption of seized animals.
The owner of an animal which has been detained and impounded may
reclaim his animal upon payment of a seizure fee as established from time to
time by resolution of the Commissioners of the Township and upon payment
of all other reasonable expenses and costs incurred by the keeper of the
animal shelter by reason of the detention, impoundment and maintenance
of the animal, provided that such expenses and costs shall not exceed a
per-day maximum as established from time to time by resolution of the
Commissioners. The owner shall pay the seizure fee to the Township. The
expenses and costs incurred by the shelter keeper due to impoundment
and maintenance of the animal may be paid by the owner to the shelter
keeper in a manner determined by the shelter keeper. All such fees and
costs paid by an owner shall be entered on the redemption portion of a form
approved by the Chief of Police. In no event shall any animal required to be
licensed by law be released from detention and impoundment until it has
been licensed. Payment of the seizure fee, expenses and costs shall not bar
prosecution of the owner for any violation of law.
§ 167-11. Seizure without detention.
Notwithstanding § 167-8, if an animal is found at large and its owner can
be identified and located, the animal need not be detained and impounded
but may, instead, be taken to and turned over to the owner. In such case,
the Animal Control Officer or police officer who seized the animal shall
complete a registry as required in § 167-8. The owner, whose animal is
seized without detention and impoundment, shall be subject to pay the
seizure fee in the manner as set forth in § 167-10, except that, if
circumstances warrant, payment of the seizure fee may be delayed for a
period of 15 days. Use of the procedure set forth in this section shall not bar
a prosecution for any violation of law.
§ 167-12. Destruction of unclaimed animals.
It shall be the duty of the keeper of an approved animal shelter to keep
detained and impounded animals for a period of at least 10 days. If, after
and obtain and enter upon the registry the name and address of the
owner and number of the license tag.
§ 167-8 MANHEIM CODE § 167-12
1:146
10 days have elapsed from the giving or posting of notice as required in
§ 167-9, a detained and impounded animal has not been claimed, the keeper
of an approved shelter may either destroy the animal in a humane manner
or sell the animal, provided that no animal shall be sold for vivisection,
or put the animal up for adoption. The proceeds derived from the sale of
an animal, after deduction of the seizure fee and the reasonable expenses
and costs incurred because of its detention, shall be paid to the County
Treasurer as required by the Dog Law.62 The Township shall pay an
impoundment fee established from time to time by resolution to the keeper
of an approved shelter for the keeping of an animal which is unclaimed and
subsequently destroyed.
§ 167-13. Quarantine of animals.
In the event an animal bites any person or other animal:
A. The owner or custodian of the animal shall:
(1) Immediately notify the Manheim Township police of the incident
and complete an animal bite report on such form as the Animal
Control Officer or police officer shall prescribe;
(2) Quarantine the animal for a period of 10 days to observe for signs
of rabies at such location and under such conditions as are imposed
or required by the Animal Control Officer;
(3) At the expiration of 10 days following the day of the biting incident,
have the animal examined by a veterinarian. A certificate of
examination shall be filed with the Animal Control Officer on such
form as the Animal Control Officer shall prescribe, completed and
signed by the veterinarian. The certificate of examination shall be
filed not more than 14 days following the bite incident;
(4) If the animal dies within the ten-day quarantine period, the
animal's head shall be removed by a veterinarian and tested for
rabies by the appropriate state laboratory or a laboratory
designated by the commonwealth for that purpose; and
(5) All costs, including laboratory preparation, laboratory examination,
quarantine and veterinary examination of the animal shall be borne
by the owner or custodian of the animal.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall have the right and duty to seize any
animal that bites a human or animal if he determines such seizure is
necessary to insure that the animal shall be quarantined. If any owner
or custodian shall refuse any order of the Animal Control Officer to
quarantine the animal and to have it examined by a veterinarian, the
Animal Control Officer shall take the action necessary to comply with
Subsection A(2) and (3) hereof, and the owner or custodian of the
62.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 167-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-13
1:147
§ 167-14. Appointment of Animal Control Officer; powers and
duties.
The Commissioners may, by resolution, appoint an Animal Control
Officer(s), who shall have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter and the Dog Law.63 The term of the appointment shall be indefinite
and subject to termination by the Commissioners on 10 days' written notice.
The Animal Control Officer(s), in the performance of the duties under the
provisions of this chapter, shall be empowered to take all action necessary
to enforce this chapter and shall be subject to control by the Chief of Police
of Manheim Township. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as
to limit any police officer of Manheim Township in enforcing any of the
provisions of this chapter or the Dog Law.
§ 167-15. Compensation of Animal Control Officer.
Compensation of the Animal Control Officer(s) shall be established by
resolution of the Commissioners appointing a person or persons to that
position and by resolution from time to time thereafter.
§ 167-16. Approved animal shelters.
Animals seized may be impounded only at shelters approved by resolution of
the Commissioners. An approved shelter shall comply with all requirements
of the Dog Shelter Rules as set forth in 7 Pa. Code § 23 et seq. The keeper
of the approved shelter shall fill out disposition information upon a form
approved by the Chief of Police and submit it to the Police Department on a
timely basis, indicating the final disposition of each animal seized within the
Township and turned over to such keeper for detention and impoundment.
§ 167-17. Violations and penalties.
animal shall be liable to the Township for all costs thereof, which may
be collected as an additional penalty for violation of this section.
C. The owner of any animal placed under quarantine shall not sell,
exchange, lease, lend, give away, allow to stray, remove or allow to be
removed such animal until the quarantine has been revoked.
D. Any animal under quarantine shall be muzzled while outside the
confines or structure specified by the Animal Control Officer for the
quarantine.
E. If a biting incident occurs that involves an unclaimed or stray animal,
the owner of which cannot be identified, the Animal Control Officer
shall attempt to capture the animal or destroy it if necessary. The same
procedures as outlined in this section concerning quarantine and
veterinary examination of the offending animal shall be followed, with
the costs borne by the Township.
63.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 167-13 MANHEIM CODE § 167-17
1:148
Chapter 190
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 190-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Manheim Township
Cable System Ordinance."
§ 190-2. Definitions. [Amended 1-10-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and as may be amended in the
future.
BASIC SERVICE TIER — Those channels required to be carried in the basic
service tier by the Act, including, but not limited to, commercial and public
television signals in accordance with the Act and the public, educational
and governmental local access channel required to be provided by § 190-7
herein. The company may include other stations within the basic service tier
in addition to the channels so listed in this definition.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers in the
Township of video and/or audio programming or other programming
service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the
selection of such video and/or audio programming or other programming
service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Township of Manheim,
A. Except as provided below, any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, for every such violation, upon conviction thereof before a
Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine or penalty payable to the
Township of not less than $50 nor more than $600, plus costs, and, in
default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
B. The owner of a dangerous dog who fails to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District
Judge, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, plus costs, for the first offense and not less than $500 nor
more than $1,500, plus costs, for a second or subsequent offenses and,
in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
§ 167-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:149
with the exception of those facilities specifically excluded under Section 602
of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.
COMMISSIONERS — The governing body of the Township of Manheim,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
COMPANY — A grantee of rights under this nonexclusive franchise chapter.
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE TIER — A grouping of at least the following
educational programming services as a package available to subscribers
receiving basic service: Arts and Entertainment Network (A&E); Cable
News Network (CNN); and The Discovery Channel (TDC).
GROSS RECEIPTS — Revenue of the company based on income from
subscription s imposed upon residents of the Township of Manheim,
including basic service tier subscription; subscription to any service tier
other than the basic service tier; premium service; pay-per-view, excluding
the share of pay-per-view revenue paid by the company to the suppliers
of the pay-per-view service; and any other fee for cable service shown on
the subscriber's bill as a separate line item which is a recurring fee, but
not including s for connections, disconnections and other s for services
which are normally nonrecurring in nature and which do not involve the
transmission of audio or visual programming. Sales taxes and other taxes
collected by the company shall be deducted from the gross receipts before
computation of the franchise fee due to the Township; provided, however,
the company shall include not less than 60% of the revenue of the company
generated from pay-per-view service in the computation of gross receipts
notwithstanding the actual amount or percentage of the per program
revenue paid by the company to the suppliers of pay-per-view service. The
Township reserves the right at any time to include the entire revenue from
pay-per-view service within the definition of "gross receipts" during the
term of the franchise or any renewal thereof if the Township shall provide
the company with written notification of its intention to do so not less than
60 days before the end of a calendar year. In such event, the inclusion
of the entire revenue from pay-per-view service shall be included in the
computation of gross receipts in the next and each succeeding calendar
year until changed by action of the Board of Commissioners.
SERVICE TIER — A grouping of programming services or channels which is
offered to subscribers as a package.
STREETS — Includes all public streets, rights-of-way and roads owned by
or under the jurisdiction of the Township of Manheim.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person or entity receiving for any purpose cable
service from a cable system of the company.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 190-3. Nonexclusive franchise.
Upon application from the company in compliance with this chapter,
including acceptance of the terms and conditions contained herein, the
Township may grant to the company a nonexclusive franchise to construct,
§ 190-2 MANHEIM CODE § 190-3
1:150
operate and maintain a cable system for cable service as may be prescribed
or permitted by the Federal Communications Commission and to use poles,
wires, conduits and appurtenances under, along, across, or upon any or all
public streets, ways, alleys or parkways, as the same now or may hereafter
exist within the Township and within the boundaries of the Township as
the same may hereafter be extended, for transmitting and distributing
electricity and electrical, electronic, digital and fiber optic impulses and
signals to the residents of the Township upon the terms and conditions and
subject to the limitations herein set forth.
§ 190-4. Annexation.
Upon the annexation of any territory to the Township, the portion of any
cable system of the company that may be located or operated within said
territory shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of this chapter as though
it were an extension made hereunder.
§ 190-5. Acceptance of franchise.
This chapter shall constitute a contract between the Township and the
company for all the uses, services and purposes set forth herein, and
the company, by its acceptance of the provisions of this chapter, binds
itself to provide the necessary cable system and to establish, operate and
maintain the cable system contemplated by this chapter, continuing without
substantial interruption except for causes beyond its control until the
expiration of the term of this grant. The company shall enter into an
agreement in writing, in a form satisfactory to the Township, evidencing
the company's acceptance of the terms and conditions of this chapter
prior to exercising any rights under the franchise granted herein. If any
cable operator within the Township refuses to accept the provisions of this
chapter, such operator shall be considered a franchisee at will and shall
be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter, including the payment of
franchise fees, until the cable operator ceases operations either voluntarily
or upon demand of the Township in accordance with any applicable
termination or renewal procedures set forth in the Act. No company may
initiate new cable service in the Township prior to obtaining a franchise in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 190-6. Fees; provision of free services.
A. The company shall pay a franchise fee to the Township during the life of
this franchise, said franchise fee to be in the amount of 5% of the
company's total gross receipts per year as derived from cable service
operations in the Township. The franchise fee shall be due and payable
in accordance with the following schedule:
Due Date Gross Receipts Received During the Period
November 1 April 1 through September 30 of the same year
May 1 October 1 of the previous year to March 31 of the
same year
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:151
§ 190-7. Public access channel.
The company shall provide for the Township, along with those other
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, municipalities under contract with the
company, at least one dedicated, noncommercial, multimunicipality, public
access channel for public, educational and municipal governmental use. The
Commissioners shall determine which Township programs shall appear on
the public access channel. The public access channel required herein shall
be included within the basic service tier.
§ 190-8. Service standards.
The company shall, during the continuance of this franchise, provide
facilities and service sufficient to meet the needs of the public and shall
maintain its facilities and provide service in accordance with accepted
industry standards. The company shall maintain, operate and render
efficient service in accordance with the Act and under such applicable
rules, regulations and standards as are, from time to time, established by
the Township or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction. The
company shall be certified during the term of this franchise as meeting
the National Cable Television Association, or any successor association,
standards for customer service. The Township expressly reserves the right
to establish lawful rules, regulations and standards during the term of the
franchise, which rules, regulations and standards shall not be in conflict
with the Act or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The cable
system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with good
engineering practices. All construction shall be done in a good and
workmanlike manner, free of defects which may be a hazard to life and limb,
and in conformance with the standards set forth in the National Electric
Safety Code. The following additional service standards shall apply to any
franchise granted under this chapter:
B. In addition to the franchise fee paid to the Township, the company shall
provide free basic and standard tier cable television service to one
outlet within any public school, firehouse or municipal building if
requested to do so in writing by the Township, provided the cable
system's existing trunk or distribution service passes such building and
the building can be served with a service drop of 150 feet or less.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the
Township specifically reserves the right to increase the amount of the
franchise fee and to change the method of computing such fee to the
extent authorized by federal and state laws in effect from time to time
during the term of this franchise or any renewal thereof. In such event,
the company may, unless otherwise prohibited by law, pass through to
subscribers the amount of any increase in the franchise fee.
A. Rights of subscribers. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue
to receive service from the company as long as their financial and other
obligations to the company are honored.
§ 190-6 MANHEIM CODE § 190-8
1:152
§ 190-9. Subscriber service rates.
To the extent permitted by Section 623 of the Act and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and to the extent permitted by future amendments
to the Act, the Township hereby reserves the right to regulate the rates
d by the company for video and/or audio programming provided by the
company's cable system, to enforce regulations prescribed by the Federal
Communications Commission and to file complaints challenging a rate as
unreasonable to the extent permitted by federal and state law, including,
but not limited to, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992.
B. Notice of interruption for repairs. Whenever it is necessary to shut off
or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or
installations, the company shall attempt to do so at such times as shall
cause the least amount of inconvenience to its subscribers; and, unless
such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall
attempt to give reasonable notice thereof to its subscribers.
C. Continuous service. Company service shall be continuous daily during
the regular telecast operating hours of the stations whose broadcasts
are being transmitted.
D. Interference. Subject to federal technical standards, the company shall,
at all times, operate the cable system so as not to adversely affect or
interfere with existing radio and television reception and shall prevent
radiation from the company's cable system.
E. Complaints. The company shall maintain a toll-free telephone line with
seven-day-per-week service to receive complaints. The company shall
provide subscribers with a written explanation of the company's
complaint policy. The company agrees to respond to and investigate all
complaints received from its subscribers within the Township and to
resolve said complaints in an efficient and timely manner if at all
technically and reasonably possible, and the company's agents or
employees shall be available for such purposes in the Township. The
company shall maintain, for at least one year, a record of the subscriber
complaints received and the action taken by the company to resolve
such subscriber compliance. These records shall be available for
inspection by the Township.
F. Survey of subscribers. At least once each year, the company shall
conduct a survey of its subscribers to determine the level of subscriber
satisfaction or dissatisfaction. Such survey shall request subscribers to
indicate the level of satisfaction with the programming and services
provided by the company and an opportunity for subscribers to request
additional programming choices or changes to existing programming
provided by the company. The results of this annual survey shall be
provided to the Township no later than three months after the inclusion
of the survey.
§ 190-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-10
1:153
§ 190-10. Notification of changes in service to Township.
The company shall provide the Township with 30 days' advance notification
of any changes in services, including, but not limited to, the deletion of
channels from the basic service tier or the movement of any channel from
one service tier to another service tier. The company shall provide the
Township with 30 days' advance notification of any changes in rates to be d
subscribers for service tiers, installation, or any other services provided by
the company. Such notice shall be provided to the Township as set forth in
§ 190-23 and a reasonable number of times on the public, educational and
governmental access channel. The notification shall not be required for the
offering of any particular pay-per-view programming.
§ 190-11. Notification of changes in service to subscribers.
The company shall provide all subscribers with 30 days' advance
notification of any changes in services, including, but not limited to, the
deletion of channels from the basic service tier or the movement of any
channel from one service tier to another service tier. The company shall also
provide subscribers with 30 days' advance notification of any changes in
rates to be d subscribers for service tiers, installation, or any other services
provided by the company. The company shall provide all subscribers with
clear and complete notification concerning rates and s on a regular basis,
not less than twice each year. Such information shall include, at a minimum:
A. The monthly, quarterly and annual rates for the basic service tier,
specifically setting forth any discounts which may be available for
quarterly or annual payment.
B. The monthly, quarterly and annual rates for each service tier other than
the basic service tier, specifically setting forth any discounts which may
be available for quarterly or annual payment.
C. The monthly, quarterly and annual rates for the FM radio programming,
specifically setting forth any discounts which may be available for
quarterly or annual payment.
D. Any discount programs which the company may offer, including, but not
limited to, discounts for senior citizens.
E. A listing of s which may be imposed by the company for installation of
equipment, repair of equipment, removal of equipment, and similar
services.
F. A listing of s which may be imposed for late payments, checks returned
for insufficient funds, and similar matters.
G. A listing of all other s and fees imposed by the company.
§ 190-10 MANHEIM CODE § 190-12
1:154
§ 190-12. Reports required.
For the purpose of administering this chapter, the company shall,
concurrent with the payment of the fee specified in § 190-5, file a verified
statement of the gross receipts received from subscribers in the Township
for the preceding six-month period. This statement shall include a
breakdown of gross receipts from the basic service tier; each other service
tier (except premium channels or pay-per-view); premium channels; and
pay-per-view. The company shall also provide the results of the annual
survey of subscribers in accordance with the provisions of § 190-8F herein.
§ 190-13. Examination of company records.
The company shall keep full, true, accurate and current books and records
reflecting its investment and its operations under this chapter, which books
and records shall be made available upon reasonable notice on a
confidential basis for inspection during the company's normal business
hours by officials of the Township, including, but not limited to, the
Township auditors or controller, elected or appointed, or an independent
certified public account retained by the Township. The Township shall be
permitted to make copies of the company's records with the permission of
the company or as part of discovery proceedings if litigation between the
company and the Township should occur.
§ 190-14. Term of franchise.
The franchise and rights herein granted shall be deemed to commence on
April 1, 1993, and shall continue in full force for a term of five years from
April 1, 1993, expiring on March 31, 1998. If the company shall commence
operations within the Township after April 1, 1993, the franchise and rights
herein granted shall commence upon the granting of a franchise by the
Township and shall expire on March 31, 1998. Franchise fees under a
franchise granted by this chapter shall accrue commencing on the later of
April 1, 1993, or the commencement of operations within the Township by
the company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the company shall elect to
provide an educational service tier to subscribers within the Township who
shall subscribe to the basic service tier which shall be available without
obtaining any service tier other than the basic service tier and which shall
be made available at less cost than the cost of obtaining any other service
tier above the basic service tier; or provide a mechanism for individualized
selection whereby each subscriber can select only those channels or
programming services to which the subscriber desires to subscribe in
addition to the basic service tier and be billed for those channels and/
or services in addition to the basic service tier; or include all of the
programming required for an educational service tier within the basic
service tier, then the term of the franchise shall be automatically increased
to 15 years from April 1, 1993, and the franchise shall expire on March 31,
2008.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-15
1:155
§ 190-15. Transfer of franchise.
The company shall not sell, lease, transfer, or assign this franchise to
any other person, firm, company, corporation or entity other than to the
principal shareholders of the company, a parent corporation, a subsidiary
or affiliate corporation of a parent company or subsidiary or affiliate
corporation of the company, or any other firm or entity owned by the
company, without prior notice to the Township, which notice shall include
information as to the financial and technical ability of the transferee to
operate the system. No sale, lease, assignment or transfer shall be effective
until the vendee, lessee, assignee or transferee has filed with the Township
Manager-Secretary an instrument accepting the terms of the franchise and
agreeing to perform all the conditions thereof.
§ 190-16. Renewal of franchise.
Any franchise granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered for renewal in accordance with applicable law existing at the
time application for renewal of such franchise is made by the company. The
company shall file a formal request to renew the franchise granted by the
Township at least 30 months prior to the expiration of the franchise. The
request to renew the company's franchise must be accompanied by such
information as the Township may reasonably require.
§ 190-17. Liability of Township.
It is expressly understood that the Township has no control, standard or
regulation pertaining to the subject matter of programs distributed by
the company. Except for programming initiated by the Township on the
public, educational and governmental access channel or otherwise initiated
by the Township, the company agrees to indemnify and save harmless
the Township, its officers, agents and employees from all claims, suits
and actions at law or in equity (including attorneys' fees and expenses
of investigation relating thereto) for libel, slander, invasion of privacy and
patent or copyright infringement in any action arising out of the subject
matter of programs transmitted by the company. The company further
agrees that, in the event the Township is made a party defendant in any
action arising out of the subject matter of programs transmitted by the
company, the company shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend such
action and any appeals therefrom.
§ 190-18. Conditions for street occupancy.
The following conditions shall apply to street occupancy by the company:
A. Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the company within the Township shall be located with the
approval of the Commissioners and shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners and the traveling public who use the streets of the
Township. Upon request, the company shall furnish the Township with a
§ 190-15 MANHEIM CODE § 190-18
1:156
map showing the cable system in sufficient detail to assure the
Township of being currently advised as to the location of the cables.
Upon request, it shall be the responsibility of the company to keep the
Township advised of any and all changes, additions and removals to the
cable system, except for the individual subscribers' connection wires.
B. Restoration. In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and
expense, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface
of any street disturbed in as good condition as before said work was
commenced.
C. Relocation. In the event that, at any time during the term of a franchise
granted hereunder, the Township shall lawfully elect to alter or change
the location or grade of any street, road or other public way, or if, in the
opinion of the Commissioners, a pole or pole line interferes with the
necessary convenience of the Township or a property owner, then, upon
reasonable notice by the Township, the company shall remove, relay
and relocate its poles, wires and cables or other cable system fixtures at
its own expense.
D. Placement of fixtures.
(1) It is the policy of the Township, and it is understood by the company
that, where distribution lines are to be installed along any public
street, the same shall be attached to existing utility poles and not to
additional poles placed on the same side of the street as existing
utility poles. It is understood and agreed that this restriction and
limitation shall extend to any and all streets within the limits of the
Township, even though some of said streets may be part of the state
highway system. A waiver of this requirement may be granted to
the company by the Commissioners upon written application to the
Township by the company, but said waiver shall be for good cause
shown and in the sole discretion of the Commissioners.
(2) Before the company sets poles or constructs any structure on
Township property, streets or rights-of-way, it shall file with the
Township detailed specifications showing the exact location, height
and dimension of the poles or structures to be erected. The poles or
structures shall not be erected thereafter until such specifications
shall be approved in writing by the Commissioners. All wires,
cables and other overhead equipment shall be at such minimum
heights as are or may be required by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or
any nationally recognized building or electrical code.
(3) When the company makes written application for a waiver or
submits specifications for construction, and the Commissioners are
uncertain as to the exact location of the limits of the right-of-way of
any street or road, then, in their discretion, the Commissioners may
§ 190-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:157
require the same be surveyed by a surveyor selected by them, the
cost of said survey to be paid by the company.
E. Underground placement. It is the policy of the Township, and it is
understood and agreed to by the company, that all distribution lines,
wires and cables shall be located underground in those areas of the
Township where utility services are located underground.
F. Tree trimming. The company shall have the authority to trim trees upon
and overhanging streets, roads and public places of the Township so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with wires
and cables of the company, all trimming to be done in accordance with
Township regulations and at the expense of the company.
G. Use of poles and fixtures. The company agrees that it shall, upon
request, furnish a copy of any contract entered into with any public
utility for the use of their poles by the company and shall set forth the
terms, conditions and duration of said contract. The company agrees
that the copy of the aforementioned contract shall be filed upon written
request with the Township Manager-Secretary prior to starting any
installation of wires or other facilities on Township streets or rights-ofway
under the franchise.
H. Removal of wires from premises of subscriber. The company shall, on
request of any subscriber, promptly remove all wires, cables and
related installations from the premises of such subscriber, subject to
the provisions of any applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
I. Removal of wires, cables, poles and installations from streets. The
company shall remove or cause to be removed from the streets, roads
and public ways of the Township, and from all public property, all of the
wires, cables, poles and installations of any kind or nature whatsoever
which have been installed under the authority of the franchise granted
hereunder upon the termination of the franchise or upon cessation of
operation under the franchise by the company, its successors or
assigns, for any reason whatsoever. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
company may abandon such of its underground equipment in place, so
long as the continued presence of such equipment does not adversely
affect the continued use of the public right-of-way, create a danger to
public health or safety or violate the Act or any regulation promulgated
thereunder. The company may retain in place such of its underground
or overhead equipment that is in active use to provide service to
customers outside of the Township, so long as the continued presence
of such equipment does not adversely affect the continued use of the
public right-of-way, create a danger to public health or safety or violate
the Act or any regulation promulgated thereunder.
J. The company shall apply for all required permits and shall not
undertake any construction without receipt of such permits, issuance of
which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed by the Township.
§ 190-18 MANHEIM CODE § 190-19
1:158
§ 190-19. Extension of service.
The company shall extend service to Township residents not serviced as of
the effective date of this chapter so long as the number of the occupied
dwelling units per mile, or fraction thereof, of distribution system (density)
within the extension area is equivalent to or greater than 40 dwelling units
per underground mile of cable plant or 20 dwelling units per aerial mile
of cable plant. The company shall not deny access to cable service to any
group of potential residential subscribers because of the income level of
the area in which the group resides. The company may, but shall not be
required to, use other alternative methods of extending service into areas
where the minimum density is less than set forth herein, including the
use of microwave, satellite or other means where, in the opinion of the
company, the extension is not economically feasible, or by negotiating a
cost-sharing agreement with the developer of a low-density area or with any
of the residents of a low-density area in order to make such an extension
of service economically feasible, or the company may extend service into
such low-density area at its own discretion. Upon written request for cable
service from a developer or any of the residents in a low-density area, the
company shall respond in writing within 60 days of such request to the
requester, with a copy to the Township, with information regarding the
potential for extending cable service or of providing comparable service
through alternative means, and all cost-sharing options available, according
to the provisions herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the company shall
not be required to extend cable service into an area which is presently being
served by a different company under a franchise granted under this chapter.
§ 190-20. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
The company shall comply with all current and future state and federal
laws and the rules and regulations of any federal or state authority having
jurisdiction over the providing of cable service in the Township, including
subsequent changes to the Act or regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission which are mandatory upon cable service
operators. If any such law, rule or regulation is changed so as to permit
franchising authorities to request or require any right, benefit or payment
other than was permitted at the time the company entered into any
franchise under this chapter, the company shall consider any reasonable
request by the Township for modification of its franchise to include the
increased or enhanced right, benefit, or payment to the Township and shall
enter into good faith negotiations with the Township for the provision of
such right, benefit or payment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rights
of the Township regarding any change in any law, rule or regulation which
would permit the Township to increase the franchise fee shall be as set forth
in § 190-6 herein and which would allow the Township to regulate rates
shall be as set forth in § 190-9.
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-21
1:159
§ 190-21. Liability of company.
Except for liabilities arising out of programming initiated by the Township
on the public, educational and governmental access channel or otherwise
initiated by the Township, the company shall indemnify and save the
Township and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and
all claims for personal injuries or property damage, and any other claims
and costs, including attorneys' fees, expenses of investigation and litigation
of claims and suits thereon, which may arise from the installation and/
or operation of the company's cable system. In case suit shall be filed
against the Township, either independently or jointly with the company, to
recover for any claims or damages, the company, upon notice to it by the
Township, shall defend the Township, its officers, agents and employees
against said action, and, in the event of a final judgment being obtained
against the Township, either independently or jointly with the company,
the company shall pay the judgment and all costs and hold the Township
harmless therefrom. If a judgment is not obtained against the Township, the
company shall reimburse the Township for all costs and expenses incurred,
including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of investigation and defense.
For this purpose, the company shall carry and, at all times keep in force,
automobile liability insurance, products liability insurance and a general
liability insurance policy or policies in the name of the company and the
Township, as their respective interests may appear, insuring the company
and the Township against any and all liability arising from the installation,
maintenance and/or operation of the cable system. A certificate or
certificates of insurance indicating such coverages and indicating that the
Township is an additional insured shall be provided to the Township for
review by the Township Solicitor. Such insurance policy or policies shall
be in limits of not less than $500,000 for damage to property in any one
accident, and not less than $1,000,000 for injury or death to any one
person, and not less than the sum of $2,000,000 for injury or death to
all persons affected by any one accident. Such policies of insurance shall
be issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The company shall also carry workers'
compensation coverage for all of its employees subject to such coverage and
shall submit to the Township Manager-Secretary a certificate of insurance
showing that workers' compensation coverage is in effect.
§ 190-22. Effect of granting franchise.
The company shall hold the Township harmless from the alleged violation
of any utility franchise previously or hereafter granted by the Township.
The granting of a franchise under this chapter shall not be construed as an
undertaking or guarantee of the efficiency of the company or maintenance
of service by the company. The Township assumes no responsibility for the
acts or omissions of the company, other than to require, to the extent the
Township elects to do so, compliance with this chapter.
§ 190-21 MANHEIM CODE § 190-23
1:160
§ 190-23. Manner of giving notice.
Whenever, by the terms of this chapter, notice is required to be given
by the Township to the company, it shall be given by delivering to an
officer or manager of the company written notice thereof during ordinary
business hours at the principal office or any branch office of the company
or by mailing the same by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, to said principal or branch office. Whenever the company is
required to give notice to the Township, it shall do so by leaving or
delivering written notice at the office of the Township Manager-Secretary
during ordinary business hours or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the Township Manager-Secretary, such notice being effective
upon receipt by the Township.
§ 190-24. Forfeiture.
The Commissioners may, at any time, subject to the provisions of the Act,
declare a forfeiture of this grant for violation or default by the company
of any of the terms thereof, provided that none of the terms of this grant
shall be deemed to be violated so as to permit such forfeiture unless the
company shall first be given written notice by the Township of such violation
or default and of the attempt to declare a forfeiture. Thereafter, if such
violation or default shall continue for a period of more than 90 days, all the
rights and privileges of the company under the provisions of this chapter
may be forthwith declared forfeited and revoked. If any action shall be
instituted or prosecuted directly or indirectly by the company, or by its
stockholders or creditors, to set aside or have declared void any terms of
this grant, the whole of this grant may be thereupon forfeited and annulled
at the option of the Commissioners; provided, however, that no forfeiture
shall occur if the company brings a challenge to the chapter based upon
a future change in state or federal law which would render provisions of
this chapter invalid. This exception shall not apply if such change to state
or federal law contains a provision authorizing the continuation of existing
ordinances; provided, further, that the company shall not be deemed to be in
default of performance of any provision of this grant, nor shall forfeiture be
invoked, for any violation or failure to perform any provision hereof due to
strikes, lockouts, insurrections, acts of God, or any cause beyond the control
of the company.
§ 190-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation who or which shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, and,
in default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of such firm,
association or partnership or the officers of such corporation shall be liable
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 190-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-26
1:161
§ 190-26. Additional remedies.
In addition to or in lieu of the penalties provided in § 190-25, the Township
may commence actions to collect franchise fees which are due and payable
under this chapter, and any violations of provisions of this chapter may be
abated or enforced by proceeding against the violator in a court of equity
for relief.
§ 190-27. Permit fee; reimbursement of Township expenses.64
A permit fee, as established by resolution of the Commissioners from time
to time, shall be paid to the Township at the time application is made by the
company to operate under the terms of this chapter. Upon acceptance of any
new or renewal franchise, the company shall reimburse the Township for all
fees and expenses incurred in connection with the preparation, negotiation,
advertisement and enactment of this chapter or the granting of a franchise
hereunder, including reasonable attorneys' fees. In the event that two or
more franchises are awarded in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, and, in the event that the first company awarded a franchise shall
have reimbursed the Township for its costs in the preparation, negotiation,
advertisement and enactment of this chapter, the Township, to the extent
allowed by law, shall require any subsequent franchisee to pay a pro rata
share of such costs and expenses to the Township for reimbursement to
the company which initially paid such costs; provided, however, that the
Township shall not be required to institute litigation to collect such
reimbursement.
§ 190-28. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force as provided by law. The term
of any franchise granted hereunder and the commencement date for the
payment of franchise fees shall be governed by § 190-14.
Chapter 202
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 259. Property maintenance — See Ch. 367.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 190-26 MANHEIM CODE § 190-28
1:162
ARTICLE I
Uniform Construction Codes
§ 202-1. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to Section 501 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, 35
P.S. § 7210.501, as amended, the Township hereby elects to administer and
enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, 35 P.S.
§ 7210.101, as amended. For the purposes described in Section 102 of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, 35 P.S. § 7210.102, as amended,
the Township hereby adopts the Uniform Construction Code (UCC), 34
Pa. Code, Article XIV, as amended, and the standardized codes adopted
thereunder as presently promulgated or as they shall be amended hereafter,
except Chapter 1 of the International Building Code, UCC Chapter 405 -
Elevators and Other Lifting Devices and except as hereafter set forth.
§ 202-2. Amendments.
A. Section 403.42a(a). Permit application subsection (a) is amended by
adding the following phrase to the end of the first sentence:
On a form obtained from the Department of Code Compliance with
the applicable permit fee.
B. Sections 403.42a. Permit application subsections (b) and (c) are deleted
and replaced with the following:
(b) The application for a permit shall be accompanied by not less
than two sets of construction documents as described by the UCC.
The Building Code Official may waive the requirement for filing
construction documents when the scope of the work is of a minor
nature. When the quality of materials is essential for conformity
to the UCC, the International codes, or this Ordinance, specific
information shall be submitted to establish such quality. Citation to
the UCC or use of the term "legal" or its equivalent shall not be used
as a substitute for specific information.
The construction documents for new construction, alteration, repairs,
expansion, addition or modification for buildings or structures shall
be prepared by a registered design professional. All construction
documents required for a building permit application shall be
prepared by a registered design professional consistent with the
professional registration laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The construction documents shall include the name and address of
the registered design professional and shall be signed, sealed and
dated by a registered design professional registered in accordance
with the professional registration laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Building Code Official may waive the requirements
for having documents prepared by a licensed design professional
when the scope of work is of a minor nature.
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-2
1:163
Fire protection system designs shall be by one of the following: PA
licensed professional engineer or an individual who is certified by
the National Institute for Certification in Engineering and Technology
(Level III and Level IV only).
At the time of filing an application for permit, the applicant shall
present to the Building Code Official adequate evidence that he has
obtained from all governmental authorities having jurisdiction all
permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances required in connection
with the proposed use, occupancy construction, enlargement,
alteration or demolition.
C. Section 403.43.(g). Grant, denial and effect of permits is hereby deleted
in its entirety and replace as follows:
(g) A permit becomes invalid unless the authorized construction work
begins within 180 days after the permit's issuance or if the authorized
construction work permit is suspended or abandoned for 180 days
after the work has commenced. A permit holder may submit a written
request for an extension of time to commence construction for just
cause. The Code Official may grant extensions of time to commence
construction in writing.
The work shall be completed within the time period stated on the
building permit but not longer than one year from the date of the
permit issuance, the work shall be completed within six months from
the date of permit issuance for electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
roofing and fire alarm permits. A permit holder, permit applicant,
property owner or authorized agent may submit a written request for
an extension of time to complete the work for just cause. A request
for an extension shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. The
Code Official may grant extensions of time to complete construction
in writing.
D. Section 403.44. Alternative construction materials and methods is
hereby amended to by addition of subparagraph (d) as follows:
(d) Determinations by the Building Code Official shall be made in one
of two written forms of communication.
(i) An Administrative Order which will provide guidance as to policy
decisions. Administrative Orders shall be issued by the Building Code
Official to clarify code questions and to establish departmental policy
where no other criteria exists, or where administrative guidance is
needed to establish a methodology to resolve recurring problems; or
(ii) A Standard Design Bulletin which will be issued where code
criteria leave a specific aspect of construction to the judgment of the
Building Code Official or the authority having jurisdiction. Specific
design criteria will be set by the by appropriate authority as
necessary.
§ 202-2 MANHEIM CODE § 202-2
1:164
E. Section 403.45. Inspections is hereby amended by the addition of
subparagraphs (g) as follows:
(g) Reinspections: When a structure or equipment or mechanical,
electrical or plumbing or other system subject to inspection under
this or any other code shall fail two or more inspections or when the
Department of Code Compliance is contacted to perform a test or
inspection but the structure, equipment or system is not ready for
testing or inspection when the Code Official arrives, the contractor
or other person or business responsible for performing the work shall
pay a fee for each such failure, as prescribed from time to time by
resolution.
F. Section 403.62. Permit requirements and exemptions is hereby
amended to include the following new subsection:
(f) A building permit shall be required for the erection, construction
or placement of detached utility and miscellaneous use structures,
such as private garages, carports, greenhouses, gazebos and sheds
accessory to single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings if
greater than 400 square feet in area.
Where detached utility and miscellaneous use structures, such as
private garages, carports, greenhouses, gazebos and sheds accessory
to single family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, of 400 square
feet or less in building area are connected to a utility, an appropriate
permit for the utility connection is required. A utility is electric,
natural gas, water, or sewer service.
A building permit shall be required for residential alterations or
repairs as set forth in Section 403.62 of the Uniform Construction
Code.
G. Sections 430.62a. Permit application is amended by deleting
subsections (b) and (c) and adding new subsections as follows:
§ 202-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-2
1:165
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by not less than
two sets of construction documents as described by the UCC. The
Building Code Official may waive the requirement for filing
construction documents when the scope of the work is of a minor
nature. When the quality of materials is essential for conformity
to the UCC, the International codes, or this Ordinance, specific
information shall be submitted to establish such quality. Citation to
the UCC or use of the term "legal" or its equivalent shall not be used
as a substitute for specific information.
The construction documents for new construction, alteration, repairs,
expansion, addition or modification for buildings or structures shall
be prepared by a registered design professional when the proposed
design is outside the scope of the prescriptive building code. When
construction documents required for a building permit application
are prepared by a registered design professional they shall be
consistent with the professional registration laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The construction documents shall
include the name and address of the registered design professional
and shall be signed, sealed and dated by a registered design
professional registered in accordance with the professional
registration laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Fire protection system designs shall be by one of the following: PA
licensed professional engineer or an individual who is certified by
the National Institute for Certification in Engineering and Technology
(Level III and Level IV only).
At the time of filing an application for permit, the applicant shall
present to the Building Code Official adequate evidence that he has
obtained from all governmental authorities having jurisdiction all
permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances required in connection
with the proposed use, occupancy construction, enlargement,
alteration or demolition.
H. Section 403.63. Grant, denial and effect of permits is hereby amended
by deleting subsection (g) and replacing it in its entirety as follows:
§ 202-2 MANHEIM CODE § 202-2
1:166
(g) A permit becomes invalid unless the authorized construction work
begins within 180 days after the permit's issuance or if the authorized
construction work permit is suspended or abandoned for 180 days
after the work has commenced. A permit holder may submit a written
request for an extension of time to commence construction for just
cause. The Code Official may grant extensions of time to commence
construction in writing.
The work shall be completed within the time period stated on the
building permit but not longer than one year from the date of the
permit. The work shall be completed within six months from the
date of permit issuance for electrical, plumbing, mechanical and
residential fire alarm permits. A permit holder, permit applicant,
property owner or authorized agent may submit a written request for
an extension of time to complete the work for just cause. A request
for an extension shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. The
Code Official may grant extensions of time to complete construction
in writing.
I. Section 403.64. Inspections is hereby amended by adding new
subsection (h) as follows:
(h) Reinspections: When a structure or equipment or mechanical,
electrical or plumbing or other system subject to inspection under
this or any other code shall fail two or more inspections or when the
Department of Code Compliance is contacted to perform a test or
inspection but the structure, equipment or system is not ready for
testing or inspection when the Code Official arrives, the contractor
or other person or business responsible for performing the work shall
pay a fee for each such failure, as prescribed from time to time by
resolution.
§ 202-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-2
1:167

ARTICLE II
International Codes
§ 202-3. Purpose.
This article makes amendments to the technical provisions of the 2015
International Codes which are incorporated herein by reference thereto.
§ 202-4. International Residential Code amendments.
A. Section R202, Definitions. Building sewer is amended by adding the
following sentence:
All matters related to the building sewer design, installation,
inspection, testing, and repair of building sewer system shall be in
accordance with the rules and regulations set forth by the sewer
authority having jurisdiction: Lancaster Area Sewer Authority or City
of Lancaster.
B. Table R301.2.(1), Climatic and Geographical Design Criteria shall read
as:
Ground Snow Load 30 PSF
Wind Speed 115 Mph
Topographic Effect No
Special Wind Region No
Seismic Design Category B
Weathering Severe
Frost Line Depth 36 inches
Termites Moderate to Heavy
Winter Design Temp. 11°
Ice Shield Underlayment Yes
Flood Hazards Section 816 Floodway Controls,
Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
adopted June 24, 1968
Air Freezing Index 974
Mean Annual Temperature 51°
C. R319. Site Address. Address identification is amended by deleting the
text and replacing it with the following:
§ 202-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-4
1:169
Structures to which a street number has been assigned shall display
such number (numerals only) in a position easily observable and
easily readable from the roadway or street fronting the property.
The numbers shall be of contrasting color with their background and
permanent in nature. The numbers shall not be installed on openable
man doors or overhead doors.
Residential Structures — Street numbers shall be at least four inches
in height and shall be installed at least 18 inches above finish grade.
D. Section R403.1, Footings is amended by adding the following:
When unsuitable soil conditions are present or if blasting is required
in the excavation of footings and foundation, two one-half inch
diameter reinforcing bars are required to be installed in the entire
footing. If conditions warrant, a design professional shall be
consulted for footing/foundation design.
E. Section R405.1.1, Precast concrete foundation is amended as follows:
By deleting "sewer system" in the last sentence and replacing it with
"drainage system" in accordance with Section R405.1.
F. Section R405, Foundation drainage is amended by adding the following
new subsection:
Section R405.1.2, Sump pump discharge piping termination. Sump
pump pipes discharging groundwater shall terminate at least five feet
beyond the exterior foundation wall and in a manner that does not
create a nuisance on adjacent property(s), but no closer than 10 feet
from the street right-of-way.
G. Section 702.7, Vapor retarders is amended to remove Class I vapor
retarders. Class I vapor retarders are not to be installed on the interior
side of frame walls.
H. Section R801.3, Roof drainage is amended as follows:
The controlled method of water disposal from roofs shall terminate at
least five feet beyond the exterior foundation wall and in a manner
that does not create a nuisance on adjacent property(s), but no closer
than 10 feet from the street right-of-way.
I. Section P2603.5, Freezing is amended by deleting the last sentence and
inserting in its place:
Water service pipe shall be installed a minimum of 36 inches below
finish grade.
J. Section P2719, Floor drains is amended to read as follows:
§ 202-4 MANHEIM CODE § 202-4
1:170
§ 202-5. International Building Code amendments.
Basement and garage floor drains in residential structures shall not
discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Basement and garage floor
drains in new construction, alterations or additions shall discharge by
approved piping directly to daylight by either gravity or by a drainage
system to the exterior of the structure. Existing basement and garage
floor drains are subject to approval by the Building Code Official.
K. Section P2902.1, Potable water required is amended by adding the
following sentence:
Water service pipe installed downstream from City of Lancaster
Water Bureau's last valve shall conform to this Code.
L. Section P2903.7 Size of water service mains, branch mains and risers is
amended in the first sentence by inserting "1" in place of "3/4".
M. Appendix F, Radon Control Methods is adopted as part of this Code.
N. Appendix H, Patio Covers is adopted as part of this Code.
O. Appendix K, Sound Transmission is adopted as part of this Code.
A. Section 901.8, Pump and riser room size is amended by adding the
following after the second sentence: No less than a thirty-six-inch
clearance is to be provided in front of all serviceable equipment in a fire
pump and/or riser room.
B. Section 903.2.1.1, Group A-1: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
C. Section 903.2.1.3, Group A-3: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
D. Section 903.2.1.4, Group A-4: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
E. Section 903.2.3, Group E: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of 12,000.
F. Section 903.2.4, Group F-1: in number 3, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
G. Section 903.2.4: add Group F-2, to read as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing Group F-2 occupancies where the Group F-2 fire
area exceeds 7,500 square feet.
H. Section 903.2.7 Group M: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of 12,000
and in number 3, insert 12,000 in place of 24,000.
I. Section 903.2.9, Group S-1: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of 12,000
and in number 3, insert 12,000 in place of 24,000.
§ 202-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-5
1:171
J. Section 903.2.9.1, Repair garages in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
10,000 and in number 2 by inserting 7,500 in place of 12,000.
K. Section 903.2.10, Group S-2 enclosed parking garages is amended in
number 1 by inserting 7,500 in place of 12,000.
L. Section 903.2.10 is amended by adding Group S-2, to read as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing Groups S-2 occupancies where a Group S-2 fire
area exceeds 7,500 square feet.
M. Section 903.2 is amended by adding the following new subsection:
903.2.13 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
for Group B occupancies other than ambulatory health care facilities
and where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet.
2. The building is three or more stories in height.
N. Section 912.2.2, Fire Department Connections - Existing Buildings shall
be amended by adding the following sentence:
THIS FDC SERVES THE AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM
AND/OR STANDPIPE SYSTEM AT (insert street address).
O. Section 912.5, Signs it is amended by adding after such signs shall
read:
THIS FDC SERVCES THE AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM
AND/OR STANDPIPE SYSTEM AT (insert street address).
P. Section 1028, Exit Discharge is amended by adding the following:
Safe exit discharge shall include snow/ice guards on the roof of the
structure when deemed necessary by the Building Code Official.
Q. Section 1405.3.1, Class I and II vapor retarders is amended to remove
Class I vapor retarders from the third sentence. Class I vapor retarders
are not to be installed on the interior side of frame walls.
R. Section 1608.1, Snow Loads General is deleted and replaced with the
following:
Design snow loads shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 7
of ASCE 7 as follows:
(1) The ground snow load (pg), to be used in determining the roof
design loads for roofs in accordance with ASCE 7-10, is 30 pounds
per square foot (psf).
(2) ASCE 7-2010 Chapter 7 is amended to read as follows:
7.3 Flat Roof Snow Loads, pf = Ce Ct I pg
§ 202-5 MANHEIM CODE § 202-5
1:172
§ 202-6. International Fire Code.
7.3.1 Exposure Factor, Ce. This section is revised as follows:
The value for CE shall be determined from Table 7-2, except that the
Ce value used shall not be less than 1.0 7.3.3 Importance Factor, I.
This section is revised as follows: The value for I shall be determined
from Table 7-4, except that the I value used shall not be less than 1.0.
S. Section 1608.2 Ground snow loads is amended by deleting the first
sentence in its entirety and replaced with the following: The ground
snow load (pg), to be used in determining the roof design loads for roofs
in accordance with ASCE 7-10, is 30 pounds per square foot (psf).
T. Section 1803.2, Investigations required is amended by adding the
following:
The Building Code Official shall be permitted to grant code
modifications for geotechnical investigations when buildings are one
story in height above grade and less than 1,000 square feet in
building area.
U. Appendix H101.2 Signs Exempt from Permits is deleted in its entirety.
V. Appendix H108 Animated Devices is deleted in its entirety.
W. Appendix H110 Roof Signs is deleted in its entirety.
X. Appendix H112 Projecting Signs is deleted in its entirety.
Y. Appendix H113 Marquee Signs is deleted in its entirety.
Z. Appendix 114 Portable Signs is deleted in its entirety.
A. Chapter 4, Emergency Planning and Preparedness is adopted as part of
this Code.
B. Section 401.2, Approval is amended by adding the following after fire
code official:
and the Manheim Township Fire Chief/Emergency Management
Coordinator.
C. Chapter 5, Fire Service Features is adopted as part of this Code.
D. Section 505.1, Address identification is amended by deleting the text
and replacing it with the following:
Every new and existing structure to which a street number has been
assigned shall display such number (numerals only) in a position
easily observable and easily readable from the roadway or street
fronting the property. The numbers shall be of contrasting color with
their background and shall be permanent in nature. The numbers
shall not be installed on openable man doors or overhead doors.
§ 202-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-6
1:173
Residential Structures. Street numbers shall be at least four inches
in height and shall be installed at least 18 inches above finish grade.
Nonresidential Structures. Street numbers shall be at least six inches
in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch and shall be
on or adjacent to the entrance doors at least five feet above finish
grade.
Each tenant in a multitenant commercial structure shall display
numbers at both the front and all rear entrance doors to each unit in
accordance with requirements for nonresidential structures.
E. Section 506.1, Where required is amended by adding the following
sentence:
Key boxes shall be approved by the Building Code Official and the
Manheim Township Fire Chief, and are required in all buildings in
which there is a fire alarm system or fire protection system monitored
by a central station.
F. Chapter 6, Building Services and Systems is adopted as part of this
Code.
G. Section 903.2.1.1, Group A-1: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
H. Section 903.2.1.3, Group A-3: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
I. Section 903.2.1.4, Group A-4: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
J. Section 903.2.3, Group E: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of 12,000.
K. Section 903.2.4, Group F-1: in number 3, insert 7,500 in place of
12,000.
L. Section 903.2.4, add Group F-2, to read as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing Group F-2 occupancies where the Group F-2 fire
area exceeds 7,500 square feet.
M. Section 903.2.7, Group M: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of 12,000
and in number 3, insert 12,000 in place of 24,000.
N. Section 903.2.9, Group S-1: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of 12,000
and in number 3, insert 12,000 in place of 24,000.
O. Section 903.2.9.1, Repair garages: in number 1, insert 7,500 in place of
10,000 and in number 2 by inserting 7,500 in place of 12,000.
P. Section 903.2.10, Group S-2 enclosed parking garages is amended in
number 1 by inserting 7,500 in place of 12,000.
§ 202-6 MANHEIM CODE § 202-6
1:174
§ 202-7. International Plumbing Code.
Q. Section 903.2.10 is amended by adding Group S-2, to read as follows:
An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings containing Groups S-2 occupancies where a Group S-2 fire
area exceeds 7,500 square feet.
R. Section 903.2 is amended by adding the following new subsection:
903.2.13 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
for Group B occupancies other than ambulatory health care facilities
and where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 7,500 square feet.
2. The building is three or more stories in height.
S. Section 903.4, Sprinkler system supervision and alarms is amended by
adding the following:
This section shall include all new and existing automatic fire sprinkler
systems, both required and non-required.
T. Section 907.6.6, Monitoring is amended by adding the following
sentences:
This section shall include new and existing fire alarm systems, both
required and non-required, fire alarm and detection systems.
U. Section 912.2.2, Fire Department Connections - Existing Buildings shall
be amended by adding the following sentence:
THIS FDC SERVES THE AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM
AND/OR STANDPIPE SYSTEM AT (insert street address).
V. Section 912.4, Signs it is amended by adding after such signs shall
read:
THIS FDC SERVES THE AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM
AND/OR STANDPIPE SYSTEM AT (insert street address).
W. Section 1028, Exit Discharge is amended by adding the following:
Safe exit discharge shall include snow/ice guards on the roof of the
structure when deemed necessary by the Building Code Official.
A. Section 302.2, Industrial Wastes is amended by inserting "commercial
properties," in front of "manufacturing or industrial", and deleting
"code official or other authority having jurisdiction" and inserting in its
place "sewer authority having jurisdiction."
B. Section 305.4, Freezing is amended by replacing the last sentence with
the following:
§ 202-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-7
1:175
Water service pipe shall be a minimum of 36 inches below finish
grade.
C. Section 412, Floor Drains is amended by adding the following:
Newly installed basement drains in new and existing structures, and
existing basement floor drains in existing structures are subject to
approval by the Building Code Official.
D. Section 603.1, Water Service Pipe is amended by inserting "1" in place
of "3/4" in the second sentence and by adding the following:
Non-residential water service pipe installed downstream of the
Lancaster City Water Bureau's last valve shall conform to this code.
E. Section 803, Special Wastes is amended by adding a new subsection
that reads:
Section 803.4 Requirements. The sewer authority having jurisdiction
shall be consulted prior to the discharge of special waste.
F. Section 1003.1, Interceptors and Separators. Where required is
amended to read:
Approved separators shall be installed in accordance with this Code
in structures, where a determination is made by the Building Code
Official or the sewer authority having jurisdiction of the need of
a separator based on the use of the structure, proposed waste or
discharged waste regulated by this code.
G. Section 1113, Sumps is amended by adding the following subsection:
Section 1113.3.5 Sump Pump Discharge Piping Termination:
Sump pump pipes discharging groundwater shall terminate at least
five feet beyond the exterior foundation wall and in a manner that
does not create a nuisance on adjacent property(s), but no closer than
10 feet from the street right-of-way.
§ 202-7 MANHEIM CODE § 202-7
1:176
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 202-8. Effect on other provisions.
§ 202-9. Violations and penalties.
In the event any person fails to comply with provisions of this chapter,
the Building Code Official may institute proceedings before a Magisterial
District Judge for failure to comply therewith. Any person found guilty
of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to pay a fine
not exceeding $1,000 plus costs. Each day's violation will constitute a
separate offense. Failure to pay any such fines will subject the violator to
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days. Nothing contained herein
shall prevent the Building Code Official from filing a nontraffic citation
against a person for violations of this chapter.
§ 202-10. Severability.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter
shall be held invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity, illegality or unconstitutionally shall not affect
or impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or parts
of the chapter, it being the intent of the Board of Commissioners that the
remainder of the chapter shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
A. All building code ordinances or other code ordinances or portions of
ordinances which were adopted by Manheim Township on or before July
1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the UCC and
the International Ordinances incorporated therein shall continue in full
force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the UCC or the International
Ordinances incorporated therein, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the UCC or the
International Ordinances incorporated therein are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the UCC.
§ 202-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-10
1:177
Chapter 208
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 216.
§ 202-10 MANHEIM CODE § 202-10
1:178
ARTICLE I
Enforcement Regulations
[Adopted 7-9-1990 by Res. No. 1990-37 (Part 8, Ch. 1, Art. C.2, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 208-1. Approval of rules and regulations.
The Commissioners of Manheim Township hereby approve the attached
rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police for the
enforcement of the Township's Curfew Ordinance 1990-10, as provided in
Section 7 of that ordinance, adopted July 9, 1990.65, 66
§ 208-2. Extension of hours for special occasions.
Section 208-11 provides for the Chief of Police to extend hours for special
occasions without providing further instructions as to accomplishing that.
The following is provided to implement that provision:
A. Special permits for special occasions. When necessary nighttime
activities of a minor may be inadequately provided for by other
provisions of Article III of this chapter, then recourse may be had to the
Chief of Police of the Township, either for a regulation as provided in
§ 208-11 or for a special permit as the circumstances warrant. Upon the
Chief of Police's finding of necessity for the use of the streets to the
extent warranted by a written application, signed by a minor and by a
parent of such minor, if feasible, stating the name, age and address of
such minor; the name, address and telephone number of a parent
thereof; the height, weight, sex, color of eyes, hair and other physical
characteristics of such minor; the necessity which requires such minor
to remain upon the streets during the curfew hours otherwise
applicable; and the street or route and the beginning and ending of the
period of time involved by date and hour, the Chief of Police may grant a
permit in writing for the use of such minor of such streets at such hours
as in his opinion may reasonably be necessary. In an emergency, this
may be handled by telephone or other effective communication, with a
corresponding record being made contemporaneously, either to the
Chief of Police or, if unavailable, to the police officer authorized by the
Chief of Police to act on his behalf in an emergency, at the police
station.
B. General extension for special occasions. When necessary nighttime
activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on an individual
special permit basis exists, the Chief of Police, upon receipt of a written
request containing the times, dates, location and purpose of a function,
together with information attesting that proper adult chaperones will
65.Editor's Note: See now Art. III, Curfew for Minors, § 208-11, Rules and regulations, of this
chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8-1062, "Other legitimate business" clarified, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 208-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-2
1:179
§ 208-3. Authority to promulgate rules and regulations.
be present, may grant an extension of curfew hours. Normally such
extension by the Chief of Police permitting use of the streets should
be issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity and
should define the activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted,
and the period of time involved, not to extend more than 60 minutes
beyond the time for termination of such activity.
A. Section 208-11 of Article III of this chapter authorizes the Chief of
Police to promulgate such rules and regulations as in his opinion shall
be necessary or useful in the enforcement of Article III of this chapter.
B. The above-listed rules and regulations are promulgated in accordance
with that authority and for that purpose to be effective the date Article
III of this chapter becomes effective, and these rules and regulations
are hereby submitted to the Board of Township Commissioners for their
review and approval as further provided for in Article III of this chapter.
§ 208-2 MANHEIM CODE § 208-3
1:180
ARTICLE II
Trick or Treat Night
[Adopted 4-13-1992 by Res. No. 1992-23 (Part 8, Ch. 1, Art. D, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 208-4. Adoption of policy.
The Manheim Township Commissioners adopts the policy of the Lancaster
Intermunicipal Committee that "Trick or Treat Night" activities occur from
6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on Halloween, October 31, of each year, unless
October 31 falls on a Saturday or Sunday, in which case "Trick or Treat
Night" activities should occur from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on the Friday
prior to October 31.
§ 208-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-4
1:181

ARTICLE III
Curfew for Minors
[Adopted 1-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2 (Part 8, Ch. 1, Art. C.1, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 208-5. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Manheim Township Curfew Ordinance."
§ 208-6. Findings; purpose.
The Board of Commissioners of Manheim Township, recognizing the
problem of crimes committed by and committed against juveniles during
the nighttime and believing that it can be dealt with more effectively
by regulating the hours during which minors less than 18 years of age
may remain in public places and certain establishments without adult
supervision, and by defining more clearly certain duties and responsibilities
upon those who have the custody and responsibility for the care of such
minors, hereby enacts this article for the purpose of promoting the general
welfare and protecting the general public through reduction of juvenile
violence and crime within Manheim Township; promoting the safety and
welfare of Township's citizens under the age of 18 whose youth and
inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants
in criminal activity and in being victimized by perpetrators of crime; and
fostering and strengthening parental responsibility for children.
§ 208-7. Definitions.
In this article, the following definitions shall apply:
AFTER HOURS — The period of time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday nights and 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
EMERGENCY — Refers to unforeseen circumstances, or the status or
condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life,
limb or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural
disasters, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for
profit, including any place of amusement or entertainment, to which the
public is invited.
MINOR — Any person less than 18 years of age. For the purpose of this
article, any person shall be deemed to be 18 years of age on the date of his
or her 18th birthday and not before this time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
owning, operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. Whenever
used in any provision prescribing a penalty, the word "operator" shall
include the members, partners, officers, and managers of any firm,
association, partnership, or corporation.
§ 208-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-7
1:183
PARENT — The biological or adoptive parent of a minor; a legal guardian;
or an adult person 21 years of age or over and who is authorized by a
minor's parent or legal guardian to be responsible, either temporarily or
permanently, for the custody or care of any minor or for the control of such
minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
vacant lot, or any private building, structure or area to which the public is
invited or in which the public is allowed to remain.
REMAIN — To be at or stay at a place.
§ 208-8. Unlawful conduct of minors.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in or upon any public place or
to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon or
to remain in or upon an establishment in Manheim Township after hours,
except as follows:
A. The minor is accompanied by a parent; or
B. The minor is involved in an emergency; or
C. The minor is engaged in an activity related to his or her employment or
is going to or returning home from such activity without detour or stop;
or
D. The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she
resides with a parent; or
E. The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, or
civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by another
similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults,
and/or the minor is going to or returning from such an activity without
detour or stop; or
F. The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the minor
has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent containing
the following information: the name, signature, address and telephone
number of the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number
where the parent may be reached during the errand, the name of the
minor, a brief description of the errand, the minor's destination(s) and
the hours the minor is authorized to be engaged in the errand; or
G. The minor is involved in interstate travel through or beginning or
terminating in Manheim Township; or
H. The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech, and the right of assembly.
§ 208-7 MANHEIM CODE § 208-9
1:184
§ 208-9. Unlawful conduct of parents.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon any public
place or establishment after hours unless the minor is engaged in an activity
permitted under § 208-8 of this article. “Knowingly” shall mean knows or
has reason to know.
§ 208-10. Unlawful conduct of operators of establishments.
No operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit any minor to
remain upon the premises of such establishment after hours.
§ 208-11. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized from time to time to promulgate
such rules and regulations, including the extension of hours for special
occasions, as in his or her opinion shall be necessary or useful in the
enforcement of this article. Such rules and regulations shall, however,
be subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners of Manheim
Township.
§ 208-12. Offenses.
Each violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 208-13. Violations and penalties.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no exception set
forth in this section applies.
A. Any minor or parent who violates the provisions of this article for the
first time shall be issued a warning. The minor shall be taken into
temporary custody; his or her parents shall be notified, and the minor
shall be released into the custody of the appropriate parent or parents
of the minor. If such parent is not available, in the discretion of the
officer in charge, the minor may be released to a relative by blood or
marriage over the age of 18 or to the parents of any other minor
detained for the same curfew violation. If no such person is available
after reasonable efforts have been made to locate such person, then the
minor shall be released to such agencies or institutions as are
established for juvenile welfare.
B. Any minor or parent who violates any provisions of this article a second
or subsequent times is guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to fine or imprisonment.
(1) Second offense: $10;
§ 208-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-13
1:185
§ 208-14. Annual review of provisions.
This article and the need for it shall be reviewed annually. By November
1, 2001, and each year thereafter, the Chief of Police of the Township shall
review this article and report and make recommendations to the Township
Commissioners concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing need for
this article. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
(2) Third offense: $50;
(3) Fourth offense: $100 and subject to imprisonment up to 90 days;
(4) Fifth and subsequent offenses: $300 and subject to imprisonment
up to 90 days.
C. Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this article for the
first time shall be fined $50 and shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days. Any operator convicted of violating the
provisions of this article for the second or subsequent time shall be
fined $300 and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days.
A. The practicality of enforcing the article and any problems with
enforcement identified by the Township Police Department.
B. The impact of this article and support programs on juvenile crime
statistics and the public perception of juvenile crime and victimization.
C. Number of juveniles taken into custody for curfew violations.
D. Number of official citizen complaints filed regarding the enforcement of
this article.
§ 208-13 MANHEIM CODE § 208-14
1:186
Chapter 216
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 208.
§ 216-1. Unlawful acts. [Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03]
A. Any person who shall commit or cause to be committed any act, word or
conduct causing a breach of the peace and good order of the Township
shall be guilty of disorderly practices in violation of this chapter if that
person:
(1) Causes any danger, discomfort or unreasonable annoyance to any
of the inhabitants of the Township or users of the Township
thoroughfares or public areas, including but not limited to anyone
who shall willfully make any loud, boisterous or unseemly noise or
disturbance; or
(2) Fights or quarrels or incites others to fight or quarrel; or
(3) Congregates with others upon any of the Township thoroughfares
or other public areas of the Township to the reasonable annoyance
of peaceable residents nearby or users of any Township
thoroughfares or public areas by the use of obscene or other
offensive language or by threatening conduct; or
(4) Loiters near or in the entrances to commercial establishments,
whether on public or private property, or any place of public resort,
whether public or private, or upon any private property within the
Township without the consent of the owners thereof, whereby the
public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public
reasonably annoyed by obscene or other offensive language, by
loud or boisterous noise, by threatening conduct, or by blocking
entrance to such an establishment; or
(5) At any time makes any sound which reasonably annoys or disturbs
humans or which reasonably causes an adverse psychological or
physiological effect on humans, in a manner that the sound is heard
across property lines or through tenant walls or between one
dwelling unit and another, or in a manner that the sound is heard in
excess of 50 feet from the source of the sound.
B. The sounds in Subsection A(5) of this section are any sound and may
typically include, but are not limited to, such things as motor vehicles
and motor vehicle accessories, domestic power tools, motorized lawn
and garden equipment, loading and unloading vehicles, powered model
vehicles, street sales, motor vehicle repairs and testing, unnecessary
§ 208-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-1
1:187
§ 216-2. Exemptions.
The following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
horn blowing, sound trucks, public address systems, radios, TV's,
stereos/CD players and musical instruments.
C. The use of domestic power tools, powered model vehicles, motor
vehicle repairs and testing, radios, TV's, stereos/CD players and
musical instruments or any other sound which has the effect described
in Subsection A(5) of this section outside the confines of a dwelling or
commercial structure, the use of motorized lawn and garden
equipment, sound trucks or public address systems or street sales,
unnecessary horn blowing, or unnecessary idling or revving of
motorcycles or truck tractors are prohibited between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A. Amplified and nonamplified activities approved by the Township
Manager-Secretary or designee, which may include but not be limited
to athletic events, concerts, block parties, church carnivals, or other
publicly or privately sponsored events.
B. Emergency work: sounds caused by the performance of emergency
work or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and
equipment.
C. Municipal and utility services: sounds resulting from the repair/
management or replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or
about the public right-of-way.
D. Warning devices: sounds made by warning devices operating
continuously for three minutes or less, except that, in the event of an
actual emergency, the time limit shall not apply.
E. Unusual/extreme weather conditions. Where unusual or extreme
weather conditions, such as heat, cold, pollen advisories, rain, snow, or
other condition that would affect the health and safety of persons
working therein, restrict the ability of persons to work between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., upon application to and permission
from the Manheim Township Police Department, such persons may
engage in activities between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that may cause
sounds otherwise prohibited.
F. Sounds created by the use of lawn care or similar equipment used by or
at a private or public golf course for the preparation of the course for
play, where such preparation cannot reasonably be done during
daytime hours, shall be permitted during the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. on weekdays and weekends. [Added 5-29-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-05]
§ 216-1 MANHEIM CODE § 216-3
1:188
§ 216-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $1,000, and costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, as authorized by law.
Chapter 253
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 259.
§ 253-1. Procedural requirements.
Insured, their insurance companies, and the hereinafter designated officer
of Manheim Township are hereby authorized and directed to comply with
the following procedures in the event of fire damage to or destruction of
buildings or other structures in Manheim Township:
A. When the loss agreed to between the named insured and his insurance
company or companies, association or exchange (company) equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building or other structure, the company shall transfer
from the insurance proceeds to the designated officer of Manheim
Township in the aggregate $2,000 for each $15,000 and each fraction of
that amount of a claim. However, if, at the time the loss is agreed to
between the named insured and the company, the named insured has
submitted a contract or signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing, or securing the building or other structure, in an amount less
than the amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
company shall transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount
specified in the contract or signed estimate to the designated officer of
Manheim Township, along with a copy of the contract or signed
estimate. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies insuring the building or other structure. After the transfer of
funds to Manheim Township, the named insured may submit a contract
or signed estimate to Manheim Township of the costs of removing,
repairing, or securing the building or other structure, in which case the
designated officer shall return the amount of the funds already
transferred in excess of the contract or signed estimate to the named
insured, provided that Manheim Township has not already commenced
to remove, repair, or secure the building or other structure.67
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 216-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-1
1:189
§ 253-2. Designated officer.
The designated officer of Manheim Township is the Township Manager-
Secretary or his designee.
Chapter 259
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Rescue Volunteer Firefighter's
Association — See Ch. 61.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 160.
Construction codes — See Ch. 202.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 253.
B. Upon receipt of the proceeds by Manheim Township, the designated
officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total cost incurred by Manheim Township for
removing, repairing, or securing the building or other structure. When
transferring the funds, the company shall provide Manheim Township
with the name and address of the insured and certify that the proceeds
have been received by Manheim Township and shall notify the named
insured that the procedures set forth herein shall be followed.
C. When the building or other structure has been removed, repaired, or
secured and appropriate proof thereof has been received by the
designated officer, if Manheim Township has not incurred any costs for
the removal, repair, or securing, it shall return the fund to the named
insured. If Manheim Township has incurred costs for removal, repair, or
securing of the building or other structure, then those costs shall be
deducted from the fund, and if any excess funds remain, Manheim
Township shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
D. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the ability of
Manheim Township to recover any deficiency resulting from the costs
incurred by Manheim Township for the removal, repair, or securing of
any building or other structure which has been damaged by fire. In
addition, nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit
Manheim Township and the named insured from entering into an
agreement which permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if
some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been
negotiated.
§ 253-1 MANHEIM CODE § 253-2
1:190
ARTICLE I
Conduct at Fires; Authority of Fire Companies
[Adopted 12-27-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-12 (Part 10, Ch. 1, Art. B, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 259-1. Fire companies recognized.
The Commissioners herewith recognize the Eden Fire Company No. 1,
the Neffsville Fire Company and the Southern Manheim Township Fire
Company as the official organizations responsible for protecting the
Township from fires and for fighting fires within the Township.
§ 259-2. Obstruction of or tampering with fire hydrants and
apparatus.
§ 259-3. Unlawful entrance to buildings during or after fire.
No person, not actually engaged in the extinguishment of a fire or the
saving of property endangered thereby, shall enter any building in which a
fire is being fought by a fire company, either during or after the fire, without
the express consent of the owner or occupant of the building.
§ 259-4. Interference with fire-fighting activities.
No person, except an active member or members of the fire company
engaged in fighting a fire, shall at any time enter within the territory in the
vicinity of any fire, when the same may be roped off, or access within the
limits be denied by the police, or interfere by giving orders to any individual,
unless requested so to do by the Fire Chief or the person acting as such.
§ 259-5. Obstruction of Fire Chief prohibited.
A. No person shall place ashes, cinders, dirt, rubbish, building material or
any other material of any kind whatsoever around or in close proximity
to any fire hydrant in the Township so as to cause hindrance or delay in
access thereto or prevent the free use thereof by the fire companies. No
person shall, in any way, interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant
or attempt to take water therefrom without special authority from the
Fire Chief or the person acting as such.
B. Without the consent of the Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief, no
person not an active member of a fire company shall at any time ride
upon any of the fire apparatus of the fire companies, nor shall any
person make use of any fire apparatus, hose, or other equipment of a
fire company, other than for the purpose for which the same was
intended, without the consent of the Fire Chief.
A. No person shall, in any way, obstruct or prevent, or attempt to obstruct
or prevent, the Fire Chief in the discharge of his duties, by denying or
attempting to deny him access to any premises owned or occupied by
the persons or by failing or refusing to furnish correct information
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-5
1:191
§ 259-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28]
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 259-2 through 259-5 shall be
subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000,
and costs, and, in default of payment of fine or penalty and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 259-7. Authorized activities of fire companies. [Amended
7-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-16; 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-20]
requested by the Fire Chief in the investigation into the cause, origin or
circumstances of any fire.
B. No person shall, in any way, obstruct or prevent, or attempt to obstruct
or prevent, the Fire Chief while inspecting any construction, building or
premises in the Township to determine the existence of any possible fire
hazard, nor shall any person deny access to the premises for inspection
thereof.
A. The fire companies recognized by Manheim Township are hereby
authorized to provide such services to the Township as maybe
necessary for the protection of property and persons situate therein,
which include, by way of example and not of limitation, the
extinguishment and prevention of loss of life and property from fire,
automobile accidents, medical emergencies, hazardous materials
incidents, and other dangerous situations.
B. The fire companies may also provide nonemergency and public service
functions, such as, again by way of example and not of limitation,
removing water from property after storms, and assisting in the
removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons or
property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The fire companies may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of the Township, as may be
deemed necessary by the officers of the fire companies to maintain
proficiency in providing service.
D. The fire companies may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Township.
E. The fire companies may recover the cost of equipment necessarily
damaged or destroyed and the cost of fire-extinguishing agents used or
consumed in the course of fighting fires or in the performance of their
authorized duties from the persons, corporations or other entities for
whom the fire company performed its services.
§ 259-5 MANHEIM CODE § 259-8
1:192
§ 259-8. Authorized activities of members of fire companies. [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-16]
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the fire companies as
authorized above, or in going to or returning from any activity, the members
of the fire companies recognized by the Township are also authorized to do
the following things:
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the fire
companies.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire companies, when
authorized by an officer or officers of the fire companies, such as
holding or participating in festivals or carnivals or such other lawful
fund-raising activities as are appropriate for volunteer fire companies
and their members, provided that all funds so raised shall be used solely
for the benefit of the volunteer fire companies.
C. Engage in the performance of such other duties or activities as are
appropriate for volunteer fire companies and their members and which
have been duly authorized by an officer or officers of the fire
companies.
§ 259-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-8
1:193

ARTICLE II
Control and Protective Measures
[Adopted 2-10-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-2 (Part 10, Ch. 1, Art. C, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 259-9. Adoption of standards.
The fire control measures and regulations as set forth in this article are
hereby adopted for the purposes of controlling conditions which could
impede or interfere with fire-suppression forces.
§ 259-10. Definitions.
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed in
the Fire Prevention Code of the Township.
§ 259-11. Authority at fires and other emergencies.
The Fire Official or duly authorized representative, as may be in charge at
the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/
or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary
to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other
hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary
in the reasonable performance of their duty. The Fire Official may prohibit
any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove
or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which
may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire Department. The Fire
Official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object
from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall
do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so
by the Fire Official.
§ 259-12. Interference with Fire Department operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel
of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with,
attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any Fire
Department operation.
§ 259-13. Compliance with orders.
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of
another individual.
§ 259-14. Vehicles crossing fire hose.
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive
§ 259-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-14
1:195
or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the Fire Official in
command of said operation.
§ 259-15. Authorized emergency vehicles.
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are
defined and authorized under the laws of the commonwealth.
§ 259-16. Vehicles approaching authorized emergency vehicles.
The operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a
position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of
the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in
such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have
passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Official or a police officer.
§ 259-17. Vehicles following fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus traveling
in response to a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within the block or
immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
§ 259-18. Tampering with emergency vehicles prohibited.
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire Official in
charge of said Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire Department
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the
siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate or
tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with, any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of, any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
§ 259-19. Damage or injury to equipment or personnel prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface any Fire Department
emergency vehicle at any time or to injure or attempt to injure or conspire
to injure Fire Department personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ 259-20. Emergency vehicle operation.
The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in § 259-15, shall not sound
the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey any existing
traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding to an emergency
call or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire. Tactical
strategies, such as, but not restricted to, "move-ups" do not constitute an
emergency call.
A. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
§ 259-14 MANHEIM CODE § 259-20
1:196
§ 259-21. Blocking of fire hydrants and Fire Department
connections prohibited.
§ 259-22. Use of fire hydrants.
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the Fire Department for fire-suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the Fire Official and the water company
having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants
by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water
company having jurisdiction.
§ 259-23. Location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants.
The Fire Official shall recommend to the Manager-Secretary of the
Township the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and
the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
(1) Park or stand irrespective of the provision of existing traffic
regulations;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not
endanger life or property;
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
B. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds
audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted
lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle.
A. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department
connection for the pressurization of fire-suppression systems, including
fire hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on
public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property.
B. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Official shall
proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of
necessary work shall be paid from the funds of the Township on
certificate of the Fire Official and with the approval of the Township,
and the Township shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of
such costs.
§ 259-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-23
1:197
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Official.
§ 259-24. Yard systems.
All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement
or exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities
of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system
shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants
shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Fire Official
and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The Fire Official shall designate and approve the
number and location of fire hydrants. The Fire Official may require the
installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with
the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire
brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants
shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire
Official.
§ 259-25. Maintenance of fire-suppression equipment.
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs, or when permitted by the Fire Official. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced
or repaired as directed by the Fire Official.
§ 259-26. Sale of defective fire extinguishers.
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind
of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Official, or which
is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the Fire Official. The requirements of this section shall not
apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment
for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked with a
permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
§ 259-27. Street obstructions.
A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place, or maintain any
bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any
other type of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the
Township. The word "street," as used in this article, means any roadway
accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to,
§ 259-23 MANHEIM CODE § 259-27
1:198
private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways
within the boundaries of the Township.
§ 259-28. Conflicting provisions.
To the extent that any of the provisions of this article are in conflict with
other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Township, then, as to the
subject matter of this article, this article shall prevail.
§ 259-29. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, for every such
violation, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,000, and costs, and, in default of payment of fine or penalty and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided the penalty above
prescribed in this section shall not apply to any situation where the act of
violation can be prosecuted under the Vehicle Code68 or other statute of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any state regulation promulgated or
adopted by authority of any statute of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 259-30. Appointment of Fire Officials. [Added 2-10-1986 by Res.
No. 1986-16]
A. The respective Fire Chiefs of Eden Fire Company No. 1, Neffsville Fire
Company No. 1, and Southern Manheim Township Fire Company, or
their duly appointed and authorized representatives, are hereby
appointed, pursuant to this article, to act as the Fire Official to be in
charge at the scenes of fire or other emergencies which occur within
the specific geographical areas of the Township where each of their
respective volunteer fire companies provide fire-fighting service.
B. The appointment and authority of such respective Fire Chiefs as Fire
Officials shall be limited solely to the purposes and requirements of the
Fire Official as set forth in this article, and such Fire Chiefs are not
otherwise appointed and shall have no authority as the Fire Official
provided for in the Fire Prevention Code of the Township or the
remaining sections of this article.
68.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 259-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-30
1:199
Chapter 261
FIREWORKS
§ 261-1. Scope.
In order to protect life and property in the Township of Manheim, the
Township, as authorized by the Fireworks Law, Act 43 of 2017, Section
2402,69 is promulgating rules on the issuance of permits.
§ 261-2. Intent.
It is the intent of the Township to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the general public through limiting and regulating the use of display
fireworks as hereafter defined. This chapter permits supervised public
displays of display fireworks performed by professional, competent
operators in a safe manner and with appropriate safeguards through a
permit process. This chapter does not prescribe regulations for the sale and
use of consumer fireworks. Consumer firework regulations are set forth in
Fireworks Law, Act 43 of 2017.70
§ 261-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth herein:
CODE OFFICIAL — The Director of Code Compliance or other code official
designated by Manheim Township Commissioners to enforce Township
ordinances.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public, and
complies with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation and complies with the provisions for "consumer
fireworks" as defined in American Pyrotechnics Association (APA)
Standard 87-1, or any successor standard, the sale, possession and use
of which shall be permitted throughout the commonwealth.
A.
The term does not include devices as "ground and hand-held sparkling
devices," "novelties" or "toy caps" in APA 87-1, or any successor
standard, the sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all
times throughout the commonwealth.
B.
69.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 259-30 MANHEIM CODE § 261-3
1:200
CONTRACTOR/OPERATOR — A professional pyrotechnician possessing a
current, valid registration with the Pennsylvania Attorney General.
DISCHARGE SITE — The area immediately surrounding the fireworks
mortars used for the outdoor display of display fireworks.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects
by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes, but is not
limited to:
DISPLAY SITE — The immediate surrounding area where a display of
display fireworks is conducted, including the discharge site, the fallout area,
and the required separation distances from mortars to spectator viewing
areas.
NFPA 1123 — The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1123-06,
Code for Fireworks Display, 2006 Edition.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — A structure, vehicle or place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons or for conducting business, whether
or not a person is actually present.
TOWNSHIP — Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 261-4. Permits.
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
A.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
B.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
C.
A. The discharge of display fireworks shall be by permit.
B. Applications for display fireworks shall be in writing on a fire permit
application submitted to the attention of the Director of Code
Compliance at least 30 days in advance of the date set for the display.
C. The applicant shall contact Manheim Township Fire Rescue (MTFR) at
717-397-5881, extension 112, at least 30 days in advance of the date set
for the display to coordinate MTFR presence at the display of display
fireworks.
D. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
E. All displays of display fireworks shall conclude by 10:00 p.m.
F. Applications for display fireworks shall include:
§ 261-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-4
1:201
§ 261-5. Bond for display fireworks.
The code official shall require the applicant to obtain a bond in the amount
of not less than $50,000 for payment of damages caused to any person and
to any property by reason of the licensed display and arising from any acts
of the licensee or licensee's agents, employees or subcontractors. The bond
shall be filed with the Township before any permit for a display is delivered.
§ 261-6. Request for extension.
(1) A fully completed and executed fire permit application, including a
description of the proposed location of the display, the character
thereof, the name and address of the owner(s) and/or tenant(s) of
the land on which the display is to be held and the name and
address of the contractor/operator.
(2) The permit fee for display fireworks per the currently adopted Fee
Resolution.
(3) A fully executed indemnification and hold harmless agreement.
(4) Proof of insurance coverage, with reputable insurance companies
licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
naming the Township as an additional insured, as follows:
(a) Workers' compensation/liability: $500,000 per accident.
(b) General liability insurance: $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(c) Intrastate liability insurance: $3,000,000 per occurrence.
(d) Umbrella liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(5) As a condition of issuance of the permit, the applicant shall submit
a bond meeting the requirements of § 261-5 of this chapter.
(6) A detailed site plan of the display site showing accurate distances
from the discharge site to the spectator viewing area, fallout
area(s), parking area(s), occupied structures, overhead utilities and
roadways. NFPA 1123-06 will be used as the plan review reference
for proposed display site.
(7) An itemized list of quantities and sizes of display fireworks, aerial
shells and ground displays to be discharged.
A. If by reason of unfavorable weather, the display for which a permit has
been granted does not take place at the time authorized:
(1) The person to whom such permit was issued may, within 24 hours,
apply to the Township requesting a continuance of the display to a
new date.
(2) Upon receiving the request for extension, the code official, if it
believes the facts stated within the request are true, shall extend
§ 261-4 MANHEIM CODE § 261-6
1:202
§ 261-7. Inspection requirements.
§ 261-8. Disposal of display fireworks.
It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner, tenant and/or
contractor/operator to dispose of all fireworks shells that fail to fire or
charges that fail to detonate. Any materials which are hazardous or unsafe
shall be immediately disposed of in a proper manner.
§ 261-9. Violations and penalties.
the provisions of the permit to the date designated within the
request, which shall be no later than one week after the date
originally designated in the permit.
(3) The extension of time shall be granted without payment of an
additional fee and without requiring a bond other than the bond
given for the original permit, the provisions of which shall extend to
cover all damages which may be caused by reason of the display
occurring at the extended date and in the same manner and to the
same extent as if the display occurred at the date originally
designated in the permit.
A. A code official is to be contacted at least 24 hours in advance of a
display fireworks event to inspect the display site. The display site is
subject to inspection and approval prior to discharging fireworks. All
applicable provisions and clearances provided in the approval plans and
in NFPA 1123-06 are applicable and will be verified.
B. A code official will be present during the display fireworks event and
will be in direct contact with the contractor/operator before and after
the event.
C. Monitoring of the display site is the responsibility of the property
owner. Barriers and patrols of the perimeter are to be conducted and
will be verified by the code official prior to the start of the fireworks
display.
D. It is the responsibility of the contractor/operator to provide a postdisplay
inspection of the discharge site and display site immediately
after the fireworks display and at a "first light" inspection the day
immediately following the fireworks display.
A. Per 2009 IFC Section 3308.10, Disposal: Any shell found during the
inspection shall not be handled until at least 15 minutes have elapsed
from the time the shells were fired. The fireworks shall then be doused
with water and allowed to remain for at least five additional minutes
before being placed in a plastic bucket or fiberboard box. The disposal
instructions of the manufacturer, as provided by the fireworks supplier,
shall then be followed in disposing of the fireworks.
§ 261-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-9
1:203
§ 261-10. Conflicting regulations.
All relevant ordinances, regulations, and policies of the Township, not
amended, shall remain in full force and effect. Administrative Order No.
99-2, Fireworks/Explosives, shall be rescinded as of the effective date of this
chapter.
Chapter 277
GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 367. Trees — See Ch. 469.
§ 277-1. Restrictions on growth.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever a code official observes an apparent or
actual violation of a provision of this chapter, the code official shall
prepare a written notice of violation describing the condition which
required corrective action. The notice shall specify the violation. Failure
to comply with the provisions of the notice of violation shall subject the
violator to the penalties herein.
B. Service of notice. The written notice of violation of this chapter shall be
served upon the property owner, tenant, contractor/operator or any
other person responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice
of violation shall be served either by certified mail to the last known
post office address, delivered in person, or by delivering it to and
leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of a display
fireworks event.
C. Legal action. Nothing herein shall prevent the code official from filing a
civil complaint or nontraffic citation against a party without issuing a
notice of violation where circumstances required prompt action
because of a threat to health, safety and welfare of the public.
D. Penalty for violations. Any person, partnership, corporation or
association violating the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply
with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof shall be guilty of a
civil offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be liable for a fine not
less than $100 or not more than $1,000. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Failure to pay any
fee as prescribed herein shall constitute a violation.
E. Fines collected. All fines and fees collected under this chapter shall be
deposited into the Manheim Township General Fund.
§ 261-9 MANHEIM CODE § 277-1
1:204
§ 277-2. Notice of violation; abatement.
A. Any weeds, and any vines, grasses or other vegetation (not including
bushes and trees) which are not edible and are not planted for a clearly
useful or ornamental purpose, which exceed six inches in height on any
improved property or 12 inches in height on any unimproved property
in Manheim Township are hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the
inhabitants of the Township.
B. It is unlawful for any person or persons or any partnership or
association or any corporation owning or occupying land or lands in
Manheim Township to permit any such weeds, vines, grasses or other
vegetation to grow or remain on any lot or tract of ground in Manheim
Township, except on the following lots or tracts of ground:
(1) Agricultural property uses.
(2) Wetlands in developed and undeveloped areas, whether natural or
constructed.
(3) Woodlands.
(4) Public rights-of-way and easements.
(5) Public parks.
(6) Government-owned lands.
(7) Best management practice facilities designed to meet the
requirements of the Manheim Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance.71
(8) Riparian buffers and riparian forest buffers planted to comply with
the specifications outlined in the Manheim Township Zoning
Ordinance72 and the Manheim Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance.
C. Noxious weeds as defined by the Pennsylvania Noxious Weed Control
Law73 are prohibited on any property in Manheim Township.
A. Notices of violation of this chapter shall be sent by Manheim Township
to the owner and occupant of any such lot or tract of land by:
(1) Sending written notice of violation by certified and first-class mail
to the address of the owner of the property and to the last known
address of any person or persons or any partnership or association
or any corporation listed as owner and to the lending institution or
its agent for foreclosed properties.
71.Editor's Note: The Stormwater Management Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
72.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
73.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 255.1 et seq.
§ 277-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-2
1:205
§ 277-3. Failure to comply; work performed by Township; costs.
§ 277-4. Collection of costs and expenses.
§ 277-5. Violations and penalties.
Failure to abate any such nuisance in accordance with the requirements of
the notice issued under § 277-2 shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
and such violator, in addition to payment of the costs and expenses referred
to in § 277-3, including attorneys' fees, shall, for every such violation, be
(2) If the certified mail and first-class mail are returned as
undeliverable, by leaving written notice of violation on the
premises either by handing such notice to an adult in charge of the
premises or by affixing a copy of the notice to the premises at a
conspicuous place thereon.
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation and shall require
abatement of the violation within 10 days of service of the notice of
violation. Upon cause shown, the Township Police Department may
extend the abatement period by 10 additional days and shall document
such extension in the Police Department report.
C. The owner/occupant of any property, or in the case of foreclosure the
lending institution or its agent, shall receive one notice of violation per
season. Future violations during the same season shall be issued
citations without further notice.
A. In the event the owner or occupant or lending institution or its agent
shall refuse or neglect to abate such nuisance within a period of 10 days
or any extension thereof, the Township may cause such weeds, vines,
grasses, or other objectionable vegetation to be removed, keeping an
account of the expense of inspecting the premises, service of the notice,
and abating the nuisance. All such costs and expenses shall be charged
to and paid by the owner or occupant.
B. Alternatively, the Township may cause the abatement of the nuisance by
suit in equity. In such event, the owner or occupant shall be liable for all
costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the Township.
A. All costs and expenses incurred by the Township in the abatement of
such nuisances shall be a lien upon the premises; and whenever a bill
therefor remains unpaid for a period of 60 days after it has been
rendered, the Township may request that the Township Solicitor file a
municipal claim for such costs and expenses, together with a penalty of
10% thereon, in the manner provided by law for the collection of
municipal claims.
B. Alternatively, the Township may request that the Township Solicitor file
an action in assumpsit for collection of the amount due, including
attorneys' fees and costs, without filing a municipal claim.
§ 277-2 MANHEIM CODE § 277-5
1:206
subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $100 per day nor more than
$1,000 plus costs and any attorneys' fees incurred in the prosecution of
such violation. Each day's continuance of a violation of any provision of
this chapter, after the expiration of the 10 days referred to in § 277-2, shall
constitute a separate violation punishable by a separate fine or penalty.
Chapter 325
MAP, OFFICIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 277-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-5
1:207

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 325-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Manheim Township
Official Map (Official Map) Ordinance."
§ 325-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, under the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 325-3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of serving and promoting the public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare; to facilitate adequate
provision of public streets and facilities; to improve traffic circulation; to
provide for the recreational and open space needs of the community; to
protect and enhance water resources; to provide greenways and pathways;
to ensure bus shelter locations; and to facilitate the subdivision of land and
the use of land and watercourses.
§ 325-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-3
1:209

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Controls
§ 325-4. Provisions of Official Map.
The Official Map, as adopted in the form attached to this chapter, and
subsequently amended,74 shall identify the location of the lines of existing
and proposed public streets, open space, pathways, greenways,
watercourses, bus shelters and public grounds, including widening,
narrowings, extensions, diminutions, openings or closings.
§ 325-5. Incorporation of Official Map.
The Official Map, including all notations, references, and other data shown
thereon, is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if it were
fully described herein.76
A. For the purpose of initially reserving land on the Official Map, property
records, aerial photography, photogrammetric mapping or other
methods sufficient for the identification, description and publication of
areas for reservation on the Official Map will be sufficient. For the
acquisition of lands and easements, boundary description by metes and
bounds shall be made and sealed by a licensed surveyor.
B. The Board of Commissioners, by amending ordinances, may make
additions or modifications to the Official Map or part thereof by
following the provisions included in Subsection A above and may also
vacate any existing or proposed public street, open space, pathways,
greenways, watercourses, bus shelters or public ground contained on
the Official Map, or part thereof.
C. Unless otherwise specified, all proposed public street right-of-way and
widening of existing public street right-of-way shall meet the width
requirements specified in the Manheim Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance75 for the street classification so designated
unless otherwise specified by a traffic impact study requiring
improvements such as deceleration and acceleration lanes which may
require a greater right-of-way width at specific location.
A. Certification of Official Map. The Official Map shall be certified and
shall bear the signatures of the Manheim Township Board of
Commissioners, the attestation by the Manheim Township Secretary,
and shall include the following words: "This is to certify that this is the
Official Map of Manheim Township referred to in Section 2 of Ordinance
No. 2013-19 of Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,"
together with the date of enactment of this chapter. The Official Map
74.Editor's Note: A copy of the current Official Map is on file in the Township Offices.
75.Editor's Note: The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance is on file in the Township
offices.
76.Editor's Note: A copy of the current Official Map is on file in the Township Offices.
§ 325-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-5
1:211
§ 325-6. Relationship with County Official Map or Lancaster
Intermunicipal Committee Official Map.
The adoption of an Official Map by the County of Lancaster or the Lancaster
Intermunicipal Committee shall not affect the Official Map of Manheim
Township, except that any Official Map of the County of Lancaster or the
Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee shall govern as to Lancaster County
or Lancaster intermunicipal public grounds, facilities and improvements of
Lancaster County or the Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 325-7. Relationship with adjacent municipalities.
If the Official Map, or amendment thereto, shows any street or public lands
intended to lead into any adjacent municipality, a certified copy of the
Official Map, or amendment thereto, shall be forwarded to such adjacent
municipality.
shall be kept on file with the Manheim Township Manager (Township
Manager).
B. The Official Map and Official Map Ordinance have been adopted
pursuant to the provisions provided in Section 402 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. A copy of the Official Map
and Official Map Ordinance of Manheim Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, shall be recorded in the Lancaster County Recorder of
Deeds Office in accordance with Section 402 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 325-5 MANHEIM CODE § 325-7
1:212
ARTICLE III
Effects of Controls
§ 325-8. Construction within mapped streets, open space, pathways,
greenways, watercourses, bus shelters, or public grounds.
For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map, no permits
shall be issued for any building within the lines of any street, open space,
pathways, greenways, watercourses, or bus shelters as shown or laid out on
the Official Map. No person shall recover any damages for the taking for
public use or any building or improvements constructed within the lines of
any street, watercourse, or public ground after the same shall have been
included in the Official Map, and any such building or improvement shall be
removed at the expense of the owner. However, when the property of which
the reserved location forms a part cannot yield a reasonable return to the
owner unless a permit shall be granted, the owner may apply to Manheim
Township Board of Commissioners for the grant of special consideration
to so build. Before granting any special consideration authorized in this
section, the Board of Commissioners may refer the request to the Manheim
Township Planning Commission and allow the planning agency 30 days for
review and comment and shall give public notice and hold a public hearing
at which all parties in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard. A
refusal by the Board of Commissioners to grant the special consideration
applied for may be appealed by the applicant to the Zoning Hearing Board
in the same manner, and within the same time limitation, as is provided
in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and in
accordance with Article V of this chapter.
A. The Board of Commissioners may fix the time for which streets, open
space, pathways, greenways, watercourses, bus shelters or public
grounds on the Official Map shall be deemed reserved for future taking
or acquisition for public use. The reservation for public grounds shall
lapse and become void one year after a property owner of such property
has submitted a written notice to the Board of Commissioners
announcing his/her intentions to build, subdivide or otherwise develop
the land covered by the reservation, or has made formal application for
an official permit to build a structure for private use, unless the Board
of Commissioners shall have acquired the property or begun
condemnation proceedings to acquire such property before the end of
the year.
B. The adoption of any street, street lines, nonmotorized path or other
public lands as part of the Official Map shall not, in and of itself,
constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of
any street nor the taking or acceptance of any land, nor shall it obligate
Manheim Township to improve or maintain any such street or land. The
adoption of proposed streets improvements, open space, pathways,
greenways, watercourses, bus shelters or public grounds as part of the
Official Map shall not, in and of itself, constitute or be deemed to
constitute a taking or an acceptance of any land by Manheim Township.
§ 325-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-9
1:213
§ 325-9. Release of damage claims or compensation.
The Board of Commissioners may designate any of its agencies to negotiate
with the property owner of land whereon reservations are made, releases
of claims for damages or compensation for such reservations are required
or agreements indemnifying Manheim Township from such claims by others
may be required. Any releases or agreements when properly executed by
Manheim Township and the property owner, and recorded, shall be binding
upon any successor in title.
§ 325-9 MANHEIM CODE § 325-9
1:214
ARTICLE IV
Adoption and Amendment
§ 325-10. Procedure.
§ 325-11. Effect of approved plans.
Following adoption of the Official Map, or part thereof, all streets,
improvements, open space, pathways, greenways, watercourses, bus
shelters or other public grounds and the elements listed in Section 401
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code on final, recorded plats
which have been approved as provided by this chapter shall be deemed
amendments to the Official Map. Notwithstanding any of the other terms of
this article, no public hearing need be held or notice given if the amendment
of the Official Map is the result of the addition of a plat which has been
approved as provided by this chapter.
A. Prior to adoption of the Official Map or part thereof, or any amendments
to the Official Map, Manheim Township shall refer the proposed Official
Map, or part thereof or amendment thereto, with any accompanying
ordinance describing the proposed map, to the Manheim Township
Planning Commission, the Lancaster County Planning Commission and
the Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee for review. The Manheim
Township Planning Commission shall report their recommendations on
said proposed Official Map and accompanying ordinance, part thereof,
or amendment thereto within 45 days unless an extension of time shall
be agreed to by the Board of Commissioners. If, however, the Manheim
Township Planning Commission fails to act within 45 days, the Board of
Commissioners may proceed without its recommendation.
B. Lancaster County and adjacent municipalities may offer comments and
recommendations during said forty-five-day review period in
accordance with Section 408 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. The Manheim Township Recreation and Park Planning
Department and similar public bodies may also offer comments and
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners or Planning
Commission if requested by same during said forty-five-day review
period. Before voting on the enactment of the proposed ordinance and
Official Map, or part thereof or amendment thereto, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing pursuant to public notice.
C. Following adoption of the ordinance and Official Map, or part thereof, a
copy of the same, verified by the Board of Commissioners, shall be
submitted to the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds and shall be
recorded within 60 days of the effective date. The fee for recording and
indexing ordinances and amendments shall be paid by Manheim
Township enacting the ordinance or amendment and shall be in the
amount prescribed by law for the recording of ordinances by the
Recorder of Deeds.
§ 325-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-11
1:215

ARTICLE V
Violations, Penalties and Appeals
§ 325-12. Notice of violation.
§ 325-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person or partnership who fails to comply with this chapter within the
period stated in the notice of the Township Manager shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a
penalty of not more than $500. Each and every day of continued violation
shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever any person, partnership, or corporation shall have violated
the terms of this chapter, the Township Manager shall cause a written
notice to be served upon the owner, applicant, developer, property
manager, or other person responsible for the property or the violation,
directing him to comply with all the terms of this chapter within seven
days, or such additional period, not to exceed 30 days, as the Township
Manager shall deem reasonable, and further the Township Manager
shall give notice to the owner, applicant, developer, property manager
or other person responsible for the property or the violation that if the
violation is not corrected, the municipality may correct the same and
charge the landowner or other persons responsible the cost thereof
plus penalties as specific herein for failure to comply.
B. Such notice may be delivered by the United States Postal Service, first
class, postage prepaid or by certified or registered mail; or by personal
service; or, if the property is occupied, by posting notice at a
conspicuous place upon the affected property.
A. In the event that the owner, developer, occupant, applicant, property
manager or other person responsible fails to comply with the terms of
this chapter within the same specified by the Township Manager,
Manheim Township may take any actions necessary to correct the
violation. The costs for correction of any violation shall be in addition to
any penalties for violations for failure to comply.
B. In addition to the fines for violations, costs, and penalties provided for
by this section, Manheim Township may institute proceedings in Courts
of Equity to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such building, structure
or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, and act, conduct,
business or use constituting a violation.
C. The cost for removal, fines, and penalties herein mentioned may be
entered by Manheim Township as a lien against such property in
accordance with existing provisions of law or may be collected by action
in assumpsit.
§ 325-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-14
1:217
§ 325-14. Appeals.
Any appeal from a decision or action of Manheim Township or of any officer
or agency of Manheim Township in matters pertaining to this chapter shall
be made in the same manner and within the same time limitations as is
provided for zoning appeals in Article X of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.
§ 325-14 MANHEIM CODE § 325-14
1:218
Chapter 329
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 367.
§ 325-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-14
1:219

ARTICLE I
Purpose; Title
§ 329-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the First Class Township Code,77 as amended, and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended,78
the purpose of this chapter is to regulate mobile homes, mobile home parks,
and mobile home lots in order to better protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the Township and of all persons living in
mobile homes within the Township.
§ 329-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park
Ordinance of Manheim Township."
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 329-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-2
1:221

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 329-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless, from the particular
context thereof, it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended:
ACCESSORY AND/OR SERVICE BUILDINGS — A detached, subordinate
building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal
building and/or principal use and which is located on the same lot as that
occupied by the principal building and/or principal use.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be
joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy, except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park
owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
MOBILE HOME PARK OWNER AND/OR OPERATOR — This person shall
include the holder of the legal title or the holder of the equitable title or
any person in charge of or responsible for the operation of the mobile home
park.
PERSON — An individual, copartnership, association or private corporation.
RECREATIONAL AREA — A specific designated space(s) used for play and
recreational purposes. The designated recreational area shall be calculated
on the gross acreage of the mobile home park, but said recreational area
shall not include areas of mobile home lots, streets, parking areas and
accessory buildings.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A portable vehicular structure, built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation, and other
short-term use.
§ 329-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-3
1:223

ARTICLE III
Regulation of Mobile Homes
§ 329-4. Parking restricted.
It shall be unlawful within the limits of the Township for any person to park
or locate any mobile home on any tract of land, occupied or unoccupied,
within the Township, except as provided in this chapter, Chapter 510,
Zoning,79 or other applicable ordinances of the Township.
§ 329-5. Standing on Township streets or alleys.
No person shall allow any mobile home to stand upon any of the streets or
alleys in the Township without being attached to a licensed and inspected
motor vehicle capable of pulling the mobile home.
§ 329-6. Time limit for parking on streets or alleys.
No person shall park any mobile home attached to a motor vehicle on any
street or alley in the Township for a period of time longer than that allowed
for the parking of vehicles upon such streets or alleys by the applicable
state laws and the ordinance of the Township applicable to traffic and
parking. Any person who shall violate this section shall be subject to the
penalties specifically provided in such laws and ordinances, as the case may
be.
§ 329-7. Occupancy outside mobile home parks.
No person shall occupy any mobile home for sleeping or living quarters
other than on a duly permitted mobile home lot in a mobile home park;
however, a mobile home may be erected and maintained as a single-family
detached dwelling outside a mobile home park when the following
requirements are met:
A. The lot upon which the mobile home is installed shall be located within
a zoning district which permits single-family detached dwellings by
right. Said lot and mobile home shall comply with all area and bulk
regulations and all supplemental regulations pertaining to single-family
detached dwellings within that district.
B. The mobile home shall be installed upon, and securely fastened to, a
frost-free foundation or footer, and in no event shall it be erected on
jacks, loose blocks, or other temporary materials.
C. An enclosure of compatible design and material, commonly called
"skirting," shall be erected around the entire base of the mobile home.
Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
79.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 329-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-7
1:225
D. No mobile home shall be erected on a single lot unless a zoning permit
is first obtained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 510,
Zoning,80 of the Code of the Township of Manheim.
80.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 329-7 MANHEIM CODE § 329-7
1:226
ARTICLE IV
Requirements for Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
§ 329-8. Compliance required; minimum floor space.
§ 329-9. Specific regulations.
A. All mobile home parks shall comply with the requirements set forth
hereinafter in § 329-9 of this article, as well as all other provisions of
this chapter.
B. All mobile homes shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of floor
space.
A. Area and density regulations.
(1) Minimum size. The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be
five acres.
(2) Density. There shall be a maximum of five mobile home lots per
acre.
(3) Setback. The minimum setback from a public street to any mobile
home, mobile home service or accessory building, or off-street
parking facility, located within a mobile home park, shall be in
accordance with the Residential District R-4 setback regulations in
Chapter 510, Zoning,81 of the Code of the Township of Manheim as
they pertain to single-family detached dwellings.
(4) Yard. The minimum allowable distance between any mobile home
park boundary line, other than a public street, and a mobile home
shall be 25 feet.
(5) Distance between buildings. Mobile homes shall be separated from
each other and service or accessory buildings and the adjoining
pavement of the mobile home park street or common parking area
by at least 20 feet.
(6) Recreation area. There shall be a minimum of 15% of the gross
acreage of the mobile home park devoted to active and/or passive
recreational facilities. Responsibility for maintenance of the
recreational area shall be with the landowner and/or the operator.
Should the landowner and/or the operator neglect to maintain the
recreational areas, the Township may, in its discretion, continue to
maintain said areas. The cost of such maintenance by the Township
shall be assessed against the landowner and shall become a lien
against the property of the landowner, in accordance with
procedures described by law. The maintenance of said recreation
area by the Township shall not relieve the landowner and/or the
81.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 329-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-9
1:227
operator from prosecution and the penalties provided under
§ 329-24 of this chapter.
B. Mobile home lot and stand requirements.
(1) Lot size. Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum area of 7,000
square feet.
(2) Lot width. Each mobile home lot shall be at least 50 feet wide.
(3) Street access. Each mobile home lot shall abut on a mobile home
park street with access to such street. Access to all mobile home
lots shall be from the mobile home park streets and not from public
streets or highways.
(4) Mobile home stand. Each mobile home shall be provided with and
securely fastened to a hard-surfaced mobile home stand which has
a foundation that will not heave, shift, or settle unevenly because of
frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting
on the superstructure. Each mobile home stand shall be equipped
with properly designed utility connections.
(5) Skirting. An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be
erected around the entire base of each mobile home. Such
enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
C. Service and accessory buildings.
(1) Construction. All service and accessory buildings, including
management offices, storage areas, laundry buildings, and indoor
recreation areas shall be adequately constructed, ventilated, and
maintained so as to prevent decay, corrosion, termites and other
destructive elements from causing deterioration.
(2) Accessory buildings. Service and accessory buildings shown on an
approved plan may be erected in a mobile home park. Yard
requirements shall be in accordance with Subsection A(3), (4) and
(5) of this section. All attachments to individual mobile homes in
the form of buildings such as sheds are prohibited.
(3) Mobile home park office. Every mobile home park shall have a
structure designed for and clearly identified as the office of the
mobile home park manager.
(4) Storage space. Occupants of each mobile home lot shall be
provided with at least 150 cubic feet of enclosed storage space. The
type of storage facility shall be approved by the Township.
(5) Use of service and accessory buildings. Service and accessory
buildings shall be used only by the occupants of the mobile home
park or their guests.
§ 329-9 MANHEIM CODE § 329-9
1:228
D. Water supply.
(1) Approved water supply. All mobile home parks shall be connected
to a public water supply which shall be constructed in accordance
with the design requirements of the supplying agency.
(2) Connection required. All mobile homes and such service buildings
as shall include the use of water shall be connected to the approved
water supply system.
(3) Protection of lines. Adequate provisions shall be made to protect
water service lines from damage, including a shutoff valve on each
mobile home lot below the frost line.
(4) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with
specifications of the water-supplying agency.
E. Sewage disposal.
(1) Approved sewerage system. All mobile home parks shall be
connected to a public sewerage system which shall be constructed
in accordance with the design requirements of the operating
agency.
(2) Connection required. All mobile homes and service buildings that
include the use of water shall be connected to the approved
sewerage system.
(3) Protection of system. Adequate provisions shall be made to protect
sanitary sewers from stormwater infiltration and breakage.
F. Storm drainage.
(1) Surface drainage. The ground surface in all parts of the mobile
home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water
in a safe and efficient manner. The storm drainage and retention
system is to be submitted to the Township for approval.
(2) Drainage structures. Storm sewers, culverts, and related
installations shall be provided to permit the unimpeded flow of
natural watercourses; to insure the drainage of all low points along
the line of the mobile home park streets; to intercept stormwater
runoff along the mobile home park streets at intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(3) Design standards. The design standards applicable to Chapter 440,
Subdivision and Land Development,82 of the Code of the Township
of Manheim shall be utilized.
G. Streets, parking, curb and sidewalk.
82.Editor's Note: The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 329-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-9
1:229
(1) Width. All mobile home park streets shall have a minimum
pavement width of 24 feet. If on-street parking is permitted, the
minimum pavement width shall be 34 feet.
(2) Construction standards. Pavement base and pavement wearing
surface shall be constructed according to the specifications
applicable to standard Township streets.
(3) All mobile home park streets shall be private driveways and shall
be provided with adequate lighting.
(4) Grades. There shall be a minimum grade of 0.75% and a maximum
grade of 10% on all mobile home park streets, unless the Township
waives this requirement.
(5) Parking. Each mobile home shall be provided with a minimum of
two paved parking spaces of bituminous or concrete surface, which
shall be located on the mobile home lot. Off-lot parking spaces may
be approved in the case of cluster-type design. Off-street parking
areas for additional vehicles of park occupants and guests shall be
provided as specified by the Township.
(6) Walks. Walkways shall be provided along all new streets and
parking compounds located in the mobile home park. Such
walkways shall have a minimum width of four feet and shall be
constructed of an all-weather material approved by the Township
Commissioners.
(7) Curb. Concrete curb, either rolled or straight, is required on both
sides of all streets in the mobile home park. The curb shall be
constructed in accordance with Township standards.
(8) Lighting. All streets, and parking lots that are designed to
accommodate more than four cars, shall be lighted to provide a
minimum of one footcandle of illumination at the three-foot height
above grade.
H. Ground cover.
(1) Surface protection. Ground surfaces in all parts of the mobile home
park shall be paved, covered with other solid material or protected
with vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
(2) Harmful vegetation. Mobile home park grounds shall be
maintained free of vegetative growth which is poisonous or which
may harbor rodents, insects harmful to man or other pests harmful
to man.
I. Electrical distribution.
(1) System. Every mobile home park shall contain an electrical wiring
system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and
§ 329-9 MANHEIM CODE § 329-9
1:230
appurtenances, which shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with local electrical power company specifications.
Each mobile home shall be connected to this electrical distribution
system and grounded in accordance with the requirements.
J. Solid waste and vector control.
(1) Solid waste disposal and vector control shall be the responsibility
of the mobile home park landowner and/or operator.
§ 329-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-9
1:231

ARTICLE V
Permits and Plans
§ 329-10. Application for permits. [Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
Any person desiring to construct, operate and maintain a mobile home
park shall make application for a permit to the Township. The fee for the
permit shall be as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Each
application shall be accompanied by appropriate plans and information
as required by this chapter and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 329-11. Approval procedure.
§ 329-12. Plans.
A. The number of applications and plans to be submitted and the
procedure to be followed by the Township in processing said
applications and plans shall be as described for final plan applications
in Chapter 440, Subdivision and Land Development,83 of the Code of the
Township of Manheim.
B. A permit to construct a mobile home park shall be issued only after a
plan has been approved by the Township Commissioners, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and other
agencies having jurisdiction. After the plans are approved, the permit
for construction of the mobile home park shall be issued. Such approval
shall only serve as authority to construct the mobile home park in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. After construction of
the mobile home park, the Township shall issue an operating permit
authorizing the applicant to operate the mobile home park if it meets all
the requirements of this chapter. This operating permit shall be valid
for a period of one year and shall be renewed on an annual basis.
A. All plans submitted shall contain the following information, at a scale of
not less than one inch equals 50 feet:
(1) Name of mobile home park.84
(2) Name of municipality.
(3) Date of plan preparation.
(4) Graphic scale and North point.
83.Editor's Note: The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance is on file in the Township
offices.
84.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 503A, pertaining to information required by Rules and
Regulations, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection,
Chapter 179, Mobile Home Parks, which immediately preceded this subsection, was
repealed 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
§ 329-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-12
1:233
(5) Name and address of firm preparing plan.
(6) Name and address of owner of record and title source.
(7) Name and address of operator, if not owner of record.
(8) Site data:
(a) Number of mobile home lots.
(b) Number of acres.
(c) Density per acre.
(d) Number of off-street parking spaces.
(e) Number of acres of recreation space.
(9) Layout of the mobile home park on a property line and topographic
survey which shows the items required by this chapter.
(10) Location of off-street parking spaces on a typical lot.
(11) Typical cross section of all mobile home park streets.
(12) Center-line profile of all mobile home park streets.
(13) Stormwater plans.
(14) Plans of electric and gas, as applicable.
(15) Plans of the sanitary sewerage system.
(16) Plans of the water supply system.
(17) Location and identity of all recreational facilities.
(18) Location and use of all service and accessory buildings.
(19) Location of all fire-fighting items, including but not limited to
hydrants, extinguishers, etc.
(20) Landscaping plan showing location and types of plantings.
(21) The seal of the registered professional engineer, professional land
surveyor or registered landscape architect who prepared the plan.
(22) Certificate for review by the Township Planning Commission.
(23) Certificate for review by the Township Engineer, if required by the
Township Commissioners.
(24) Certificate for approval by the Township Commissioners.
(25) Certificate acknowledging that the plan has been reviewed by the
Lancaster County Planning Commission.
§ 329-12 MANHEIM CODE § 329-12
1:234
§ 329-13. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, construct, or maintain a
mobile home park within the Township without first obtaining approval of
a plan and securing a zoning permit and an operating permit from the
Township.
B. The applicant shall also submit:
(1) A legal description of the boundary of the mobile home park.
(2) The method and plan of garbage and refuse disposal.
§ 329-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-13
1:235

ARTICLE VI
Additional Requirements
§ 329-14. Expiration of permit; renewal.85
The operating permit issued by the Township shall expire one year from the
date of issuance, but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter
for additional periods of one year each. A permit fee as set by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners must be paid for each year that the permit is
renewed.
§ 329-15. Enforcement; inspections.
The Township Commissioners are responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter. Periodic inspections of mobile home parks shall be made by a
designated representative at reasonable intervals. The Township
Commissioners shall have the power to revoke permits to operate mobile
home parks for the noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter or as
otherwise provided hereunder.
§ 329-16. Transfer of permits.
The permits required by this chapter are not transferable either to a new
location or to a new permittee at the same location.
§ 329-17. Changes.
No person holding a permit under this chapter shall extend or reduce
the area of any mobile home park, add any new facility or structure, or
eliminate any existing facility or structure, until notice of such proposed
change shall have been given to the Township and the Township shall have
ascertained, after investigation as in the case of an original application
for a permit, that such proposed change is in accordance with all the
requirements of this chapter. The Township shall either:
§ 329-18. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued by the Township shall be subject to revocation by the
Township for the violation by the person holding said permit(s) of any
provision of this chapter, any of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
A. Approve the changes;
B. Designate the reasons why the changes cannot be made; or
C. Advise the applicant of which additional changes are required in order
to comply with the chapter before the proposed changes will be
approved.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 329-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-18
1:237
pertaining hereto and shall also be subject to revocation by the Township
if the person holding said permit(s), under cover of such permit(s), violates
or aids or abets in violating, or knowingly permits to be violated, any penal
ordinances of the Township or laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or any rules or regulations thereunder.
§ 329-19. Cancellation or suspension of permit.
Upon conviction of any violation of this chapter, the permit and/or operating
permit shall be automatically canceled. The mobile home park shall not be
operated as such until a new application shall be made for a permit and/or
operating permit hereunder, which application shall contain, in addition to
all other items required by this chapter, reasonable assurances to prevent
further violations of the nature for which conviction was a result. The
Township Commissioners, by resolution, may suspend the permit and/or
operating permit, and thus suspend the operation of a mobile home park,
upon receipt of evidence of a violation. Such suspended permit and/or
operating permit may be reinstated for the balance of the year for which
it was issued, upon compliance of the holder thereof with all conditions
for reinstatement set forth in the resolution of suspension. No person shall
operate a mobile home park during the time when a permit and/or an
operating permit therefor shall have been canceled or suspended.
§ 329-18 MANHEIM CODE § 329-19
1:238
ARTICLE VII
Mobile Home Park Operation
§ 329-20. Posting of park permit.
In every mobile home park, a copy of the park permit and of this chapter
shall be posted in the park office. The park register shall at all times be kept
in said office. The park manager shall report all changes in occupancy to the
Manheim Township School District in accordance with Chapter 382, Rental
Property, Article I, Rental Occupancy Report.
§ 329-21. Responsibilities of park owner or attendant.
It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, the owner,
and the person holding said permit(s) to:
A. Keep at all times a register of all occupants, which shall be open at all
times to inspection by officers of the Township. Such register shall show
for each occupant:
(1) The name and prior address and, for past occupants, a forwarding
address.
(2) The dates of entrance and departure.
(3) The lot number upon which such mobile home is parked or located.
(4) The state license number of such mobile home and of the vehicle
towing the same.
B. Maintain the mobile home park in a clean, orderly and sanitary
condition at all times.
C. See to it that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced, and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations
of this chapter or any other violations of law which may come to their
attention.
D. Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats, or other animals.
E. Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Department, hand
fire extinguishers, in the ratio of one to each mobile home lot.
F. Prohibit the burning of trash or rubbish on the premises.
G. Prohibit the use of any mobile home by a greater number of occupants
than that which it is designed to accommodate.
H. Prohibit the parking of any mobile home for use as living quarters if the
said mobile home does not contain a minimum of 400 square feet of
floor space.
I. Maintain control of rodents, vermin, insects and other pests.
§ 329-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-21
1:239
§ 329-22. Removal of mobile homes.86
No mobile home shall be removed from the Township without first obtaining
a removal permit from the Township Tax Collector, as required by Act No.
54 of July 8, 1969, of the Pennsylvania General Assembly.87 Such permit
shall be issued upon payment of a fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and real estate taxes assessed against the mobile home and
unpaid at the time the permit is requested.
J. See that no disorderly conduct or violation of any law or ordinance is
committed upon the premises and immediately to report to the proper
authorities any violations which may come to his attention.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
87.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5020-407.
§ 329-21 MANHEIM CODE § 329-22
1:240
ARTICLE VIII
Waivers
§ 329-23. Application; hearing.
A waiver of any of the provisions of this chapter may be granted by the
Township Commissioners after application has been made therefor, in
writing, with the request for specific waivers therein set forth, and after a
public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice.
§ 329-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-23
1:241

ARTICLE IX
Penalties
§ 329-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-2888]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $50 nor more
than $1,000, and costs, and, upon default of payment, imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, provided that each day's continuance of a violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 329-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-24
1:243
Chapter 346
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 105.
Curfew — See Ch. 208.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 216.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 352.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 480.
§ 329-24 MANHEIM CODE § 329-24
1:244
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 7-25-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-7 (Part 9, Ch. 1, Secs. 9-1001
and 9-1002, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 346-1. Authorization to promulgate rules and regulations.
[Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-6]
The Manheim Township Parks and Leisure Board is hereby authorized
to promulgate such rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to
insure peaceful and orderly enjoyment of the Manheim Township parks by
their users.
§ 346-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28; 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
In addition to any other penalties provided by law, violation of such rules
and regulations shall be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor
more than $1,000, and costs, and, in default of payment of fine or penalty
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 346-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-2
1:245

ARTICLE II
Seasonal Parking of Vehicles in Community Park
[Adopted 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-13 (Part 9, Ch. 1, Secs.
9-1003 and 9-1004, of the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 346-3. Operation and parking of vehicles prohibited during
certain times.
Except upon permission obtained from the Manheim Township Parks and
Leisure Board, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any
motor vehicle, as such is defined in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,89
as presently in force or hereafter amended, within the Manheim Township
Community Park, East Petersburg Road, Neffsville, Pennsylvania, at any
time during the period commencing on November 1 and ending on March
31 of any year.
§ 346-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28; 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Any person who violates any provision of § 346-3 shall be subject to a fine or
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000, and costs, and, in default
of payment of fine or penalty and costs, to imprisonment for not more than
30 days.
89.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 346-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 346-4
1:247
Chapter 352
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 346.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 390.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 352-1. License required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to solicit funds, peddle, canvass,
or take orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or
merchandise upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place or from house
to house in the Township without first obtaining a license as provided
herein, except that no license shall be required from the following:
§ 352-2. Licensing requirements and procedures.
A. Farmers selling their own products.
B. Persons soliciting funds or selling goods, wares or merchandise,
donated by the owner thereof, where the funds or the proceeds of sale
are to be applied exclusively for a charitable purpose.
C. Representatives and members of Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of
America, Lions, Rotary, Kiwanis, American Association of Retired
Persons, Disabled American Veterans, YWCA and YMCA, YWHA and
YMHA, Red Cross, Salvation Army and other national and international
service organizations and associations existing for the benefit of youth,
aged, handicapped or stricken and soliciting or selling for the purpose
of self-perpetuation and who may be registered as charitable
organizations with the state or federal government.
D. Manufacturers or producers of bread and bakery products, meat and
meat products, or milk or milk products, who sell their own products.
E. Insurance and real estate agents and brokers licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
F. Individuals distributing sales literature door hangings if there is no
attempt to contact the home or business occupant.
A. Every individual desiring to engage in those acts referred to in § 352-1
and not exempted thereby must obtain a license from the Police
Department.
B. To obtain a license, individuals must complete a written application
which shall contain such information as is reasonably required by the
Police Department, shall pay a license fee as set by resolution of the
§ 346-4 MANHEIM CODE § 352-2
1:248
Board of Commissioners, and shall permit the Police Department to
photograph the individual for the purpose of personal identification.
Applicants that wish to engage in magazine sales for profit must first
provide a current license issued by the Pennsylvania Attorney General's
office as required by the Consumer Protection Law.90
C. Applicants must, at their own expense, provide a completed criminal
records check from the state in which they reside, dated within 30 days
of the date of application for the solicitor's permit.
D. Following the completion of the application and the payment of the
license fee, the Police Department shall have five working days to
investigate the applicant.
E. The Chief of Police, or his authorized deputy, may refuse to issue a
license in cases where investigation shall disclose a criminal record or
any false or misleading statement on the application. The appeal on the
refusal to issue a license shall be made within five days to the Township
Commissioners by filing written notice of appeal with the Manager-
Secretary. The decision of the Commissioners shall be final.
F. The Chief of Police, or his authorized deputy, is hereby authorized to
suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter when he deems
such suspension or revocation to be in the interest of the public health,
safety, or morals, or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
or for giving false information upon any application for a license.
Appeals from any suspension or revocation may be made in the manner
outlined in Subsection E of this section.
G. The license shall be dated and signed by the Chief of Police or his
authorized deputy and shall be valid for that period of time desired by
the applicant, not to exceed 180 days. The license shall be in the
individual's possession while engaged in solicitation and shall be
exhibited upon request to all police officers, Township officials and
residents of the Township.
H. Solicitors, whether licensed or exempted, with the exception of mobile
ice cream vendors, shall only engage in solicitations between 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., except by prior appointment. Mobile ice cream vendors
may solicit until dusk but may not solicit on high traffic roadways.
I. Upon expiration, the license may be renewable for additional periods,
not to exceed 180 days each, upon registration and payment of an
additional fee as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for
each one-hundred-eighty-day or less period.91
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 352-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 352-3
1:249
§ 352-3. Violations and penalties.92
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600, plus costs of prosecution, for each and every offense and, in
default of payment thereof, to undergo imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
Chapter 367
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass and weeds — See Ch. 277.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Trees — See Ch. 469.
§ 367-1. Additions, insertions and changes.
A. The following sections are hereby amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "Manheim Township."
(2) Section 102.3, Application of other codes, is amended by deleting
"International Zoning Code" and inserting "Zoning Ordinance of
Manheim Township 2014, as amended."
(3) Section 102.7, Referenced codes and standards, shall be amended
by deleting the International Zoning Code (IZC-15).
(4) Section 102.8, Requirements not covered by code, shall be
amended by deleting the words "code official" and inserting the
words "Director of Code Compliance."
(5) Section 103.1, General, is amended as follows:
The Property Maintenance Code of Manheim Township shall be
enforced by the Manheim Township Department of Code
Compliance. The Department of Code Compliance consists of the
Director of Code Compliance and those persons appointed by the
Commissioners of Manheim Township to assist him. Such persons
are known as "code officials." All references to a "code official" in
this code shall mean the Director of Code Compliance or the code
officials, as the case may be.
(6) Section 103.2, Appointment, and Section 103.3, Deputies, are
deleted in their entirety.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 352-3 MANHEIM CODE § 367-1
1:250
(7) Section 103.5, Fees, is amended by deleting "the following
schedule" and inserting "the current Manheim Township Fee
Resolution."
(8) Section 104.3.1, Refusal of entry, is added as follows:
104.3.1 Refusal of entry. If any owner, occupant or other person
in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this code
refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs
entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises
where inspection authorized by this code is sought, the code official
may promptly apply for a search or inspection warrant to a court
of competent jurisdiction and shall supply all necessary affidavits
and testimony to indicate that there is a reasonable or probable
cause to conduct an inspection. For the purposes of this section, a
reasonable or probable cause to gain access for an inspection shall
include, without being limited to, the following:
1. That the inspection of the area is part of a planned routine
inspection being conducted pursuant to a systematic or
concentrated code enforcement program in that portion of the
Township; or
2. That the Code Compliance Department, after investigation or
upon information received, has knowledge, information or a
reasonable belief that a violation of this code or other codes
and ordinances of the Township exist; or
3. That such entry is for the purpose of inspecting a previous
notice of violation; or
4. That the Code Compliance Department has received a
complaint concerning a violation on or within the premises; or
5. That such entry is necessary to determine if the building,
structure, premises, dwelling or dwelling units meet the
standards of this code and building, fire, and health codes and
for the safety and welfare of the public.
(9) Section 104.3.2, Right of entry by owner, is added as follows:
104.3.2 Right of entry by owner. Every occupant of a dwelling
unit, building, structure or premises shall give the owner thereof,
or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling,
dwelling unit, building, structure or premises, at all reasonable
times, for the purpose of conducting inspections to determine
whether or not a violation of the code may exist, or for the purpose
of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this code or with any lawful rule
or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this code.
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-1
1:251
(10) Section 104.3.3, Notification to tenants, is added as follows:
104.3.3 Notification to tenants. Every owner of a dwelling unit,
building, structure or premises shall give the tenants thereof notice
of an inspection and obtain their authorization to grant a code
official entry to their unit. If the tenant(s) object(s) to entry by the
code official, the owner shall so notify the code official.
(11) Section 106.3, Prosecution of violation, is amended by deleting the
word "misdemeanor" and inserting the words "summary offense."
(12) Section 106.4, Violation penalties, is amended by deleting the last
sentence and replacing it with the following:
Any person convicted of violating a provision of this code shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $75 nor more than
$500 for the first two continual and uncorrected violations of the
same subsection on the same property and not less than $150
nor more than $1,000 for the third and subsequent continual and
uncorrected violation of the same subsection of the code on the
same property, plus costs and restitution. Every section of this
code that is violated shall constitute a separate offense punishable
by a separate fine as set forth herein. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense punishable by a separate fine as set forth herein.
(13) Section 106.6, Extensions, is added as follows:
106.6 Extensions. Upon application, an extension of time beyond
that given on the correction order to bring the violations set forth
on the inspection into compliance with this code may be granted
for a reasonable cause. An application for extension shall include:
1. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
2. Address of property referenced on correction order; and
3. Violation(s) referenced on correction order for which an
extension is being requested.
(14) Section 107.1, Notice to person responsible, shall be amended by
adding the following sentences to the end of the section:
No notice shall be required when a property is open and unsecure
and the code official has determined that the property shall be
secured. The code official may order the structure secured.
(15) The title of Section 108 shall be deleted and replaced with "Unsafe
Structures, Equipment and Premises."
(16) Section 108.1.5, Dangerous structure or premises, shall be
amended by adding the following numbered provisions:
§ 367-1 MANHEIM CODE § 367-1
1:252
12. Any premises which because of physical condition, use or
occupancy is considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts,
excavations, and unsafe fences or structures.
13. Any premises which because of neglect or lack of
maintenance has become a place for accumulation of trash
and debris, or a haven for rodents or other vermin.
14. Any unoccupied property which has been tax delinquent for
a period of two years prior to the effective date of this act,
and those in the future having a two-year tax delinquency.
15. Any property which is vacant, but not tax delinquent, and
which identified defects have not been eliminated within
one year of the receipt of notice to rehabilitate from the
Department of Code Compliance.
16. Any abandoned structure or premises. "Abandoned" shall be
defined as:
(a) A vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground on
which a municipal lien for the cost of demolition of any
structure located on the property remains unpaid for a
period of six months.
(b) A vacant property or vacant or unimproved lot or
parcel of ground on which the total sum of municipal
liens on the property for taxes or any other type of
municipal claim exceeds 150% of the fair market value
of the property as established by anybody with legal
authority to determine the taxable value of the
property.
(c) A property declared abandoned by the owner,
including an estate that is in possession of the
property.
(d) A property which has defective or unusual conditions
of title or no known owners, rendering title
unmarketable.
(e) A property which has environmentally hazardous
conditions, solid waste pollution or contamination in
a building or on the land which poses a direct and
immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the community.
(17) Section 108.6, Abatement methods, is amended by adding the
following sentences after the last sentence:
The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or
equipment shall notify the code official when the corrective action
has been completed. The code official shall then inspect the
building, premises, or equipment and shall notify the owner,
operator or occupant that the corrective action either does or does
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-1
1:253
not comply with this code. If not, the code official may take such
other action as is provided by this code.
(18) Section 111.1, Application for appeal, is amended by deleting
"board of appeals" in the first sentence and replacing the term with
"Manheim Township Uniform Construction Code (UCC) Board of
Appeals."
(19) Section 111.2, Membership of board, is deleted in its entirety,
including Subsections 111.2.1, 111.2.2, 111.2.3, 111.2.4, and
111.2.5.
(20) Section 111.7, Court review, is deleted in its entirety and replaced
as follows:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Manheim Township
UCC Board of Appeals, or any officer or department of the
Township, may appeal the decision to the Court of Common Pleas
of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to the Local Rules of
Court governing local agency and administrative agency appeals
other than land use appeals, which appeal must be filed with the
Court within 30 days after service of the decision filed by the board.
(21) Section 112.4, Failure to comply, is amended to provide a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per day plus court costs.
(22) Section 202, General Definitions, is amended to include:
HEATING FACILITY — A fixed, nonportable heating equipment or
unit.
LAVATORY — A fixed washbowl with running water and drainpipe
(sink).
PLUMBING — Refers to water pipes, waste pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, garbage
disposal units, as well as gas pipes, and gas-burning equipment,
water heating facilities and vents and other similar supply fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer and gas lines.
WATER CLOSET — A compartment or room with plumbing fixtures
used for the elimination of bodily wastes (toilet bowls and urinals).
(23) Section 301.3.1, Exterior conditions, shall be added as follows:
301.3.1 Exterior conditions. The exterior of every vacant
structure, accessory structure or premises shall be maintained
free of broken windows, loose or deteriorating shingles, siding or
decorative features or building materials, crumbling stone or brick,
or excessive peeling paint.
(24) Section 302.1, Sanitation, is amended by adding "free of any
offensive odor(s)" to the end of the second sentence.
§ 367-1 MANHEIM CODE § 367-1
1:254
(25) Section 302.3, Sidewalks and driveways, is amended by adding the
following sentence:
The exit discharge(s) as defined in the International Building Code
shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.
(26) Section 302.4, Weeds, is amended by inserting at the end of the
first section "in excess of six inches in height."
(27) Section 302.10, Trees, bushes and shrubs, shall be added as
follows:
302.10 Trees, bushes and shrubs. All trees, bushes and shrubs
shall be maintained to prevent the creation of a dangerous
condition as determined by the code official.
(28) Section 304.3, Premises identification, is amended by deleting the
third and fourth sentences and inserting the following sentences:
Residential structures. The number(s) shall be at least 2 3/4 inches
in height and shall be placed at least 18 inches above finished
grade. Numbers displayed on the main front door or overhead
doors are not permanent in nature and do not count towards the
required premises identification.
Nonresidential structures. The number(s) shall be at least six
inches in height with a minimum stroke of at least 1/2 inch and
shall be placed as directed by the Director of Code Compliance.
Numbers installed on glass are to be white in color.
Each tenant in a multitenant commercial structure shall display
numbers at both the front and all rear entrances to the unit.
(29) Section 304.7, Roofs and drainage, is amended by deleting the last
sentence and adding the following sentences:
The controlled method of water disposal from roofs shall terminate
at least five feet from the exterior foundation wall and discharge
in a manner that does not create a nuisance on the adjacent
property(ies), and shall terminate no closer than 10 feet from the
street right-of-way.
(30) Section 304.12, Handrails and guards, is amended by adding the
following:
Guards which are deteriorated and deemed unsafe by the Director
of Code Compliance shall be repaired and shall comply with the
currently adopted guardrail provisions found in the International
Residential Code or International Building Code.
(31) The first sentence of Section 304.14, Insect screens, is amended by
inserting the following dates: "from April 15 to October 1."
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-1
1:255
(32) Section 305.3, Interior surfaces, is amended by deleting the second
sentence in its entirety.
(33) Section 306, Component Serviceability, is deleted in its entirety.
(34) Section 308.3.3, Storage, collection and removal, shall be added as
follows:
308.3.3 Storage, collection and removal. The owner of every
residential, commercial, institutional and industrial establishment
shall ensure that all municipal waste from the premises is removed
properly and in such a manner not to create a public nuisance.
(35) Section 308.3.4, Recyclables, shall be added as follows:
308.3.4 Recyclables. The owner of any residential, commercial
or industrial establishment shall be responsible for the proper
storage, collection and disposal of all recyclables from the property
and in such a manner not to create a public nuisance.
(36) Section 308.4, Solid Waste and Recyclables Ordinance, shall be
added as follows:
308.4 Solid Waste and Recyclables Ordinance. Every owner of
every dwelling shall comply with the Solid Waste and Recyclables
Ordinance of the Township in effect regarding the removal of
municipal waste from the property.93
(37) Section 310, Kitchen Facilities, shall be added as follows:
SECTION 310
KITCHEN FACILITIES
310.1 Kitchen stove. The owner or operator of rental residential
property shall provide every dwelling unit with utility
connection for installed cooking appliance(s).
310.2 Kitchen sink. The owner or operator of rental residential
property shall provide every dwelling unit with a kitchen
sink in good working condition which provides an adequate
amount of heated and unheated running water under
pressure.
310.3 Refrigerator. The owner or operator of rental residential
property shall provide every dwelling unit with a utility
connection for refrigeration.
310.4 Counters and cabinets. All counters, countertops and
cabinets provided for cooking in a rental residential
property shall be maintained in good repair.
(38) Section 504.1, General, is amended by adding the following:
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 421, Solid Waste, Art. II, Solid Waste and Recyclables Management.
§ 367-1 MANHEIM CODE § 367-1
1:256
Floor drains in existing residential and nonresidential structures
shall discharge by means of gravity, or an approved sump pump
with a sealed lid, to the exterior of the structure. Floor drains shall
not be connected to the sanitary sewer system. Piping materials
and fittings used for discharge shall conform to the underground
building drainage requirements in the adopted International
Residential Code. Floor drain piping discharge termination shall be
at least five feet from the exterior foundation wall and discharge
in a manner that does not create a nuisance on the adjacent
property(ies), and shall terminate no closer than 10 feet from the
street right-of-way.
(39) Section 506.1, General, is amended by adding the following:
Existing on-lot (private) sewage facilities shall comply with the
Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapter 71, and the Manheim
Township Code of Ordinances, Chapter 399, Sewers and Sewage
Disposal.
In existing structures with on-lot sewage systems, an inspection,
performed by an approved septic service company in accordance
with the current Manheim Township Administrative Order, shall
evaluate and verify that the on-lot sewage facility(ies) properly
operates in accordance with Manheim Township Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 399, Sewers and Sewage Disposal,
regulations prior to the issuance of any permit. Provisions shall be
made for additional flows when bedrooms are added or as other
conditions warrant. Noted deficiencies shall be corrected under
a permit issued by the Manheim Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer.
(40) Section 506.4, Sump pump discharge, is added as follows:
506.4 Sump pump discharge. Sump pumps discharging
groundwater shall not connect to the sanitary sewer, unless
approved by the sewer authority having jurisdiction. The sump pit
shall be an approved type with a sealed lid.
(41) Section 507.1, General, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with
the following:
507.1 Roof drainage. The controlled method of water disposal
from roofs shall terminate at least five feet beyond the exterior
foundation wall and discharge in a manner that does not create
a nuisance on the adjacent property(ies) and shall terminate no
closer than 10 feet from the street right-of-way.
(42) Section 507.2, Sump pump discharge, is added as follows:
507.2 Sump pump discharge. Sump pump pipes discharging
groundwater shall terminate at least five feet beyond the exterior
foundation wall and discharge in a manner that does not create a
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-1
1:257
nuisance on the adjacent property(ies), but no closer than 10 feet
from the street right-of-way.
(43) Section 602.1, Facilities required, is amended by adding
"Permanent" at the beginning of the sentence.
(44) Section 602.3, Heat supply, is amended by requiring the supply of
heat during the period from October 1 to April 15.
(45) Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, is amended by requiring
the supply of heat during the period from October 1 to April 15.
(46) Section 602.6, Prohibited method of heating, shall be added as
follows:
602.6 Prohibited method of heating. Liquid-gas-type portable
heating appliances shall be prohibited except in single-family
residential homes. Wood-burning stoves are prohibited except in
single-family residential owner-occupied homes.
(47) Section 606.1, General, is deleted in its entirety and replaced as
follows:
All requirements relating to elevators and other lifting devices shall
be administered and enforced by the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry Elevator Division in accordance with the
applicable edition of ASME A.17.1 and any addenda.
(48) Section 701.3, Applicability of International Fire Code, is added as
follows:
701.3 Applicability of International Fire Code. The
International Fire Code shall be applied to provide minimum
requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practices
for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property
protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous
conditions in existing buildings, structures and premises and to
provide safety to building occupants, firefighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations.
(49) Section 703.3, Fire sprinkler area, is added and reads as follows:
703.3 Fire sprinkler area. An existing building area currently
protected by automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be separated
from an adjacent building area which is not protected by a fire
sprinkler system by constructing an approved two-hour fireresistive
rated fire barrier assembly(ies) and/or horizontal
assembly(ies) in accordance with the fire barrier requirements in
the currently adopted International Building Code. More restrictive
requirements shall apply as required by the International Building
Code.
§ 367-1 MANHEIM CODE § 367-1
1:258
Chapter 382
RENTAL PROPERTY
(50) Section 704.1, General, is amended by adding "inspected, tested
and" after the word "be" and before the word "maintained."
(51) Section 704.5, Tampering, is added as follows:
704.5 Tampering. Anyone tampering or interfering with the
effectiveness of a smoke detector shall be in violation of this code.
(52) Section 704.6, Maintenance, is added as follows:
704.6 Maintenance. The property owner shall maintain all smoke
detectors located in rental units.
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-1
1:259

ARTICLE I
Rental Occupancy Report
[Adopted 3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 1974-4 (Part 6, Ch. 2, Art. A, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 382-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning:
LESSEE — A person or persons who has the use of real estate of another as
a dwelling unit and is responsible for the giving of any type of consideration
therefor, including any house, apartment or other dwelling unit designated
for the use of one or more persons as a place of abode, but excluding those
who are lessees for a period of less than 30 days.
LESSOR — Any person who grants, leases or otherwise permits others
the use of three or more dwelling units for a consideration, monetary or
otherwise.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
§ 382-2. Report required.
All lessors shall report to the business office of the Manheim Township
School District, in writing, the number of parcels or units of real estate
presently or hereafter rented or available for rent in accordance with the
terms of this article.
§ 382-3. Filing requirements.
The report shall be filed within 30 days after the effective date of this article
or, in the case of after-acquired real estate or after-acquired rental units,
within 30 days of such acquisition. In the event of a change of occupancy,
such change shall be reported within 10 days. A change shall include a unit
or a parcel becoming vacant.
§ 382-4. Contents.
A. The report shall contain the following information:
(1) A description of the unit or parcel.
(2) The name or names of the lessor and lessees at the time of the
report.
(3) The names and birth dates of the persons occupying the premises.
B. The report may consist of any of the following, as long as they include
the information listed above:
§ 382-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-4
1:261
§ 382-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28]
Any lessor who violates any provision of this article or who furnishes false
information in any report required by this article shall be deemed a violator
of this article and, for every such violation, shall be subject to a fine or
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $600, and costs.
(1) A standard report form which is available in quantity at the
business office of the Manheim Township School District.
(2) A copy of the actual lease (if it includes the names and birth dates
of all occupants).
(3) A copy of any other form the lessor may be required to submit to
any other agency concerning lessees (if it includes the names and
birth dates of all occupants).
§ 382-4 MANHEIM CODE § 382-5
1:262
Chapter 390
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 352.
§ 390-1. Definitions. [Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-9]
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
following meanings, and, when not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular number, words in the singular number include the
plural number, and words of the masculine gender shall include the
feminine. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ANTIQUE OR SECONDHAND DEALERS — Any person who either wholly
or in part engages in or operates the trade or business of buying and/or
selling used goods such as antiques, precious stones, metals, jewelry, tools,
electrical devices, coins, fixtures, appliances, household goods, firearms
and bric-a-brac. The foregoing enumeration of articles, goods and property
shall not be deemed to be exclusive or all-inclusive. Exempted are judicial
sales or sales by executors or administrators, sales of unredeemed pledges
by or on behalf of licensed pawnbrokers in the manner prescribed by law,
occasional or auction sales of household goods and other articles sold from
private homes (commonly known as "garage sales") and auctions of real
estate.
BUSINESS — Every kind of vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise,
establishment, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with
all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, which are
conducted for profit or benefit, directly or indirectly, on any premises in the
Township.
JUNK DEALERS — Any person who shall carry on the business of buying or
selling and dealing in worn out and discarded material that may be turned
to some use, especially scrap, iron, brass, lead, copper, aluminum and other
metals or alloys or other materials commonly referred to as "junk."
LICENSE — Such document(s) as the Chief of Police or his designated
representative shall prescribe by rule or regulation as evidence that the
provisions of this chapter have been properly followed.
PAWNBROKER — Any person who:
Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of
personal property other than choses in action, securities, or written
evidence of indebtedness; or
A.
§ 382-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1
1:263
PERSON — Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations, or any
officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind of personal representatives
of any of the above, in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other
person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PLEDGE — Any article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker as security
for a loan in the course of his business as defined under "pawnbroker."
PLEDGOR — The person who obtains a loan from a pawnbroker and delivers
a pledge into the possession of a pawnbroker, unless such person discloses
that he is or was acting for another, in which case a "pledgor" means the
disclosed principal.
POLICE — The publicly supported Police Department of the Township of
Manheim.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Manheim Township Police
Department or his designated representative.
PREMISES — All lands, structures, places and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any
personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with, any such business conducted on such premises.
§ 390-2. Unlawful activities. [Amended 9-28-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-12]
Purchases personal property with an express or implied agreement or
understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price;
or
B.
Lends money upon goods, wares or merchandise pledged, stored, or
deposited as collateral security.
C.
A. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique or secondhand
dealer to exercise or carry on trade or business within this Township
without first obtaining a license from the Township and displaying it in a
place where it may be seen at all times.
B. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer, or antique or secondhand
dealer to receive, accept or purchase articles from individuals under 18
years of age, any person under the influence of drugs or intoxicants, or
any known thieves. Exception: Junk dealers may receive from persons
under 18 years of age any commonly discarded items such as
newspapers, cans, bottles, etc. Such transactions are also exempted
from any identification requirements unless specifically covered by a
promulgated rule or regulation.
C. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique or secondhand
dealer to receive, accept or purchase articles from anyone not known to
them without first requiring some form of identification which, at a
minimum, shall include the individual's name and address and either
the individual's motor vehicle operator's number, the individual's social
§ 390-1 MANHEIM CODE § 390-2
1:264
§ 390-3. License requirements.
security number or, if the individual does not have this information,
such other proof of identity as the Chief of Police shall provide by
regulation.
D. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique or secondhand
dealer to fail to keep or forward records to the police or fail to keep
other records and books as required by this chapter. Exception: Junk
dealers, unless specifically required by promulgated rule or regulation,
are required to obtain only the vehicle license or registration number
from vehicles containing the items purchased or the individuals the
junk dealers purchased the items from.
E. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer, or antique or secondhand
dealer to fail to permit the police all reasonable inspections of his
business and examinations of his books containing information required
to be kept by this chapter.
F. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique or secondhand
dealer to operate his business after his license is revoked or suspended.
G. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique or secondhand
dealer to loan, sell, give, assign to any other person, or allow any other
person to use or display or to destroy, damage or remove or to have in
his possession, except as authorized, any license which has been issued
to that licensee.
H. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique or secondhand
dealer to fail to keep in this Township and retain in the original form,
shape or condition any items acquired in the course of their business for
a minimum period of 72 hours from the time of furnishing the required
report to the police. In the case where retention for the time period
required would result in serious and substantial economic loss to the
dealer, or the probability of such loss is significant due to rapid and
highly fluctuating market conditions, or in the case of a transient
business or person who desires to move the items acquired from the
Township shortly after purchase, the minimum retention period may be
waived by the police after inspection and, if necessary, any
photographing of the goods by police. The waiver shall be
acknowledged in writing by the police upon the completed report form
required to be turned into the police.
A. Every individual desiring to engage in those acts referred to in § 390-2A
must obtain a license from the Township.
B. To obtain a license, individuals or persons must complete a written
application which shall contain such information as is reasonably
required by the Chief of Police but which, as a minimum, shall include a
sworn affidavit that the information furnished is true and correct.
§ 390-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:265
§ 390-4. License fees. [Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
§ 390-5. Suspension or revocation of license.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application accompanied by the fee
required in § 390-4, the Police Department shall have 15 working days
to investigate the applicant, process the application, and to grant or
deny a license.
D. Licenses to applicants shall be denied if:
(1) The applicant does not agree to comply or fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter; or
(2) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any
report or record required to be kept or filed with the police; or
(3) The applicant has been convicted of the crime of burglary, theft or
receiving stolen goods; or
(4) The applicant has had a similar license revoked or suspended for
good cause in this or another state for reasons which justify
suspension or revocation in this chapter.
E. If the application is approved, the Chief of Police or his designated
representative is authorized to sign and issue the license.
F. If a license is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the
denial and the basis thereof. If the reasons for denial are correctable,
the applicant will be so advised with suggestions on how these
corrections can be made and what time limit has been set for making
said corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the applicant that
appeals may be made in the manner outlined in § 390-6.
A. All pawnbrokers and junk dealers shall pay a license fee as set by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
B. All antique dealers or secondhand dealers shall pay a license fee as set
by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Those antique or
secondhand dealers who engage in isolated or occasional purchases
and who maintain no place of business within the Township, engage in
no promotion and advertising and can prove by appropriate records
that total purchases in the previous year did not exceed $1,500 shall
pay a fee as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
A. Any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police
for any of the reasons below:
(1) The practice of any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or furnishing
false information in obtaining or attempting to obtain a license.
§ 390-3 MANHEIM CODE § 390-5
1:266
§ 390-6. Appeal procedure.
(2) The practice of fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or furnishing false
information in the course of carrying on the licensed business.
(3) The conviction of any of the unlawful activities set forth in this
chapter for the particular business license involved.
(4) Violation of or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter or
rules and regulations issued under the authority of this chapter.
(5) Loaning, borrowing or using a license of another or knowingly
aiding or abetting in any way the granting of improper licenses.
(6) The doing of any act or engaging in any conduct in the course of the
business which demonstrates incompetency, bad faith or
dishonesty or substantially adversely affects the health, safety, or
general welfare of the public.
B. When the Chief of Police decides to suspend or revoke a license issued
under this chapter, he shall cause notice to be sent to the licensee,
which shall contain the reasons for suspension or revocation.
A. Any person aggrieved by denial of an application for a license or
renewal of a license or suspension or revocation of a license shall have
the right of appeal to the Commissioners.
B. Appeals must be filed within 15 days after receipt of notice from the
Chief of Police. Appeals shall be made by filing with the Secretary of the
Board of Township Commissioners a letter of appeal, briefly stating
therein the basis for the appeal, together with a filing and processing
fee in an amount as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
[Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
C. Failure to file a letter of appeal within the fifteen-day period shall
constitute a waiver of the appellant's right to a hearing; however, the
Commissioners, in their sole discretion, may nevertheless grant such a
hearing.
D. A hearing by one or more of the Commissioners will be set no more than
15 days after receipt of the letter of appeal. Five days' advance notice of
the time and date of the hearing shall be sent to the appellant.
E. At the hearing with the Commissioner(s), the appellant and any other
interested party shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in
order to show cause why the determination of the Chief of Police should
not be upheld. In all cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the
appellant to show that there was no substantial evidence to support the
decision of the Police Chief.
F. The hearing may be recorded by tape or other mechanical means; a
brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact and final
§ 390-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-6
1:267
§ 390-7. Report to police/electronic filing. [Amended 9-28-1981 by
Ord. No. 1981-12; 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-09]
decision reached by the Commissioner(s) shall be prepared. The
decision of the Commissioner(s) shall be binding on all parties.
A. Responsibility of Township.
(1) The police may choose to enter into an agreement with an online
entity which operates an electronic inventory tracking system for
law enforcement agencies for the purpose of identifying stolen
merchandise and tracking persons associated with the transaction.
(2) The online entity chosen by the police to administer the electronic
inventory tracking system shall insure that all data remains secure
and confidential by providing each pawnbroker, junk dealer,
antique or secondhand dealer with login security protocols which
meet current industry standards, and shall employ state-of-the-art
technology to designed to protect the data from all known forms of
unauthorized access and malicious intrusion.
B. Responsibility of pawnbroker, junk dealer, antique or secondhand
dealer.
(1) All pawnbrokers, junk dealers, antique or secondhand dealers shall
maintain an electronic inventory tracking system which is capable
of securely and confidentially uploading a record of all transactions
via computer to the online entity designated by the police pursuant
to Subsection A herein.
(2) No later than 24 hours after the completion of a transaction, every
pawnbroker, junk dealer, antique or secondhand dealer shall
upload, in the manner specified by the police, the required tracking
information for each transaction. This section shall apply
regardless of whether the twenty-four-hour time limit falls on a
business day, a weekend day, or a national or religious holiday. It
shall not be a defense that a pawnbroker, junk dealer, antique or
secondhand dealer did not comply with this section because the
day following the transaction was not a business day.
C. Transactions involving a trade-in allowance on goods or items originally
sold by the pawnbroker, junk dealer and antique or secondhand dealer
to the person seeking such trade-in or allowance, a trade-in on a like
item or dealer-to-dealer, are exempt from the reporting requirements.
D. In addition, pawnbrokers, junk dealers and antique or secondhand
dealers shall file such additional reports as may from time to time be
required by the Township and in such form as the Township may require
from time to time by resolution.
E. Holding period and inspection.
§ 390-6 MANHEIM CODE § 390-7
1:268
§ 390-8. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police may promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary for administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any such
rules and regulations promulgated shall be approved by the Commissioners
and shall be available for public inspection.
§ 390-9. Confidentiality.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and
shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to
persons charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or
the administration and enforcement of the criminal justice system.
§ 390-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-28]
(1) All items shall be kept in unaltered condition, available for
inspection by law enforcement officials in the course of their law
enforcement duties, for 10 working days following a transaction by
a pawnbroker, junk dealer, antique or secondhand dealer or a data
upload as specified in Subsection B(2) above, whichever occurs
last.
(2) No business shall require law enforcement officials to obtain a
search warrant to inspect the item, unless the inspection is made
during hours other than regular business hours.
(3) During the holding period, any item subject to the holding period
shall be segregated from other inventory to ensure that it is not
placed in an area or section where personal property and/or
precious metals are offered for sale. Where any item is held off the
premises, the pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique or secondhand
dealer shall make the item available for inspection within 24 hours
after receiving a request for inspection by law enforcement
officials.
(4) Any law enforcement official who has reason to believe any item
was not sold or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct the
pawnbroker, junk dealer, antique or secondhand dealer to hold the
item for a reasonable length of time as determined by the law
enforcement official as necessary to identify the lawful owner of the
item.
(5) Law enforcement officials may seize any item(s) reported to have
been stolen and may order any business to temporarily retain any
item(s) suspected of being stolen, until further investigation
concludes otherwise.
§ 390-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-10
1:269
§ 390-11. Scope.
This chapter shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances; provided,
however, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons,
premises or personal property than is imposed or required by such existing
provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.94
Chapter 399
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 493.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every
such violation, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $50 nor
more than $600, and costs, and, in default of payment of fine or penalty
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, except that the
minimum fine for violation of § 390-2F, which makes it unlawful for any
pawnbroker, junk dealer or antique dealer to operate his business after
his license has been suspended or revoked, shall be $100 instead of
$50.
B. The payment of any fees required shall not be a bar against prosecution
for any violation under this chapter. Each incident constitutes a
separate offense.
94.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 6-2092, Effective date, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06.
§ 390-10 MANHEIM CODE § 390-11
1:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 399-1. Definitions.
A. Word usage. In the interpretation of this chapter, the singular shall
include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
B. Definitions. All words and phrases not otherwise defined herein shall
have the meanings provided in Section 2 of the Act, 35 P.S. § 750.2,
Section 71.1 of the Department's regulations, 25 Pa. Code § 71.1, or
Section 73.1 of the Department's regulations, 25 Pa. Code § 73.1, or the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
each may be amended or supplemented.
C. Unless the context of this chapter specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms used in this chapter shall mean:
ABSORPTION AREA EASEMENT — A portion of a lot, tract or parcel
that encompasses the primary area and replacement location and which
shall be delineated and preserved. The primary area and replacement
location need not be contiguous.
ACT — The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966,
P.L. 1535, No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 through 750.20.
ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous
substance, waterborne waste or form of energy ejected or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from
the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as
distinct from sewage, which is permitted to be discharged into the
sewer system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
AUTHORITIES ACT — The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, Act of
May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), as amended, and as supplemented,
modified or restated by Act of June 19, 2001 (P.L. 287, No. 2001-02), as
amended.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Township Engineer, a certified Sewage
Enforcement Officer (SEO), professional engineer or sanitarian,
plumbing inspector, soils scientist, water quality coordinator, qualified
professional engineer, qualified professional geologist, qualified soil
scientist, Township Code Enforcement Official, City of Lancaster
official, LASA official or any other person who is designated to carry
out the provisions of this chapter as the agent of the Township, City of
Lancaster or LASA.
BOARD — Board of Commissioners of the Township of Manheim,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and any authorized agent or employee
designated by it to act on its behalf or on behalf of the Township.
CITY OF LANCASTER — The City of Lancaster, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 399-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-1
1:271
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394, as
amended, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 through 691.1001.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature from two or more lots, and the treatment and/or disposal
of the sewage or industrial waste on one or more of the lots or at any
other site and which shall comply with all applicable regulations of
the Department. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sewage collection,
transmission and treatment systems of the City of Lancaster or LASA
shall not be considered community sewage systems for the purposes of
this chapter.
DEPARTMENT/DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any successor agency.
DEVELOPER — Any owner, agent of such owner or tenant with the
permission of such owner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development, or other activities covered
by this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space, and public facilities.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the Township
upon which is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which sewage shall or may be discharged.
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (OLDS) — Any
system of piping, tanks, or other facilities serving on a single lot and
collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil and
any waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and which is located
upon the lot which it serves. The term also includes an OLDS which
meets the definition of "nonstandard system."
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance,
waterborne wastes or form of energy ejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources as distinct
from sewage.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
The improvements of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1)
§ 399-1 MANHEIM CODE § 399-1
1:272
LASA — The Lancaster Area Sewer Authority, a municipal authority
organized and existing under the Authorities Act.
LOT — A parcel of land used or intended to be used as a building site or
a separate parcel to be created as a result of approval of a subdivision
or land development application or a condominium unit. The term "lot"
shall include parcels equal to or greater than 10 acres in size where the
lot may be occupied by one or more persons or families.
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an OLDS or
community sewage system discharges sewage onto the surface of the
ground, into groundwater of the commonwealth, into surface waters of
the commonwealth, backs up into the building connected to the OLDS
or community sewage system or otherwise causes a nuisance hazard
to the public health or pollution of groundwater or surface water or
contamination of public or private drinking water wells. An OLDS or
community sewage system shall be considered to be malfunctioning if
any of the conditions set forth in this definition occur for any length of
time during any period of the year.
NONSTANDARD SYSTEM — An OLDS which has a denitrification unit
or any other equipment which is not commonly found on OLDS within
Lancaster County or an OLDS which has been modified to address
groundwater contamination or other environmental issues or any OLDS
which requires additional approvals from the Department or a
modification or amendment to the Township's Official Plan.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Each single dwelling unit, household unit,
condominium, flat or apartment unit, store, shop, office, business,
commercial or industrial unit or family unit contained within any
structure erected and intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage is or may be discharged.
OFFICIAL PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the provision of adequate
sewage disposal systems adopted by the Township and approved by the
Department in accordance with the Act and with applicable Department
regulations.
OLDS — An individual on-lot sewage disposal system.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 399-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-1
1:273
OWNER — Any person vested with an ownership interest, legal or
equitable, sole or partial, in any property located in this Township.
PERMIT — A permit issued by the SEO after the performance of tests
to determine suitability to authorize the initial installation of an OLDS
or the repair, replacement or enlargement of an existing OLDS.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department,
board, bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision,
municipality, district authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or
imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include the
members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of any
local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to
the Township Official Plan submitted in connection with the request
for approval of a subdivision or land development in accordance with
Department regulations.
PRIMARY AREA — An area on a lot, tract or parcel of land that has
been tested by the SEO and found suitable, based upon the thencurrent
DEP site requirements, for the installation of an OLDS and
which will be preserved and protected from alteration for installation of
the initial OLDS for sewage generated on that lot, tract, or parcel. (See
"replacement location.")
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING UNIT — Any structure intended to
be occupied as a whole by one family, an apartment intended to be
occupied by one family, or any other one-family living unit containing
plumbing for kitchen or toilet facilities.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Any improved
property which adjoins, abuts or is adjacent to the sewer system or
as may be further defined under rules and regulations adopted by the
Board pursuant to Article II, § 399-12. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
property accessible to the sewer system shall mean, as to a private
dwelling or living unit, all improved residential property where the
residence thereon is within 150 feet of a sewer as measured from the
nearest portion (part) of the residence in a straight line to the center
line of the sewer, provided that this modification shall apply solely to
private dwelling or living units and to no other improved property,
all other improved property being determined to be accessible to the
sewer system as provided by the first sentence of this section.
PUMPER/HAULER BUSINESS — Any sole proprietor, company,
partnership or corporation which is licensed by the Department and/or
other governmental agency to engage in cleaning any or all components
of a community or individual on-lot system, retaining tanks, privies,
aerobic tanks, cesspools, or any other sewage disposal facility within
§ 399-1 MANHEIM CODE § 399-1
1:274
the Township and evacuate and transport the septage cleaned
therefrom, whether for a fee or free of charge.
PUMPER'S REPORT/RECEIPT — A form, provided by the Township,
which shall be used by all pumper/hauler truck operators to report
every pumping of an on-lot system in the Township.
REGULATIONS — The Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapters 71, 72 and
73, as may be amended and supplemented.
REPLACEMENT LOCATION — A location designated as the future
location of an OLDS that shall be installed should the OLDS installed
or to be installed fail or otherwise become inoperable and which shall
meet all requirements of the regulations of the Department and all
applicable Township ordinances for an OLDS.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and
retains sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate
disposal of the sewage at another site. The term includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
SEPTAGE — The residual scum, sludge and other materials pumped
from septic or aerobic treatment tanks and the systems they serve.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrements or other discharge from the bodies of human beings
or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes
pollution under the Clean Streams Law.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The Sewage
Enforcement Officer of the Township.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A permanent or portable nonflushing toilet
using chemical treatment in the retaining tank for odor control.
(1)
HOLDING TANK — A tank, whether permanent or temporary, to
which sewage is conveyed by a sewer system having no discharge
point, requiring pump out and disposal of waste at another site.
(2)
PRIVY — A tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure is not available.
(3)
INCINERATING TOILET — A device capable of reducing waste
materials to ashes.
(4)
COMPOSTING TOILET — A device for holding and processing
human and organic kitchen waste, employing the process of
biological degradation through the action of microorganisms to
produce a stable, humus-like material.
(5)
RECYCLING TOILET — A device in which the flushing medium is
restored to a condition suitable for reuse in flushing.
(6)
§ 399-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-1
1:275
§ 399-2. Appointment of agent.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The plants and facilities owned by
the City of Lancaster and the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority for the
treatment and disposition of sewage and allowable industrial waste, as
well as any other sewage treatment plant which may, in the future,
be used for the treatment and disposition of sewage and allowable
industrial waste from the sewer system serving the Township.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system
used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer mains, lateral sewers from the main
to the point of service connections, sewage ejector and/or pumping
stations, force mains, sewage treatment plant, and all appurtenances
thereto which are owned and/or operated by the Township, City of
Lancaster and/or LASA for the collection and disposal of sewage and
allowable industrial waste within this Township.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one
or more persons, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of
any abutting or adjoining lot.
SOIL ABSORPTION SYSTEM — An on-lot system that uses the
renovative capacity of the soil for treatment. All SEO permitted
systems, except retention tank systems, are soil absorption systems.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
A. The City of Lancaster is hereby designated and appointed as an
authorized agent of the Township for the purpose of receiving, treating,
and disposing of sewage and allowable industrial waste to be collected
by the sewer system which is transported to any sewage treatment
plant owned or operated by the City of Lancaster and to promulgate
rules and regulations which are reasonably necessary in connection
with the function of the City of Lancaster as the receiving authorized
agent of sewage from the Township and for receiving all applications
for permits required under the provisions of this chapter, designating
place of connection, establishing rules and regulations on the materials
and construction of the sewer system, private sewer system, service
line, house connection, lateral sewer, and service connection, and
carrying out all inspections, observations, measurements, samplings
and testing required or permitted hereunder.
§ 399-1 MANHEIM CODE § 399-2
1:276
§ 399-3. Incorporation of City of Lancaster/LASA standards.
§ 399-4. Fees.
The Board may, by resolution, establish a fee schedule and collect fees to
cover the Township's actual costs of administering this chapter.
§ 399-5. Establishing manner of fee collection by Sewage
Enforcement Officer (SEO); method of compensation.
B. LASA is hereby designated and appointed as an authorized agent of the
Township for the purpose of receiving, treating, and disposing of
sewage and allowable industrial waste to be collected by the sewer
system which is transported to any sewage treatment plant owned or
operated by the LASA and to promulgate rules and regulations which
are reasonably necessary in connection with the function of the LASA as
the receiving authorized agent of sewage from the Township and for
receiving all applications for permits required under the provisions of
this chapter, designating place of connection, establishing rules and
regulations on the materials and construction of the sewer system,
private sewer system, service line, house connection, lateral sewer, and
service connection, and carrying out all inspections, observations,
measurements, samplings and testing required or permitted hereunder.
A. With respect to that portion of the sewer system which transports
sewage and allowable industrial waste for treatment by the sewage
treatment plant of the City of Lancaster, the Township specifically and
expressly incorporates by reference, in its entirety, the Code of the City
of Lancaster, Chapter 249, Sewers, as such rules and regulations are
currently in effect and as the same may be amended from time to time.
B. With respect to that portion of the sewer system which transports
sewage and allowable industrial waste for treatment by the sewage
treatment plant of LASA, the Township specifically and expressly
incorporates by reference, in their entirety, the rules and regulations of
the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority, as such rules and regulations are
currently in effect and as the same may be amended from time to time.
A. Utilizing invoices provided by the Township, the SEO shall invoice and
collect all fees charged in connection with the work performed by the
SEO. The SEO shall forward a copy of the invoice along with all
collected fees to the Township.
B. The SEO shall deliver a written statement of all work performed by the
SEO, specifically describing the work performed, stating the dates on
which the work was performed, stating the address and location of the
lot where the work was performed, and identifying the person for whom
the work was performed.
§ 399-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-5
1:277
§ 399-6. Penalties applicable to Article II, §§ 399-9 through 399-14.
Any person who violates any provision contained in Article II, §§ 399-9
through 399-14 shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $600 plus all costs
of prosecution, which fines and penalties may be collected by suit brought
in the name of the Township before any Magisterial District Judge, in like
manner as debts of like amount may be sued for by existing laws. Each day
that a violation continues and each section of this article which is violated
constitutes a separate violation. Each occupied building shall constitute
a separate and distinct unit under the provisions of Article II, §§ 399-9
through 399-14, and the owners of occupied buildings consisting of multiple
units contained in the same structure who violate any of the provisions of
Article II, §§ 399-9 through 399-14 shall be subject to the aforesaid fine
for each of such occupied buildings or units which is in violation of the
provisions of Article II, §§ 399-9 through 399-14.
§ 399-7. Penalties applicable to Article II, §§ 399-15 through
399-17.
Any person who violates any provision contained in Article II, §§ 399-15
through 399-17, and Article III, § 399-29 shall be punishable by a maximum
fine of $1,000 plus all costs of prosecution, which fines and penalties
may be collected by suit brought in the name of the Township before any
Magisterial District Judge, in like manner as debts of like amount may be
sued for by existing laws. Each day that a violation continues and each
section of this article which is violated constitutes a separate violation.
§ 399-8. Penalties applicable to Article III of this chapter.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of Article
III; or who shall use, maintain or alter an OLDS or community sewage
system in violation of any permit issued by the Sewage Enforcement Officer;
or who shall fail to remedy or who shall negligently or improperly remedy
any health hazard; or who shall fail to completely implement a plan to
remedy a health hazard which has been reviewed and approved by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer shall be punishable by a maximum fine of
$1,000 plus all costs of prosecution, which fines and penalties may be
collected by suit brought in the name of the Township before any
Magisterial District Judge, in like manner as debts of like amount may be
sued for by existing laws. Each day that a violation continues and each
section of this article which is violated constitutes a separate violation.
C. Upon receipt of the SEO's written statement, the Township shall
compensate the SEO for the work performed in accordance with the
terms of compensation agreed upon by the Township and SEO.
§ 399-5 MANHEIM CODE § 399-8
1:278
ARTICLE II
Sewer System Connections
§ 399-9. Notice of availability of sewer system for use.
Whenever the sewer system or any usable portion thereof is completed and
ready for public use, the Township shall cause written notice of that fact to
be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township,
which notice shall state that the sewer system, or portion thereof, shall be
used by all persons owning occupied buildings on property accessible to
the sewer system and that all such persons shall make connection with the
sewer system within 180 days, subject to the payment of any permit and
inspection fees in the amounts as may, from time to time, be fixed by either
the Township, City or LASA.
§ 399-10. Connection of occupied buildings.
§ 399-11. Abatement of nuisances.
Any person who permits sewage to discharge into the ground or who
erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool, sinkhole or septic
tank on any property accessible to the sewer system, or otherwise erects,
constructs, uses or maintains any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for
the discharge of sewage in violation of any provision of Article I and Article
II, §§ 399-9 through 399-18, shall be deemed to be erecting, constructing
and maintaining a nuisance, and the Township is hereby authorized and
directed to take such action as is necessary to abate any such nuisance in
the manner provided by law.
§ 399-12. Manner of making connections.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system, except in compliance
with the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as may, from time to
time, be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by the Township, City
or LASA.
§ 399-13. Effect of failure to connect within time limit.
If any owner of an occupied building on property accessible to the sewer
system fails to connect such property with the sewer system as required by
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
which is now or hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall,
at their own expense, connect that building with the sewer system
within 180 days after the date of publication of the notice provided for
in Article II, § 399-9.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of that building and at their own expense, connect the same
with the sewer system.
§ 399-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-13
1:279
Article II, § 399-10, after the expiration of the periods of time specified in
Article II, § 399-10, the Township shall cause a copy of Article II, §§ 399-9
through 399-18, and a written or printed notice requiring such connection
to be made to be served upon the owner of that property and upon any
persons occupying that property, which notice shall require compliance by
the making or connection with the sewer system within 60 days from the
date thereof.
§ 399-14. Certain receptacles prohibited; unlawful discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the
sewer system to erect, construct, use, maintain or cause to be erected,
constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank
or other receptacle on such premises or otherwise for receiving sewage
after receipt of the notice specified in Article II, § 399-10, or otherwise at
any time to erect, construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or
other facility for the discharge of sewage into the gutters of the Township,
the storm sewers of the Township or upon public or private property or
otherwise, except into the sewer system.
§ 399-15. Work of incompetent plumbers not to be connected to
sewer system.
Any plumber or other person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of Article I and Article II, §§ 399-9 through 399-18 shall not be
deemed competent to perform any work which is intended to be connected
with the sewer system, and no work performed by any such plumber or
other person shall be connected with the sewer system.
§ 399-16. Installation of devices discharging into sewer system.
§ 399-17. Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or permit to be discharged
any substance other than sewage or allowable industrial waste into the
sewer system.
§ 399-18. Right of entry for inspections.
A. It shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person to install or permit
to be installed any device or system designed to discharge any
substance other than sewage or allowable industrial waste into the
sewer system.
B. Without limiting the foregoing, it shall be unlawful for any plumber or
other person to install a sump pump, gutter, downspout, or other device
to conduct stream water, stormwater, roof water, groundwater or
surface water into the sewer system.
A. The owner or possessor of property connected or about to be connected
or required to be connected to the sewer system shall permit the
§ 399-13 MANHEIM CODE § 399-18
1:280
authorized agent or employees of the Board, Township, City of
Lancaster or LASA, bearing proper credentials and identification, at
all reasonable times, the right of access to any part of the property
connected or about to be connected or required to be connected to the
sewer system for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of Articles I and
II.
B. The owner or possessor of property on which, or in which is located, any
private sewer system connected or about to be connected or required to
be connected to the sewer system shall permit the authorized agent or
employees of the Board, Township, City of Lancaster or LASA, bearing
proper credentials and identification, at all reasonable times, the right
of access to any part of the property connected or about to be
connected or required to be connected to the sewer system for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 399-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-18
1:281

ARTICLE III
Individual and Community On-Lot Sewage Systems
§ 399-19. (Reserved)
§ 399-20. Legislative intent.
A. In accordance with municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law, and the
Act, it is the duty of the Township to provide for adequate sewage
treatment facilities and for the protection of the public by preventing
the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage. The Official
sewage Facilities Plan for Manheim Township indicates that it is
necessary to formulate and implement a sewage management program
to effectively prevent and abate water pollution and hazards to the
public health caused by improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
B. Further, the Board recognizes that OLDS constitute a valid and
approved manner of conserving the quality of the water and other
natural resources of the Township through proper treatment of wastes
generated by development within the Township. The use of OLDS must
be regulated in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the
Department of Environmental Protection which pertain to the location
and permitted types of on-lot sewage disposal systems. In addition, the
Township has determined that should the on-lot sewage disposal system
installed by an owner fail, the water quality and other natural resources
of the Township may be polluted.
C. It is especially of concern to the Board that such pollution may occur
when a system fails and there is no suitable area on the lot for the
installation of a replacement system. Therefore, in order to protect the
water quality and other natural resources of the Township, thereby
protecting the health and welfare of residents and visitors, the Board
desires to require that all owners provide and set aside areas for the
installation of replacement OLDS.
D. It is the further intent of the Board to insure that on-lot sewage disposal
systems are properly maintained. Failure to maintain on-lot sewage
disposal systems results in malfunctions which, in turn, result in the
pollution of the water quality and other natural resources of the
Township. OLDS should be pumped out on a regular basis, and it is the
responsibility of all owners to insure such maintenance is performed.
E. The Board also desires to provide for the proper maintenance of any
community sewage systems which have been installed in the Township.
Proper maintenance of community sewage systems is essential to
preserve and protect the health and welfare of Township residents and
to preserve and protect the environment.
F. The Board, being authorized and empowered to do so, hereby confirms
assumption by the Township of responsibility for and control of the
§ 399-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-20
1:283
§ 399-21. Adoption of standards by reference.
The regulations are hereby adopted as the sewage permit application and
installation procedure of the Township, and each and all of the regulations
are hereby adopted by the Township, except as modified by this chapter. It is
the intent of the Board to adopt all subsequent amendments and revisions to
the regulations as permitted by law and in accordance with the provisions of
1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937(a). If such intent is found invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, it is the intent of the Board to adopt the regulations as they
existed on the effective date of this chapter.
§ 399-22. Sewage testing and hydrogeologic studies required for all
proposed lots.
§ 399-23. Replacement location required.
After the effective date of this chapter, a replacement location for an OLDS
shall be required for all lots or lots to be created which are not serviced or
to be serviced by a community sewage system operated by a governmental
entity or for which a valid permit for an OLDS has not been issued. The
replacement location shall comply with the Act and with all regulations
issued by the Department as incorporated into this chapter concerning
methods of retaining tank sewage and septage disposal, collection and
transportation.
A. No requests for approvals of planning modules for land development
and no revisions or supplements to the Official Plan shall be granted
unless the applicant presents to the Board evidence that each lot or lot
to be created contains a suitable location for the installation of an initial
OLDS, except when such lots or lots to be created are to be served by a
community sewage system. All tests required by the Department and
this chapter for the location of an OLDS to confirm the suitability of the
location shall be performed as approved by the Department.
B. All planning modules for land development, except planning modules
for land development which propose sewer service by means of the
LASA or City of Lancaster sewer systems, shall be accompanied by
hydrogeologic tests performed in accordance with all applicable
Department regulations. The Board shall not approve any planning
module for land development which does not contain hydrogeologic
studies which demonstrate that the proposed sewage disposal facilities
will not adversely affect the groundwater or that measures will be
utilized, such as the installation of denitrification systems or dispersion
plume easements, which will address the impacts of the proposed
sewage disposal facilities.
C. Well test results submitted with planning modules will be compared
with the Official Plan well test data. If the results vary from the Official
Plan well test data, the Township may require additional testing to
verify any discrepancies.
§ 399-20 MANHEIM CODE § 399-23
1:284
OLDS, including isolation distances, and with the terms of this chapter and
any other applicable Township ordinances.
§ 399-24. Identification of replacement location.
A. Each person who shall apply for a permit under Chapter 510, Zoning,95
of the Code of the Township of Manheim or a permit for an OLDS (other
than a permit for a repair to or modification of an existing OLDS) or who
shall request approval of a planning module for land development or the
adoption of a revision or supplement to the Official Plan or who shall file
an application for subdivision or land development approval which
proposes sewage disposal by means of OLDS shall demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Sewage Enforcement Officer, that a suitable area
exists on the lot or on each lot to be created for an initial OLDS and for
the replacement location. In lieu of demonstrating suitable area on the
lot or on each lot to be created, the Township may approve an initial
OLDS and/or replacement OLDS located on an adjacent tract,
encumbered perpetually in the chain of title with an easement to allow
said OLDS, the easement of form and content approved by the Township
Solicitor and duly recorded at the Recorder of Deeds' office in and for
Lancaster County. All tests required by the Department and this
chapter for the location of an OLDS to confirm the suitability of the
replacement location shall be performed as approved by the
Department. Allowance of open land for the replacement location
without testing performed or observed by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer shall not constitute compliance with the requirements of this
section.
B. The developer shall identify the location of the initial OLDS and the
replacement location as confirmed by the Sewage Enforcement Officer
on the plot plans and diagrams submitted as a part of the subdivision or
land development plan and as part of the permit application.
C. If the application has been submitted as a part of an application for
approval or review of a planning module for land development, the
developer shall identify the location of each OLDS and each
replacement location upon the plans. If the application is for
subdivision or land development approval, the developer shall include a
note on the plans stating that:
(1) No improvements, whether permanent or temporary, shall be
constructed upon or within the absorption area easement.
(2) No permanent or temporary alterations, grading, excavation,
stockpiling of any soil or any other material shall take place on or in
the absorption area easement.
(3) During any construction or other activities, the absorption area
easement shall be so marked to prevent equipment with greater
95.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 399-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-24
1:285
§ 399-25. Relief from requirement of designation of replacement
location.
wheel loadings than a common garden tractor/riding mower from
traveling over or operating upon the surface of the absorption area
easement.
D. Any revisions to a permit affecting a replacement location which
previously has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be approved by the Board or its authorized agent. Any revisions to
a subdivision or land development plan affecting a replacement location
which has been previously approved pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be resubmitted to the Township for review and approval.
E. An owner wishing to alter the use of the replacement location must first
document, through a site evaluation by the SEO, that an additional area
suitable for the installation of an on-lot system exists, and upon such a
finding shall:
(1) Prepare and submit to the Township for approval a declaration of
easement, which shall:
(a) Meet the identification, nonuse and preservation requirements
of this section;
(b) Describe, by metes and bounds, the easement area to be
abandoned.
(2) Within 15 days of the approval by the Township, record the
declaration of easement at the County Recorder of Deeds' office.
(3) File a copy of the recorded easement with the Township.
A. If any lot held in single and separate ownership as of the effective date
of this chapter shall not contain land suitable for a replacement
location, the applicant for a permit under Chapter 510, Zoning,96 or an
installation permit for an OLDS may request that the Township grant an
exception to the requirement of providing a replacement location.
Applicants for relief under this section shall submit a written
application setting forth the information required by this section and
shall include the application fee established by resolution or ordinance
of the Board. The applicant for such an exception shall present credible
evidence to the Township demonstrating:
(1) That the lot was held in single and separate ownership on the
effective date of this chapter;
(2) The size of the lot;
96.Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 399-24 MANHEIM CODE § 399-25
1:286
§ 399-26. Permit required for all lots.
The owner and any contractor performing work upon an OLDS shall obtain
a permit from the SEO in accordance with the Act, the regulations of
the Department, and this chapter prior to the installation, alteration,
modification, repair or replacement of any OLDS. This requirement shall
apply to all lots within the Township, regardless of the size of the lot
and regardless of the familial relationship of the person seeking to install
the OLDS to the property owner. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall
not issue a permit for an OLDS until a suitable replacement location has
been established or until the applicant presents the Sewage Enforcement
Officer with a written determination by the Township granting relief from
the designation of a replacement location in accordance with § 399-25 of
this chapter or unless such permit is requested to repair a malfunction of an
existing OLDS. All permit applications shall demonstrate compliance with
the following:
(3) Inability of the applicant to acquire adjacent land or the
unsuitability of adjacent land which might be able to be acquired;
and
(4) The testing conducted to determine that the lot is not suitable to
provide a replacement location.
B. At all times, the burden to present credible evidence and the burden of
persuasion shall be upon the applicant for an exception from the terms
of this chapter.
A. Building and zoning permits shall not be issued for any building or
improvement to real property to be serviced by an on-lot system prior to
receiving a permit for the installation or repair of the on-lot system from
the SEO. Septic systems must be sized appropriately and in a state of
good repair prior to issuance of a building permit for proposed building
additions and renovations. If there are no repairs to an existing OLDS,
the Township's SEO is required to notify the Township.
B. In general, all system components, including absorption areas, must be
located on the same lot, tract, or parcel as the structure they will serve.
Systems or components may be located on a separately deeded parcel,
regardless of the parcel's ownership, or through means of an easement,
right-of-way or other instrument, with the approval of the Board,
provided that the separate parcel is encumbered by an easement
providing for such use in perpetuity. Said easement is subject to the
review of the Township Solicitor.
C. All planning modules proposing individual or community sewage
systems which require a DEP permit shall include a provision granting
the Township and its agents the right to enter the premises to inspect
the construction and/or operation of the DEP-permitted system and, if
the system is not being constructed or operated according to the
permitted design, issue a stop-work order or revoke the occupancy
§ 399-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-26
1:287
§ 399-27. Permit requirements and procedures.
All owners, developers and contractors who desire to install, repair, modify
or alter an OLDS in the Township shall obtain a permit from the Sewage
Enforcement Officer prior to the commencement of such work. All work
performed under any permit shall comply with the following regulations:
§ 399-28. Permit requirements for nonstandard OLDS.
All owners, developers and contractors who desire to install a nonstandard
OLDS, including but not limited to a denitrification system, in addition to
all other requirements of this chapter, shall also meet all of the following
requirements:
permit until construction or operation is brought into compliance with
the permit.
D. No on-lot system shall be altered, extended, augmented, modified or
repaired without the issuance of a repair permit by the SEO.
E. No on-lot system shall be used or loaded in a manner which is
inconsistent with the permit that was issued to authorize that system's
installation.
F. Permit applications for on-lot systems which include electronic,
mechanical, or other methods to treat sewage, other than a standard
septic system, must provide the Township with the manufacturer's
recommended maintenance schedule and product specifications.
A. The holder of a permit and the contractor performing work under such
permit shall notify the Sewage Enforcement Officer at least three
working days before commencing installation, repair, modification or
alteration of the OLDS in order that one or more inspections in addition
to the final inspection required by the Department may be scheduled
and performed by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
B. If construction or installation of the OLDS and of any building or
structure for which such OLDS is to be installed has not commenced
within three years after the issuance of the permit for such OLDS, the
permit shall expire. The owner and/or contractor shall obtain a new
permit prior to commencement of the installation, repair, modification,
replacement or alteration of the OLDS.
A. The owner of the lot on which such system is to be installed and, if
different, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the
Township, in recordable form, providing for the long-term maintenance
of the system which grants the Township the right to enter upon the
property; to inspect such system not less than once each year and, in
addition, whenever the Township receives a complaint or otherwise has
reason to believe that such system is not functioning properly; to
maintain such system if the owner fails to do so; and to recover the cost
of any maintenance performed, plus a penalty, from the owner. The
§ 399-26 MANHEIM CODE § 399-28
1:288
§ 399-29. Permit requirements for community sewage systems.
All owners, developers and contractors who desire to install a community
sewage system shall meet all of the following requirements:
agreement shall specifically authorize the Township to file a municipal
claim against the property to recover all costs and fees and shall
specifically state that its provisions are binding upon the owner
executing the agreement and upon all successive owners of the
property until the system is removed and the property is connected to
a public sewer system owned and operated by a governmental entity.
B. The applicant shall post financial security with the Township to secure
the future maintenance of the system and payment of costs of annual
inspection of such system. The amount of the financial security shall be
based upon the estimated cost to maintain the particular nonstandard
system chosen by the applicant. The financial security shall be posted
through a self-renewing irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable
to the Township Solicitor or in a cash escrow which the Township shall
maintain in a non-interest-bearing account. The Township shall not
release such financial security until the Township is provided with
alternate financial security or until the system is removed and the
property is connected to a public sewer system owned and operated by
a governmental entity.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township that the proposed
nonstandard system meets all applicable Department regulations and
that the applicant has obtained all necessary approvals and permits.
D. The applicant shall provide the Township with a complete set of record
plans for the nonstandard system after its installation.
E. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for all costs incurred in the
preparation of the agreement and its recording.
F. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the yearly inspection of
the nonstandard system.
A. The owner of the lot on which the community sewage system is to be
installed and, if different, the applicant shall enter into an agreement
with the Township, in recordable form, providing for the long-term
maintenance of the community sewage system which grants the
Township the right to enter upon the property; to inspect such
community sewage system not less than once each year and, in
addition, whenever the Township receives a complaint or otherwise has
reason to believe that such community sewage system is not
functioning properly; to maintain such community sewage system if the
owner fails to do so; and to recover the cost of any maintenance
performed, plus a penalty, from the owner. The agreement shall
specifically authorize the Township to file a municipal claim against the
property served by the community sewage system to recover costs and
§ 399-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-29
1:289
§ 399-30. Use of holding tanks.
fees and shall specifically state that its provisions are binding upon
the owner executing the agreement and upon all successive owners of
the property and any lots which are served by the community sewage
system until the community sewage system is removed and the property
is connected to a public sewer system owned and operated by a
governmental entity or until LASA or another governmental entity
assumes ownership and maintenance responsibility for the community
sewage system.
B. The applicant shall post financial security with the Township to secure
the future maintenance of the community sewage system and payment
of costs of annual inspection of such system. The amount of the
financial security shall be based upon the estimated cost to maintain
the particular community sewage system chosen by the applicant. The
financial security shall be posted through an irrevocable letter of credit
in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor or in a cash escrow which
the Township shall maintain in a non-interest-bearing account. The
Township shall not release such financial security until the Township is
provided with alternate financial security or until the community
sewage system is removed and the property is connected to a public
sewer system owned and operated by a governmental entity or until
LASA or another governmental entity assumes ownership and
maintenance responsibility for the community sewage system.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township that the proposed
community sewage system meets all applicable Department regulations
and that the applicant has obtained all necessary approvals and
permits.
D. The applicant shall provide the Township with a complete set of record
plans for the community sewage system after its installation.
E. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for all costs incurred in the
preparation of the agreement and its recording.
F. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the yearly inspection of
the community sewage system.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage or septage from any
improved property utilizing a Holding Tank shall be done solely by or
under the direction and control of the Township, and disposal of sewage
or septage shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved
by the Department. The owner shall furnish a written contract to the
Township entered into between the owner and a pumper/hauler
business, noncancelable in form, whereby the pumper/hauler business
agrees to receive and dispose of the sewage or septage at a site or sites
acceptable to the Township and DEP and not to cancel or terminate the
contract for any reason except upon 120 days' written notice to the
owner with a copy of such notice going to the Township.
§ 399-29 MANHEIM CODE § 399-30
1:290
§ 399-31. Proper operation and maintenance of OLDS.
All persons who own a lot upon which an OLDS is installed and all persons
who occupy a lot on which an OLDS is installed shall properly use and
maintain such OLDS. Proper maintenance of an OLDS shall include, at a
minimum:
B. The owner of an improved property that utilizes a Holding Tank shall:
(1) Obtain a permit from the Sewage Enforcement Officer in
accordance with this chapter.
(2) Execute and deliver a Holding Tank maintenance agreement97 to
the Township in the form approved by the Township;
(3) Maintain the Holding Tank in accordance with this chapter and all
other applicable ordinances of the Township, the provisions of all
applicable laws, and the rules and regulations of the Township and
all administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
and
(4) Permit only a pumper/hauler business under contract with the
improved property owner to collect, transport, and dispose of the
contents of the Holding Tank.
A. Following any operation and maintenance recommendations of the
manufacturer of the OLDS. If the OLDS is a nonstandard system,
additionally following the operation and maintenance recommendations
of the manufacturer of the denitrification unit or other nonstandard
equipment which is part of the OLDS.
B. The owner of a property upon which an on-lot system is constructed
shall at all times operate and maintain the on-lot system in such
condition as will permit it to function in the manner in which it was
designed and to prevent the unlawful discharge of sewage.
C. The owner of a property upon which an on-lot system is constructed
shall maintain the area around such system so as to provide convenient
access for inspection, maintenance and pumping and divert surface
water and downspouts away from the absorption area and system
components and protect the absorption area(s) from physical damage.
D. In the event an owner detects conditions that indicate or could
reasonably be interpreted to indicate a malfunction, the owner shall
contact the SEO and, if repair or replacement is necessary, apply for a
permit to repair or replace the malfunctioning system.
(1) Owners who disclose to the SEO the presence of a malfunction
upon their lands shall not be penalized for the disclosure.
97.Editor's Note: The holding tank maintenance agreement is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 399-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-31
1:291
(2) If an owner who has disclosed the presence of a malfunction fails to
make voluntary repairs, the Township may seek injunctive or other
relief to compel the repair of the malfunction or cause the repair to
be effectuated.
E. Every aerobic or septic treatment tank which discharges effluent to a
soil absorption area or to an individual residential spray irrigation
system shall be pumped out according to the schedule established in
this chapter. If a component's manufacturer requires a more frequent
pumping interval than contained in this chapter, that interval shall be
deemed the minimum interval for pumping.
F. When an on-lot system's treatment tank is pumped out, all dosing tanks,
lift tanks and other tanks associated with the system shall also be
pumped out.
G. Retaining tanks shall be pumped out at such intervals as will prevent
overflow, leakage, backup, other malfunction, or a public health hazard
or nuisance, but no less frequently than 12 times per year or at
sufficient intervals to ensure the tank does not reach 75% capacity.
Proof of pump out of Holding Tanks shall be supplied to the Township.
H. Upon completion of each required pumping, the pumper/hauler
business shall:
(1) Complete a pumper report that substantially conforms to the
Township's standard pumper report form;
(2) Deliver the original pumper report to the owner;
(3) Deliver a copy of the pumper report to the Township by the 10th
business day of the month following the month of inspection and/or
pumping;
(4) The pumper report shall be signed by the pumper and contain the
information as shown on the Township's standard pumper report
form.
I. In addition to the requirements for initial tank pumping, periodic tank
pumping shall include an inspection of and a pumper report to the
Township on forms provided by the Township regarding the presence of
any or all of the following:
(1) Defective tank components (lids, baffles, dividers, etc.);
(2) Before pumping, water level above outlet pipe elevation;
(3) Following or during pumping, backflow from the absorption area;
(4) Inflow from building(s) served to verify connection to the
building(s);
(5) Surface discharge, ponding or other signs of malfunction in the
vicinity of the absorption area.
§ 399-31 MANHEIM CODE § 399-31
1:292
J. Persons undertaking the initial inspection of an on-lot system shall have
successfully completed an on-lot wastewater treatment system
inspector program such as those administered by the Pennsylvania
Septage Management Association. The Township may accept verifiable
experience or education as a substitute for the on-lot wastewater
treatment system inspector program.
K. Any person owning a building served by an aerobic treatment tank or
an on-lot system, which includes any electrically, mechanically,
hydraulically or pneumatically operated or controlled devices, shall
follow the maintenance recommendations of the equipment's
manufacturer.
(1) If not on file with the Township, a copy of the manufacturer's
recommendations and owner's manual shall accompany the
pumper's report the first time the system is pumped after the
effective date of this chapter.
(2) Owners of systems with components requiring periodic
maintenance shall submit receipts as proof of maintenance to the
Township documenting maintenance/service was performed at the
intervals called for and in a manner consistent with the various
components' manufacturers.
(3) In no case may the service or pumping intervals exceed those
established in this chapter.
L. The Township, through its SEO, may require additional maintenance
activities, including, but not limited to, cleaning or unclogging of
piping, servicing or repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or
trees, and diversion of surface water away from soil absorption areas.
M. The owner shall provide adequate access to OLDS components to
facilitate inspection and pump outs. This may include installing risers
extending to grade level on the inspection ports and/or manhole portion
of tanks and other components.
N. All water used within a residence, including kitchen and laundry wastes
and water softener backwash, and all sewage shall be discharged into a
treatment tank.
O. The Township may require the on-site pretreatment of effluents prior to
their discharge to any sewage facilities operated or owned by the
Township or any other entity, to assure that the effluent's chemical or
biological constituents are compatible with the renovative methods
employed by the receiving facilities.
P. No sewage system shall discharge untreated or partially treated
sewage to the surface of the ground or into the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, unless a permit to discharge has been
obtained from the DEP.
§ 399-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-31
1:293
§ 399-32. Proper operation and maintenance of community sewage
systems.
All persons who own a lot which is served by a community sewage system
shall properly use such community sewage system. The owner of the
community sewage system shall properly maintain the community sewage
system. Proper maintenance of a community sewage system shall include,
at a minimum:
Q. Discharging only domestic sanitary sewage into an OLDS. Discharge of
waste that is noncompatible with OLDS is prohibited. Noncompatible
waste includes but is not limited to the following:
(1) Industrial waste.
(2) Automobile oil, other nondomestic oil, grease, nonbiodegradable
soaps, detergents and/or inert materials such as coffee grounds.
(3) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners,
herbicides, gasoline and other solvents.
(4) Clean surface water or groundwater, including water from roof or
cellar drains, springs, basement sump pumps, and french drains.
(5) Vehicle wash water and other potentially contaminated or clean
runoff or stormwater.
(6) Disposable products such as diapers, tampons, and similar
materials.
(7) Beauty shop waste other than a single-chair beauty shop in
conjunction with a residential use.
A. Inspection of the community sewage system by the Township SEO or by
a Sewage Enforcement Officer certified by the Department on a
bimonthly basis. Inspection reports shall contain the minimum
information required for OLDS by this chapter. If the inspection is
performed by a Sewage Enforcement Officer other than the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer, the property owner shall submit the
inspection report prepared and signed by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer to the Township within one month after the date of inspection of
the community sewage system. All laboratory analyses required to be
submitted by the Department or the Department's regulations shall also
be submitted simultaneously to the Township to be reviewed, as
appropriate, by the Sewage Enforcement Officer or his designee.
B. Removal of septage or sludge in accordance with Department
regulations and manufacturer specifications.
C. Maintenance of surface contouring and other measures consistent with
the regulations of the Department to divert stormwater away from the
§ 399-31 MANHEIM CODE § 399-32
1:294
§ 399-33. Pumper/hauler business registration.
§ 399-34. Maintenance districts created.
treatment facilities and absorption areas and to protect the absorption
areas from physical damage.
D. Following any operation and maintenance recommendations of the
manufacturer of the community sewage system.
E. Requiring that all users of the community sewage system discharge
only domestic sanitary sewage into the community sewage system. The
owner of the community sewage system shall inform all users of the
community sewage system that the types of waste described in
§ 399-31Q of this chapter shall not be permitted to be discharged.
A. At least seven days before offering pumping and inspection services to
property owners that will enable their compliance with the terms of this
chapter, all pumper/hauler businesses shall:
(1) Register with the Township and comply with all reporting
requirements established herein;
(2) Identify all employees/owners and vehicles that will provide these
services in the Township;
(3) Operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S.
§§ 6018.101 through 6018.1003);
(4) Provide, to the Township, a current fee schedule for all services
required under this chapter;
(5) Provide documentation that all septage pumped from properties in
this Township will be delivered to a DEP-approved site or facility;
(6) Provide the Township with an insurance certificate showing the
hauler has at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and $10,000,000
aggregate of liability insurance;
(7) Document that there is at least one employee/owner who has
completed an on-lot wastewater treatment system inspector
program such as those administered by the Pennsylvania Septage
Management Association. The Township may accept verifiable
experience or education as a substitute for the on-lot wastewater
treatment system inspector program.
B. When there is a change in the personnel/employees or vehicles that
provide services in accordance with this chapter, it shall be the duty
and obligation of the business owner to notify the Township of the
changes within seven days of the effective date of the change.
§ 399-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-34
1:295
A. The Township is hereby divided into three districts, designated as
Districts 1, 2, and 3, as illustrated on the Management District Map of
the Township, as the same may be modified, which is incorporated by
reference.98
B. Every on-lot system in the Township shall be inspected and every tank
associated with every system shall be pumped at least one time within
36 months following the adoption of this chapter.
C. The requirements of this section shall become effective in a sequential
manner:
Area First Pumping and Inspection Shall Be Completed By:
1 12 months following the adoption of this chapter
2 24 months following the adoption of this chapter
3 36 months following the adoption of this chapter
D. After the initial inspection and pumping, all tanks in all systems shall be
pumped out at a minimum regular interval of once every three years
from the year of either the initial pumping or a subsequent pumping.
Tanks that have been subjected to more frequent pumping, by the
nature of their size, loading rate or other system characteristics, should
continue to receive that frequency of pumping. This chapter is not an
instruction to reduce the frequency of pumping and should not be
construed as such. This chapter establishes the minimum pump-out
requirement for all treatment tanks that do not exhibit characteristics
that indicate more frequent pumping is required.
E. Owners may choose to have tanks pumped out more frequently. When
more frequent pump outs are undertaken in a manner consistent with
this chapter, the date of the subsequent regular pump out shall be
deemed to be the last day of the last month three years following the
year of the voluntary pump out.
F. In the event that an owner fails to obtain the required initial inspection
or subsequent tank pump out, the Township's authorized agent shall
have the right to enter upon land for the purposes of conducting
inspections required by this chapter. Prior to entry for inspection, the
Township shall give advance notice either by phone, by mail to the last
known address which appears in the records of the Lancaster County
Tax Assessor's office, or by a written notice posted at the entrance to
the structure or other place where it is likely to be seen by the owner, to
enable the occupant to be personally present or be represented by an
agent at the time of such entry.
G. Any adult occupant of a property at the time a request to enter is made
by an authorized agent may waive their right of advance notice.
98.Editor's Note: The Management District Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 399-34 MANHEIM CODE § 399-34
1:296
§ 399-35. Reporting of malfunctioning OLDS or community sewage
systems.
Any person who owns a lot upon which an OLDS or community sewage
system is installed, any person who occupies a lot upon which an OLDS or
community sewage system is installed, any person who owns a community
sewage system, and any pumper/hauler business pumping out or otherwise
maintaining an OLDS or community sewage system shall report any
malfunctioning of such OLDS or community sewage system to the Township.
Such report shall be made as soon as possible, but in no case later than
three days after discovery of the malfunction.
§ 399-36. Duties of Sewage Enforcement Officer.
In addition to all other duties of the SEO set forth in this chapter, the SEO
shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
to investigate any reports of malfunctioning OLDS and community sewage
systems or evidence that an OLDS or community sewage system may be
malfunctioning which the SEO discovers. In performing these duties, the
Sewage Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers:
§ 399-37. Unlawful acts; violations.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to commit or permit any other person
to commit any of the following acts:
H. In the event that access to inspect the property is denied, the Township
shall proceed according to law to obtain a search warrant and conduct
the inspection established in this chapter.
I. No provision of this chapter shall require notice to be given before
entry, where it can be observed from a public street that an on-lot
system is malfunctioning or being operated improperly.
A. To conduct routine inspections of properties upon which OLDS or
community sewage systems are installed as part of an administrative
program to insure compliance with this chapter. Any inspections shall
be performed in accordance with all applicable statutes and
constitutional provisions.
B. To make reports as requested by the Township regarding maintenance
of OLDS and community sewage systems in the Township and to
suggest actions which may be taken by the Board to insure proper
maintenance.
C. To consult with the Township Engineer and the Township Solicitor, as
authorized by the Township, to assist in the enforcement of this chapter.
A. To install, repair, modify or alter an OLDS or a community sewage
system prior to obtaining a permit or in a manner which violates the
terms and conditions of any permit.
§ 399-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-37
1:297
§ 399-38. Remedies.
In case any improvement is constructed or any lot maintained in violation
of this chapter, or any OLDS or community sewage system is installed,
repaired, altered or modified prior to obtaining a permit as required by
this chapter or in a manner which does not comply with such permit, or
any OLDS or community sewage system is not properly maintained or the
malfunction of any OLDS or community sewage system is not reported
to the Township, in addition to the other remedies provided by law, the
Township may commence any appropriate action or proceedings in equity
to prevent such unlawful construction of improvements or such unlawful
maintenance of such lot or the continued use of such OLDS or community
sewage system.
§ 399-39. Declaration of nuisance.
The following activities are hereby declared to be nuisances:
B. To misuse or fail to maintain an OLDS or a community sewage system.
C. To fail to report a malfunctioning OLDS or community sewage system.
D. To fail to remedy a malfunctioning OLDS or community sewage system.
E. To construct any improvements upon, grade, or take any other action
which will render a replacement location unsuitable for installation of
an OLDS or community sewage system, unless the Sewage
Enforcement Officer has approved an alternate replacement location in
accordance with §§ 399-25 and 399-27 of this chapter.
F. To place false information on or omit relevant information from an
application for a permit.
G. To occupy or permit the occupancy of any structure served by an OLDS
for which a valid permit has not been obtained as required by this
chapter.
H. To occupy or permit the occupancy of any structure served by a
community sewage system for which a valid permit has not been
obtained as required by this chapter.
I. To fail to comply with any other provision of this chapter.
A. Construction of improvements on the replacement location. Such
construction renders the replacement location useless and therefore
jeopardizes the water quality and other natural resources of the
Township. This harm to the water quality and other natural resources of
the Township is a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township and is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
abatable as such in accordance with the provisions of the First Class
Township Code.
§ 399-37 MANHEIM CODE § 399-39
1:298
§ 399-40. Waiver of liability.
Although this chapter is intended to provide guidelines for the installation
and maintenance of OLDS and community sewage systems and the
identification and maintenance of a replacement location for OLDS, nothing
contained herein shall be interpreted as a guarantee or warranty to
applicants or other Township residents that systems installed under the
provisions of this chapter will function as intended. The Township assumes
no responsibility for the location and/or maintenance of OLDS or community
sewage systems within the Township.
§ 399-41. Appeals.
Appeals from any action of the Sewage Enforcement Officer under this
chapter shall be made in writing to the Township within 15 days from the
date of the written determination of the Sewage Enforcement Officer. All
appeals shall be accompanied by the appeal fee established by resolution of
the Board of Commissioners.
B. Installation, alteration or modification of an OLDS or community
sewage system without having obtained a permit as required by this
chapter and the regulations of the Department or, if a permit was
obtained, in a manner which violates the terms of the permit.
C. Failure to maintain an OLDS or community sewage system as required
by this chapter. All of these actions result in pollution of the waters of
the commonwealth and other natural resources of the Township and
constitute a danger to the health, safety and welfare of Township
residents. The actual expenses of the Township in the abatement of
such nuisances, plus a penalty in the amount of 25% of such expenses,
shall be filed as a municipal claim against the property.
A. The written appeal shall specify the precise action from which the
appeal is taken and shall set forth in concise terms the reason for the
appeal and any legal authorities supporting the appeal period.
B. If the appellant desires a hearing before the Board, the appellant must
request a hearing in the written appeal.
C. If a hearing is requested in writing, the Board shall conduct the hearing
at a regular or special public meeting which occurs not less than 45
days after receipt of the written appeal. The hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 551 et seq. and § 751 et seq.
D. The Board shall render a decision on the appeal in accordance with the
provisions of the Local Agency Law.
§ 399-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-41
1:299
Chapter 421
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass and weeds — See Ch. 277.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 367.
Abandoned and junked vehicles and
equipment — See Ch. 474.
§ 399-41 MANHEIM CODE § 399-41
1:300
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Disposal and Joint Cooperation
[Adopted 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-6 (Part 5, Ch. 1, Art. C, of the
1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 421-1. Statutory authority; findings.99
A. The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L.
380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. ("SWMA"), was enacted to
establish a comprehensive planning and regulatory framework to deal
with the storage, collection, transportation and processing of solid
waste, including municipal waste, as defined in Section 103 of the
SWMA, 35 P.S. § 6018.103.
B. The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Act of
1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., makes each municipality responsible
for the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal
waste generated or present within its boundaries and authorizes
municipalities to contract with any other person or municipality,
including a county or an authority, to carry out such responsibilities.
C. The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Act of
1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., further authorizes municipalities to
adopt ordinances, regulations and standards regulating the storage and
collection of municipal waste and requiring disposal of all municipal
waste generated within their jurisdiction at a designated facility.
D. Section 201 of the SWMA, 35 P.S. § 6018.201, requires the preparation
of municipal waste management plans.
E. In cases where the applicable planning agency determines that it is in
the public interest for municipal waste management and disposal to be
a public function and the governing body approves this determination,
the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Act of
1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., requires each municipal waste
management plan to provide the mechanisms to do so.
F. The SWMA gives counties, cities, townships, boroughs and authorities
created by such municipalities concurrent responsibility for the
planning and regulation of municipal waste collection, transportation
and disposal by defining all such entities as "municipalities." See 35 P.S.
§ 6018.103.
G. Pursuant to Section 201(b), 35 P.S. § 6018.201(b), and other
requirements of the SWMA, various municipalities in the county have
adopted resolutions requesting the County Board of Commissioners
("County Board") to prepare a comprehensive municipal waste
management plan on the municipalities' behalf.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 421-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-1
1:301
H. Pursuant to such requests and the county's independent authority
under Section 201 of the SWMA, 35 P.S. § 6018.201, the County Board
has developed and adopted a municipal waste management plan for
municipal waste disposal ("plan") in which the county undertakes to
assist such municipalities with the disposal of municipal waste and
resource recovery is emphasized.
I. The plan calls for the construction of a resource recovery facility for
incineration of municipal waste and generation of energy, expansion of
the existing Creswell Landfill owned and operated by the Lancaster
Area Refuse Authority ("LARA") for the disposal of nonprocessable
municipal waste, residue from the resource recovery facility, and
municipal waste generated within the county which exceeds the
capacity of the resource recovery facility, and construction of transfer
facilities throughout the county (hereinafter collectively referred to as
the "county system" or "system").
J. The plan determines that it is in the public interest for municipal waste
management and disposal to be a public function, calls for the creation
of the Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority
("LCSWMA") from LARA, and designates LCSWMA as the public agency
responsible for the financing, design, construction and operation of the
facilities comprising the county system.
K. In order to finance the construction and purchase of the facilities and
equipment comprising the county system and to eliminate
uneconomical operations, it is necessary for the county and its
municipalities to make legally enforceable commitments to assure the
delivery of substantially all regulated municipal waste, as hereinafter
defined, presently generated within the county into the county system.
L. The Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
and Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania authorize municipalities to enter into joint cooperation
agreements with other municipalities in the exercise or performance of
their respective governmental functions, powers or responsibilities and
to delegate to other municipalities, including counties, the authority to
exercise said governmental functions, powers or responsibilities.
M. Each of the participating municipalities, as defined below, has
determined that it is in the public interest for municipal waste
management and disposal to be a public function controlled and
implemented by the county and LCSWMA.
N. Each of the participating municipalities has determined that it is
appropriate and in its interest to enact certain ordinances ("waste flow
ordinances") providing for the disposition of municipal waste generated
within its jurisdiction at facilities comprising the county system.
O. The county and the participating municipalities have agreed to act in
good faith and take all necessary and appropriate actions in
cooperation with one another to effectuate a joint cooperation
§ 421-1 MANHEIM CODE § 421-1
1:302
agreement ("intermunicipal agreement") pursuant to their respective
lawful authority.
P. The county and LCSWMA have entered into an agreement ("LCSWMA
agreement") further to effectuate the purposes of the intermunicipal
agreement.
Q. The LCSWMA agreement is conditioned upon execution of the
intermunicipal agreement by the county and other municipalities with
60% of the county's population.
R. The intermunicipal agreement is entered into for the mutual benefit of
the county and the participating municipalities, with LCSWMA as a
beneficiary, and is not intended by the parties to be for the benefit of
any other persons.
S. It is understood that failing the implementation of the arrangements
contemplated in the intermunicipal agreement, the participating
municipalities will have continuing responsibilities for the collection,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal waste in
accordance with 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
T. The Township of Manheim has full authority under the applicable laws
to provide for the management of municipal solid waste within its
boundaries as hereinafter provided.
U. Pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement, the county will agree to
enact a parallel ordinance ("County Waste Flow Ordinance") requiring
the disposal of all regulated municipal waste generated within the
county at the facilities comprising the county system, forbidding the
collection of municipal waste within the county by collectors or haulers
of municipal waste not licensed by LCSWMA to dispose of waste at
facilities comprising the county system, and authorizing the county and
LCSWMA to develop additional necessary rules and regulations
concerning solid waste collection, transportation and disposal.
V. Pursuant to the LCSWMA agreement and the intermunicipal
agreement, LCSWMA will agree to administer and the county will agree
to enforce said rules, regulations and licensing requirements.
W. Legislation is presently pending before the Pennsylvania General
Assembly which would provide counties with unilateral authority to
require disposal of all municipal solid waste at a designated facility or
facilities.
X. The form of this article has been approved by the county and has been
included in the plan approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection ("DEP").
Y. The county is willing to assist in the implementation of the plan, but
only after ordinances similar to this article have been enacted by a
§ 421-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-1
1:303
§ 421-2. Definitions.
sufficient number of municipalities in the county to make construction
of such solid waste facilities as proposed in the plan feasible.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COUNTY — The County of Lancaster.
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any agreement or contract fully executed
prior to the effective date of this article for the collection, disposal or
transportation of municipal waste generated within this municipality.
FACILITY — The waste-to-energy incinerator to be constructed by or on
behalf of LCSWMA pursuant to the plan.
FULL SYSTEM OPERATION or FULLY OPERATIONAL — That date
which is 60 days from the date upon which the county and other
municipalities representing, in the aggregate, not less than 60% of the
population of the county, as determined by the 1980 decennial census
of the United States, execute the intermunicipal agreement and enact
waste flow ordinances.
LCSWMA — The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority,
its assigns, its successors in interest, and its predecessor in interest,
the Lancaster Area Refuse Authority.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Manheim, a Township of the First
Class located within the County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental
agency or any other entity or any group of such persons which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions
of this article prescribing a fine, penalty, imprisonment or denial or
grant of any license, the term "person" shall include the officers and
directors of a corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
PLAN — The municipal waste management plan for the county, adopted
by the county or municipalities therein and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE SYSTEM — Any delivery site within the
system designated by LCSWMA for delivery of regulated municipal
waste.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse
of metals, glass, paper, yard waste and other materials which would
otherwise become municipal waste.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, and other material, including solid or
semisolid material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
§ 421-1 MANHEIM CODE § 421-2
1:304
§ 421-3. Operation by licensed collectors.
commercial, or institutional establishments and from community
activities, and any other solid waste which is within the definition of
"municipal waste" set forth in Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 2, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35
P.S. § 6018.103, and which LCSWMA, the county, or any contractor
("contractor") selected by the county or LCSWMA to construct and/or
operate a resource recovery facility or facilities to be located within the
municipal boundaries of the county by ordinance or regulation is willing
to accept at the facility, but excluding:
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation and collection, prior to
delivery to a point of entry into the system, of materials for the sole
purpose of recycling.
SYSTEM — The overall solid waste management and disposal system
and every aspect thereof owned or operated by or on behalf of
LCSWMA, including, without limitation, equipment, transfer stations,
resource recovery facilities, and landfills, owned or operated or to be
acquired, constructed or operated by LCSWMA or any agent, designee
or contractor thereof in implementation of the plan.
TRANSFER FACILITY — Any solid waste facility which is now or
hereafter may be established by LCSWMA or the county for the purpose
of accepting solid waste for processing and economical consolidation
for subsequent delivery to the facility or other solid waste disposal site.
(1) Any liquid waste or sludge;
Any waste which is defined by existing or future federal or state
law or regulation as "hazardous waste" or "residual waste";
(2)
Infectious waste, pathological waste, or other waste for which
treatment or handling requirements different from those normally
applicable to municipal waste apply;
(3)
(4) Polychlorinated biphenyls;
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for purposes of recycling; and
(5)
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county or
LCSWMA ordinances, rules or regulations.
(6)
B. All other words and phrases shall have the same meanings as set forth
in the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980,
P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., as it may hereinafter be
amended or supplemented by legislation regarding municipal waste
planning.
A. Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed by LCSWMA to deliver
waste to the county system may collect or transport municipal waste
§ 421-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-3
1:305
§ 421-4. Disposal at designated facilities.
§ 421-5. Additional regulations.
located or generated within this municipality. This prohibition shall
become effective 120 days from the effective date of this section.
B. Compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances. In carrying on
activities related to solid waste collection or transportation within this
municipality, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal waste
transporters shall comply with all rules, regulations and ordinances
pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste
as may be hereinafter enacted by this municipality or by the county
pursuant to a parallel County Waste Flow Ordinance and all rules and
regulations enacted by LCSWMA pursuant to authority given it under
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5617, as hereafter amended.
C. Administration. Licenses hereunder shall be issued, revoked and
administered by LCSWMA.
A. Delivery to LCSWMA/county sites. All municipal waste collectors and
transporters shall deliver and dispose of all regulated municipal waste
collected or generated within the municipality at a transfer station or
disposal facility owned and operated by or on behalf of LCSWMA,
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may
be established by the county or LCSWMA.
B. Disposal at other sites. Disposal of regulated municipal waste collected
or generated within the municipality may occur at other sites only as
permitted by rule, regulation, ordinance or order duly issued by the
county or by the written agreement of the county, LCSWMA, and the
municipality. Disposal of regulated municipal waste at an existing
facility from sources reflected on the notice to the municipality, the
county, and LCSWMA as provided in § 421-7C of this article shall be
permitted.100
C. Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source
separation or recycling or to affect any sites at which source separation
or recycling may take place.
A. Compliance with county and LCSWMA regulations. The collection,
transportation and disposal of municipal waste present or generated
within the municipality shall be subject to such further reasonable rules
and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the county
pursuant to its Waste Flow Ordinance and such rules and regulations as
may be adopted by LCSWMA pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5617, as
hereafter amended, including, without limitation, regulations
governing applications and standards for licensing, fees to be charged
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 421-3 MANHEIM CODE § 421-5
1:306
§ 421-6. Existing contracts.
§ 421-7. New private waste processing and disposal facilities
prohibited; continuation of existing facilities.
for such licensing, the terms of licenses, procedures, recordkeeping,
transportation routes and other matters.
B. County authorization to adopt regulations. Rules and regulations
adopted by the county pursuant to the parallel County Waste Flow
Ordinance to be adopted pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement
described in § 421-12 shall be deemed rules and regulations adopted
under this article, and the county is hereby authorized to adopt such
rules and regulations.
C. Consistency of regulations with this article and other laws. No rules or
regulations adopted pursuant to this article shall be contrary to or less
stringent than the provisions of this article, the plan, the County Waste
Flow Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act or
regulations adopted thereunder, or such other laws, regulations or
requirements as may be enacted by the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the Pennsylvania Environmental Quality
Board governing municipal waste planning, collection, storage,
transportation, processing or disposal.
A. Noninterference with existing contracts. Nothing contained in this
article shall be construed to interfere with or in any way modify the
provisions of any existing contract in force in the municipality on the
effective date of this article.
B. New contracts and renewals of existing contracts. No renewal of any
existing contract upon the expiration of the original term thereof and no
new contract for municipal waste collection, transportation, processing
or disposal shall be entered into after the effective date of this article,
unless such renewal or such contract shall conform to the requirements
of this article, the County Waste Flow Ordinance, rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, and the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
A. Prohibition of private waste processing and disposal facilities. No
person other than LCSWMA, the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a county, a municipality, an authority
created by the foregoing, or a person acting on behalf of the foregoing
shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied by that
person within the municipality as a municipal waste processing or
disposal facility, either for municipal waste generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality, the county and LARA.
B. Recycling. The prohibition set forth in Subsection A of this section shall
not interfere with the operation of any program for recycling.
§ 421-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-7
1:307
§ 421-8. Unlawful activities; public nuisances.
C. Existing facilities. The prohibition set forth in Subsection A of this
section shall not interfere with the operation of any privately or publicly
owned solid waste facility which has been issued a solid waste permit
before the effective date of this article, provided:
(1) The owner or operator of the facility provides written notice to the
county and the municipality of the facility permit number, address,
ownership and existing sources of waste no later than 60 days after
the effective date of this article;
(2) The facility accepts regulated municipal waste from no sources
within the county other than those then authorized by the facility's
solid waste permit and then being accepted, as reflected on the
notice provided the county and municipality pursuant to this
section;
(3) The facility shall not be expanded in capacity, with the exception of
facilities owned or operated by or on behalf of another county,
which facilities may expand if such expansion is consistent with a
DEP-approved municipal waste management plan;
(4) Notices under this section shall be submitted to the Board of
Commissioners on behalf of the municipality. The county may, by
resolution, designate LCSWMA or another authority or agency as
the entity which will receive notice pursuant to this section.101
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Accumulate or cause to be accumulated municipal waste in an
amount greater than 20 tons, other than waste which has been
source-separated for the purpose of recycling;
(2) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
article, any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder, or
any rule, regulation or order promulgated by LCSWMA or the
county consistent with this article;
(3) Process, treat, transfer, or dispose of or cause to be processed,
treated, transferred or disposed regulated municipal waste
generated within the municipality at any solid waste facility other
than a solid waste facility owned or operated by or on behalf of the
county or LCSWMA or at an existing solid waste facility as
permitted by § 421-7C, without the express written consent of any
municipality within which the facility is located, the county, and
LCSWMA;
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 421-7 MANHEIM CODE § 421-8
1:308
§ 421-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28]
Any person who violates any provision of this article by engaging in
unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall, for every violation, be
sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not less than $150 nor more than $600,
and costs.
§ 421-10. Revocation of license.
Upon finding that any person has engaged in unlawful conduct as defined in
this article:
§ 421-11. Additional remedies.
(4) Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within
the county without a valid license for disposal issued by LCSWMA;
(5) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the
county, LCSWMA or their personnel in the performance of any duty
under this article or in the enforcement of this article;
(6) Act in a manner that is contrary to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act,102 regulations promulgated thereunder, the plan,
this article, the county ordinance, rules or regulations promulgated
thereunder, or the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A of this
section shall constitute a public nuisance.
A. LCSWMA, the municipality, or the county may revoke any license issued
by LCSWMA to that person in accordance with § 421-3; and
B. LCSWMA may deny any subsequent application by that person for a
license pursuant to § 421-3.
A. Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
article, the municipality, the county or LCSWMA may institute a suit in
equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists as defined in
this article for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article or
rules, regulations, orders or the terms of licenses promulgated or
issued pursuant to this article. In addition to an injunction, the court
may impose penalties as authorized by § 421-9 and revoke any licenses
as authorized by § 421-10.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality, the county or LCSWMA, from
exercising any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise
provided at law or equity.
102. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 421-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-12
1:309
§ 421-12. Intermunicipal agreement.
A. Entry into intermunicipal agreement. In order to implement the intent
and terms of this article, the municipality, pursuant to the authority of
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.,
and Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, hereby enters into the intermunicipal joint cooperation
agreement between this municipality, the county, and other
municipalities within the County of Lancaster, which is attached hereto
as Exhibit A and incorporated herein,103 together with such changes
consistent with this article, if any, as may be approved by the officials of
the parties executing the same, such execution to be conclusive
evidence of such approval ("intermunicipal agreement").
B. Terms and implementation of intermunicipal agreement. As more fully
set forth in the intermunicipal agreement and this article:
(1) Conditions and terms of agreement. In the agreement:
(a) The county agrees:
[1] To arrange for the provision of municipal waste disposal
facilities for the economical and environmentally sound
disposal of municipal waste generated within the
participating municipalities;
[2] To coordinate recycling activities and marketing; and
[3] To assure continuing municipal waste planning for the
county and the participating municipalities by entering
into an agreement with LCSWMA;
(b) The county and participating municipalities representing, in
the aggregate, not less than 60% of the population of the
county each agree to enact a waste flow ordinance in a form
substantially similar to this article and to assure otherwise that
all acceptable municipal solid waste be delivered to the county
system;
(c) The county agrees:
[1] To enact rules and regulations;
[2] To cause LCSWMA to enact additional rules and
regulations and to administer a licensing program; and
[3] To enforce this article and the parallel Municipal and
County Waste Flow Ordinances;
(d) The county agrees to assure reasonable solid waste disposal
fees for residents of the participating municipalities; and
103. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 421-12 MANHEIM CODE § 421-12
1:310
(e) The parties agree to cooperate in the joint enforcement of the
intermunicipal agreement and all ordinances enacted pursuant
to the intermunicipal agreement, and this municipality thereby
agrees cooperatively to exercise, to delegate to the county, and
to allow delegation of such powers, duties and responsibilities
as set forth in the intermunicipal agreement.
(2) Duration of term of the agreement. The term of the intermunicipal
agreement shall commence upon the date on which the county and
other municipalities representing at least 60% of the population of
the county have executed the intermunicipal agreement and shall
terminate 40 years following that date, unless terminated earlier
for cause.
(3) Purpose and objectives of agreement. The purpose of the
intermunicipal agreement is to provide a mechanism:
(a) To finance, to construct and to operate a municipal waste
disposal system to serve this municipality and other
municipalities within the county;
(b) To administer a county-wide recycling program; and
(c) To provide continuing municipal waste planning, as more fully
set forth in the recitals to the intermunicipal agreement and
this article.
(4) Manner and extent of financing the agreement. Enforcement of this
article shall be financed by the county's general revenues, except
insofar as the municipality elects to enforce this article;
administration of this article, the recycling program and planning
shall be financed by LCSWMA with revenues received from
operation of the county system; and construction and operation of
the county system shall be financed by debt instruments issued by
LCSWMA and operating revenues.
(5) Organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement.
LCSWMA shall be formed from LARA by amendment of LARA's
Articles of Incorporation; LCSWMA shall:
(a) Construct and operate or arrange for the construction and
operation of the county system; and
(b) Administer and enforce this article and parallel ordinances
adopted by the county and other municipalities pursuant to the
intermunicipal agreement; and the county and the municipality
shall enforce said Waste Flow Ordinances with assistance from
LCSWMA.
(6) Management and acquisition of property. All property within the
county system shall be acquired, managed and disposed of by
§ 421-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-12
1:311
§ 421-13. Operation of facilities; charges.
This municipality has been advised by the county that the plan proposes
to provide for solid waste processing and disposal facilities which will be
operated efficiently and economically by LCSWMA and in accordance with
all applicable laws and regulations, and also that LCSWMA will impose
reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all classes of the users
of the plant or plants from participating municipalities which execute the
intermunicipal agreement within 90 days of the date upon which DEP
grants preliminary approval to the plan. Charges may differ for different
categories of waste and for different points of entry into the system.
§ 421-14. Construal of provisions.
The terms and conditions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with the Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No.
97, known as the "Solid Waste Management Act," 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
LCSWMA, in accordance with its separate agreement with the
county and the powers and duties imposed upon LCSWMA by law.
C. Execution. Appropriate officers of the municipality are authorized and
directed to execute the intermunicipal agreement on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 421-12 MANHEIM CODE § 421-14
1:312
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste and Recyclables Management
[Adopted 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-9; amended in its entirety
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-18 (Part 5, Ch. 1, Art. A, of the 1976
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 421-15. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Solid Waste and Recyclables
Management Ordinance."
§ 421-16. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that the Township of Manheim accepts the
responsibility for the collection, transportation, and storage of regulated
municipal waste and recyclable materials generated within its boundaries
and, for that purpose, declares that this article is to coordinate and to
regulate that collection, transportation, and storage of all regulated
municipal waste and recyclable materials in order to promote and protect
the public safety, health and general welfare of the community.
§ 421-17. Definitions. [Amended 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-11;
12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-24; 10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08104]
Any term which refers to a category or type of solid waste, if not defined
in this article, shall have the meaning as from time to time set forth
in any other Township ordinances or resolutions or LCSWMA's rules and
regulations. In addition, as used in this article, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
ACT 90 — The Waste Transportation Safety Act, Act of June 29, 2002, P.L.
596, No. 90, as now or hereafter amended.105
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380,
No. 97, as now or hereafter amended.106
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1998, P.L. 528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.107
ALUMINUM CANS — All food and beverage cans made of a lightweight,
ductile and malleable metallic substance or element commonly known as
"aluminum." This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates, and
miscellaneous aluminum products.
BULK CONTAINER — A refuse container not intended to be moved or, if
moved, intended to be transported by vehicle for the purpose of disposal.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
105. Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 421-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-17
1:313
CHRISTMAS TREE — Trees used for Christmas decoration in homes, except
artificial ones.
COMMINGLED — Designated recyclable materials:
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day which are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals,
including but not limited to fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics, and organized
sporting events.
COMMUNITY CONTRACT AGREEMENT — An agreement between the
contract hauler and Manheim Township granting the contract hauler the
privilege and right to contract with customers for the collection of regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials.
COMMUNITY CONTRACT HAULER — A person or firm who has entered
into a community contract agreement with Manheim Township.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Paperboard which has been used for
packaging and shipping and is clean of all contaminants.
CUSTOMER — A person who independently contracts with the community
contract hauler for the collection of any component of regulated municipal
waste in Manheim Township.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
designated in § 421-24 of this article for source separation.
DRY CELL BATTERIES — As collected by the LCSWMA.
FACILITY — Any solid waste storage, collection, transfer, processing or
disposal facility or site which is included within the definition of "facility"
contained in the LCSWMA rules and regulations.
FARMS — A tract of land used for raising crops or livestock.
GLASS — A hard and brittle substance which is typically clear, brown,
green, transparent or partially transparent and produced by fusion of silica
and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals and
substances usually or conveniently included in the manufacture of glass. For
purposes of this article, the term "glass" shall mean only those materials
commonly known as "glass bottles or containers," including all food and
beverage containers made of glass, whether clear or colored, of one gallon
or less capacity. The term "glass" excludes containers of a greater capacity
than one gallon, glass which is not in the form of bottles or containers, glass
which is laminated, wired or mirrored, ceramics, and crystal.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Plant matter removed from the cutting of lawn.
Which have been segregated from regulated municipal waste but which
have not been separated into different types of recyclable materials;
and
A.
Which have been placed in a recycling container for the purpose of
collection.
B.
§ 421-17 MANHEIM CODE § 421-17
1:314
HAZARDOUS HOUSEHOLD WASTE — A portion of municipal waste that
would be considered hazardous under Act 97 but for the fact that it is
produced in quantities smaller than those regulated as hazardous waste
under Act 97 and is generated by persons not otherwise covered as
hazardous waste generators by Act 97. "Household hazardous waste"
includes the following materials and other materials of similar nature:
antifreeze; batteries; chlorinated hydrocarbons; gasoline; kerosene; grease
and rust solvents; oven, toilet and drain cleaners; paints; rust preventatives;
stains and wood preservatives; pesticides; fungicides; herbicides;
insecticides; rodenticides; roach and ant killers; photographic and pool
chemicals; thinners, solvents and furniture strippers; transmission and
brake fluids; used oil or other hydrocarbon-based lubricants; wood, metal,
rug and upholstery cleaners and polishes.
LCSWMA — The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority,
a municipal authority organized and existing under the Municipality
Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended.
LCSWMA FACILITY — Any facility owned or operated by or on behalf of the
Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority.
LEAVES — Whole leaf matter from trees, source-separated.
MAGAZINES — Publications issued periodically and which contain stories
and articles.
MOWER-COLLECTED LEAVES — Plant matter from lawns and trees
collected with a lawn mower, source-separated.
MULTIRESIDENTIAL UNIT — A property with three or more single
residential units, including, without limitation, apartment complexes,
condominium complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks within
the Township, excluding farms.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any solid waste which is garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from the operation of
residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of "residual
or hazardous waste" from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials
or unacceptable waste. Above terms are used as defined in LCSWMA
regulations.
NEWSPRINT — Paper which has been used for the production of daily,
weekly and special edition publications commonly known as "newsprint."
NONPROCESSABLE REFUSE — A portion of municipal waste consisting
of materials which cannot be handled by LCSWMA's normal collection,
processing or disposal methods or which are greater than six feet in any
dimension. "Nonprocessable refuse" includes, without limitation, large auto
parts; machinery; boats; recreation vehicles; etc. Nonprocessable refuse
will be accepted by LCSWMA only at the landfill.
§ 421-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-17
1:315
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — All commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments within the Township, excluding single residential units,
multiresidential units and farms.
OFFICE PAPER — Includes computer printout, white ledger, envelopes,
colored paper, and lightweight cardboard.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS — Refuse which will not fit into refuse
containers, including, but not limited to, carpet, portable televisions,
furniture and like materials.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency, or any legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTIC — Recyclable plastics are identified on the bottom of the container
and consist of two types of containers, namely:
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any material which would be regulated
municipal waste but for source separation and which will be separated,
collected and processed into raw materials or products which will be reused
(other than as fuel).
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, yard waste, plastics and other materials
which would otherwise be disposed of or processed as waste.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — For single residential units, the term
"recycling container" shall refer to the container supplied by the Township
made of rigid plastic construction, with a capacity of not more than 14
gallons. For multiresidential units and nonresidential units, the term
"recycling container" shall refer to a receptacle which is constructed of
plastic, metal, or fiberglass suitable for holding recyclable materials.
RECYCLING PLAN — A plan to provide for a source separation and
collection program for recyclable materials in order to conform to Act 101.
REFUSE CONTAINER — A receptacle which is:
A. PETE (such as soda bottles); and
B. HDPE (such as milk, springwater, and detergent bottles).
Constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass, having handles of adequate
strength for lifting and having a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing
entrance into the container by vectors; or
A.
A polyethylene bag which:
(1) Is specifically designed for storage and collection;
Is protected against animal damage and overloading so as to
prevent littering or attraction of insects or rodents; and
(2)
B.
§ 421-17 MANHEIM CODE § 421-17
1:316
REGISTERED HAULER — A person who has registered with Manheim
Township to collect and transport regulated municipal waste or recyclable
materials, or both, and has completed an application therefor on a form
provided by Manheim Township.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any solid waste generated or collected
within the Township which is garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge which is not residual or hazardous waste from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
RUBBISH — Refuse which will not fit into refuse containers, including
furniture, carpet, portable televisions, tree branches and like materials.
SCAVENGING — The uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of recyclable
materials placed for collection.
SINGLE RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any single-family detached, semidetached
or townhouse dwelling, or a dwelling unit within a multifamily building
containing three or fewer dwelling units, excluding farms.
SOURCE-SEPARATED or SOURCE SEPARATION — The process of
separating, or the separation of, designated recyclable materials from
regulated municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of recycling.
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage
containers commonly known as "tin cans."
TIRES — Rubber materials removed from wheels.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
VECTOR — An insect, rodent or other organism that transmits a pathogenic
fungus, virus, etc.
VEHICLE — A refuse or recycling vehicle used for the collection of
regulated municipal waste or recyclable materials which has mounted
thereon an approved type, watertight, sanitary body or which has a
standard truck body made watertight and which is equipped with means of
covering to prevent loss of material by wind.
WHITE GOODS — Large appliances weighing more than 50 pounds or
containing refrigerants, including clothes washers, clothes dryers, freezers,
refrigerators, stoves, ovens, hot-water heaters, air conditioners,
dehumidifiers, furnaces and electric heaters.
YARD WASTE — All garden residues, shrubbery, tree prunings up to six
inches in diameter, sod, leaves, grass, grass clippings and similar materials.
Has a holding strength capable of withstanding normal stresses
until it is collected.
(3)
§ 421-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-18
1:317
§ 421-18. Functions and authority of Township Commissioners.
[Amended 10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
The Township Commissioners shall be responsible for all aspects of solid
waste management within the Township; except, however, that the
Commissioners may, by official act, designate along with adjoining
municipalities a common responsible agency to function on its behalf. The
Township Commissioners shall have the following functions and powers:
§ 421-19. Storage practices; provision of containers. [Amended
10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
A. Regulate and control the collection, transportation, and storage of all
regulated municipal waste and recyclable materials in accordance with
the Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Plan approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Cooperate with other local units of government in close proximity and
with appropriate private organizations in carrying out its duties under
this article.
C. Adopt such rules, regulations, standards and procedures as shall be
necessary to conserve the air, water and land resources of the
Township, protect the public health, prevent public nuisances, and
enable it to carry out the purpose and provisions of this article.
D. Approve the registration of any person as a registered hauler and to
conduct such inspections as may be necessary to implement the
provisions of this article or to delegate to proper persons or
organizations such authority.
E. Contract with or register any person, other municipality or organization
to carry out their responsibilities for all or any part of the collection,
transportation and storage of regulated municipal waste, household
hazardous waste and recyclable materials.
A. The storage of all regulated municipal waste and recyclable materials
shall be practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage and
breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate conditions harmful to
public health and which create safety hazards, odors, unsightliness and
public nuisances.
B. A sufficient number of containers shall be provided by the person
generating the same to contain all regulated municipal waste and
recyclable materials generated during periods between regularly
scheduled collection as may be necessary to meet the requirements of
Subsection A of this section.
C. Single residential unit recycling containers shall be provided by the
Township. Recycling containers for multiresidential units and
nonresidential units and farms shall be provided either by the owner,
the registered hauler or community contract hauler.
§ 421-18 MANHEIM CODE § 421-19
1:318
§ 421-20. Disposable containers.
Disposable containers, such as paper and polyethylene bags, shall be
acceptable for storage of regulated municipal waste, provided the following
conditions are met:
§ 421-21. Recycling containers. [Amended 10-9-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-08]
§ 421-22. Preparation of waste and recyclable materials.
D. All storage practices shall, at a minimum, conform to the requirements
of all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
A. Only those bags specifically designed for storage and collection shall be
used.
B. Bags shall be protected against precipitation, animal damage, and
overloading in order to prevent littering or attracting of vectors.
C. Bags shall have a holding strength capable of withstanding normal
stress until they are collected.
D. Bag openings shall be securely closed prior to setting out for collection.
A. The following shall apply to individual recycling containers utilized for
the storage of recyclable materials at residential units:
(1) The container shall be provided by the Township and made of rigid
plastic construction, with a capacity of not more than 14 gallons.
(2) Ownership of individual recycling containers shall remain in the
Township.
(3) The Township shall replace any recycling containers which are
damaged. Stolen or lost containers will be replaced for a fee.
B. The following shall apply to recycling containers utilized for the storage
of larger quantities of recyclable materials at multiresidential units,
nonresidential units, community activities, and farms:
(1) The container shall be constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass
and be suitable for the purpose.
(2) The ownership of larger recycling containers will remain with the
customer, the registered hauler or community contract hauler.
A. All regulated municipal waste and recyclable materials shall be drained
free of liquids before storage.
B. All persons within the Township are required to source-separate all
designated recyclable materials.
§ 421-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-22
1:319
§ 421-23. Storage requirements.
§ 421-24. Designated recyclable materials.
All single residential units are required to separate the following designated
recyclable materials as shown in the table as set forth below:
Material
Types
Package or
Container
Single and
Multiresidential
Farms
Community/
Commercial/
Institutional/
Industrial
Aluminum cans
(not foil pie
plates, etc.)
Commingled bin Weekly Weekly Weekly
Bimetallic
cans, steel, tin
Commingled bin Weekly Weekly Weekly
Glass bottles,
clear, colored
(not bulbs,
dishes, glasses,
etc.)
Commingled bin Weekly Weekly Weekly
C. All cans, bottles or other food containers shall be rinsed free of food
particles and drained before storage.
D. Newsprint, corrugated cardboard and office paper shall be tied in
bundles, boxed or placed in paper or plastic bags.
E. Dry cell batteries shall be placed in a plastic bag provided by the
Township.
F. Grass clippings, leaves, mower-collected leaves and yard waste shall be
placed in bags specified by the Township.
G. Oversize refuse items shall be placed in approved containers or cut and
tied in bundles, stacked or packaged so as not to exceed 48 inches in
length and 30 pounds in weight, where possible.
A. Each person having regulated municipal waste or recyclable materials
shall obtain approved refuse and recycling containers and shall place
and keep all regulated municipal waste and recyclable materials
therein, except for wastes of nondecomposable nature and rubbish
which shall be stored in tightly secured bundles of such a size and
weight that they can be readily handled at the time of collection and so
as to minimize litter.
B. Nonprocessable refuse shall be stored so that collection of water and
harborage of rodents is prevented.
C. Containers shall be stored on the property where the regulated
municipal waste and the recyclable materials are generated.
§ 421-22 MANHEIM CODE § 421-24
1:320
Material
Types
Package or
Container
Single and
Multiresidential
Farms
Community/
Commercial/
Institutional/
Industrial
Plastic bottles,
milk, soda,
detergent (not
margarine
tubs, misc.
cont.)
Commingled bin Weekly Weekly Weekly
Dry cell
batteries
Plastic bags
provided,
sourceseparated
Weekly Weekly Weekly
Newsprint Bundled or
paper bags,
sourceseparated
Weekly Weekly Weekly
Corrugated
cardboard
Bundled or
paper bags,
sourceseparated
N/A N/A Weekly or
contracted
Office paper,
high-grade (no
glossy or color)
Bundled or
paper bags,
sourceseparated
N/A N/A Weekly or
contracted
Christmas
trees
N/A Weekly
(12/26 to 1/
31)
Weekly
(12/26 to
1/31)
Weekly
(12/26 to 1/31)
Grass clippings
(effective year
2001)
Bags, per
Township
specification
Weekly
(4/1 to 10/
15)
N/A Weekly
(4/1 to 10/15)
Leaves
(effective year
2001)
Bags, per
Township
specification
Weekly
(10/15 to 12/
31)
N/A Weekly
(10/15 to 12/
31)
Mowercollected
leaves
(effective year
2001)
Bags, per
Township
specification
Weekly
(10/15 to 12/
31)
N/A Weekly
(10/15 to 12/
31)
§ 421-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-24
1:321
Material
Types
Package or
Container
Single and
Multiresidential
Farms
Community/
Commercial/
Institutional/
Industrial
Yard waste
(effective year
2001)
30-gallon
container or 3
feet to 4 feet
bundled
Weekly N/A Weekly
Tires By weight Weekly, as
called
Weekly,
as called
Weekly, as
called
White goods By type Weekly, as
called
Weekly,
as called
Weekly, as
called
§ 421-25. Collection practices. [Amended 10-9-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-08]
§ 421-26. Placement for collection.
§ 421-27. Frequency and time of collection. [Amended 7-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-11]
A. Regulated municipal waste and recyclable materials shall be collected
and transported so as to prevent public health hazards and nuisances.
B. No person shall collect, transport or store regulated municipal waste or
recyclable materials generated within the Township unless such person
is a community contract hauler or registered hauler.
C. Any community contract hauler or registered hauler who collects
regulated municipal waste within the Township shall be required to
collect source-separated recyclable materials from all customers for
whom regulated municipal waste is collected.
D. All collection practices shall conform to the rules and regulations
promulgated under Act 97, Act 101, this article and LCSWMA rules and
regulations.
A. Residential customers may not place containers along streets for
pickup sooner than 3:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled pickup.
B. Customers shall not leave refuse and recycling containers at the place
of collection longer than 12 hours after the scheduled day of collection.
C. Residential customers shall place residential containers along streets
for pickup.
A. Regulated municipal waste and recyclable materials shall be collected
from single residential units and farms on the same day(s) every week
and at a minimum of once weekly through the year.
§ 421-24 MANHEIM CODE § 421-27
1:322
§ 421-28. Registered haulers. [Amended 10-9-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-08]
B. Regulated municipal waste shall be collected from nonresidential units
a minimum of once weekly throughout the year. Recyclable materials
shall be collected from nonresidential units using bulk containers as
often as is necessary, but at least once per month.
C. Regular municipal waste and recyclable materials shall be collected
from residential units and farms between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. Collection from nonresidential units shall be between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
D. Hotels, restaurants, institutions and commercial establishments shall
have daily collection in the event the refuse contains any substantial
amount of decomposable material.
A. No person shall collect, remove, haul or convey any regulated municipal
waste or recyclable materials other than that produced by themselves
through or upon any of the streets or properties of this Township or
dispose of the same in any manner or place without obtaining
authorization from the Township and from the LCSWMA.
(1) No person shall collect, remove, haul or convey any regulated
municipal waste or recyclable materials collected from Township
residents without registering with the Township on a form provided
by the Township.
(2) Every person who shall apply to become a registered hauler shall
state the manner of collection of regulated municipal waste or
recyclable materials and shall dispose the collected waste at a
LCSWMA facility.
(3) Each registered hauler shall file with the Township a rate schedule
showing the rates to be charged to its customers for the collection
of regulated municipal waste and source-separated recyclable
materials. Such rate schedule shall not be changed by the
registered hauler without first giving notice to the customer and
the Township Commissioners at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of such change.
(4) Each registered hauler shall be responsible for billing customers
for service provided.
(5) Registered haulers shall prepare a schedule for the collection of
regulated municipal waste and source-separated recyclable
materials from each customer in accordance with the provisions of
this article, as amended. Registered haulers shall be responsible to
notify customers and the Township of the days on which collections
will be made.
§ 421-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-28
1:323
(6) The Township shall have the right to determine the validity of any
complaints made by customers as to failure of the registered hauler
to collect regulated municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable materials in accordance with this article, and the
Township's decision shall be final and binding upon the registered
hauler.
(7) Each registered hauler shall renew its registration annually.
(8) Faithful performance must be the essence of the contract between
the registered hauler and customers unless prevented by
unavoidable accident or act of God. It is understood and agreed
that all regulated municipal waste and source-separated recyclable
material shall be collected, removed, and disposed of in a skillful
and businesslike manner, satisfactory to the Township.
(9) The registered hauler shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the
Township that he/she has available equipment, by ownership or by
valid lease agreement, for collection and disposing of regulated
municipal waste and source-separated recyclable materials. All
equipment for transporting of regulated municipal waste and
source-separated recyclable materials will comply with the sanitary
and watertight requirements set forth in this article.
B. Obligation. In addition to the obligations imposed by this article, the
registered hauler shall:
(1) Every registered hauler shall comply with the provisions of this
article and shall comply with all LCSWMA rules and regulations,
including obtaining and maintaining the required licenses for
vehicles.
(2) Between April 1 and October 31, inclusive, registered haulers shall
remove from the point of collection yard waste separate from
regulated municipal waste and recyclable materials for segregated
disposal.
(3) Registered haulers shall not comingle source-separated recyclable
materials with regulated municipal waste.
(4) Registered haulers shall not mix any source-separated recyclable
materials with any regulated municipal waste or with any solid
waste.
(5) Registered haulers shall collect designated source-separated
recyclable materials on the same day as regulated municipal waste.
C. Reports. On or before the 15th day of each month, the registered hauler
shall submit to the Township a monthly report on all regulated
municipal waste and recyclable materials collected in the Township.
The monthly collection report shall include complete information with
respect to the preceding month, including, but not limited to, the
§ 421-28 MANHEIM CODE § 421-28
1:324
amounts of regulated municipal waste and the amounts of each
recyclable material collected. The form of the monthly collection report
shall be as follows, as shown on Attachment A; the form of the monthly
residential refuse and recycling report shall be as follows, as shown on
Attachment B.108
D. Independent contractor. For all purposes, including but not limited to
laws and regulations concerning employment compensation, worker's
compensation and other labor matters, the keeping of records and
making of reports, it is specifically agreed that the registered hauler is,
and at all times for the term of their license shall be and remain, an
independent contractor and employing unit. Neither party under these
regulations is the agent or employee of the other and is not authorized
to make any representations or incur any liabilities on behalf of the
other.
E. Insurance coverage.
(1) At all times during the term of their license, each registered hauler
shall maintain in full force and effect employer's liability,
workmen's compensation, public liability and property insurance.
Each registered hauler shall provide written proof each year that
the required insurance is in effect. Each registered hauler shall
promptly notify the Township if any required insurance lapses.
(2) Each registered hauler shall carry at least the following types and
amounts of insurance:
Coverage Limits of Liability
Worker's compensation Statutory
Employer's liability $500,000
Bodily injury liability, except
automobile
$500,000 per person per
occurrence
Property damage liability,
except automobile
$500,000 per occurrence
Automobile bodily injury liability $500,000 per person per
occurrence; $1,000,000
aggregate
Automobile property damage
liability
$500,000 per occurrence
F. Compliance with law. Each registered hauler acknowledges that the
collection of solid waste is subject to federal, state and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, and LCSWMA's rules and
regulations. All such laws, ordinances, rules and regulations are
incorporated into and made part of this article as if set forth in full. Any
breach thereof by a registered hauler shall be deemed a breach of this
108. Editor's Note: Attachments A and B are on file in the Township offices.
§ 421-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-28
1:325
article and shall subject the registered hauler to the penalties set forth
in this article.
G. Indemnification.
(1) The registered hauler shall assume full responsibility for his, her
and its officers, employees and agents. The registered hauler shall
indemnify the Township, its officers, employees and agents (each of
whom shall be included in the term "Township" for purposes of this
article) and hold and save the Township harmless from and against
any claim, demand, or cause of action which may be asserted by
any person because of any injury to property, injury or death to any
person, or any other cause whatsoever which arises out of or is
related to any of the actions or omissions of the registered hauler
or his, her, or its officers, employees or agents, whether intentional,
reckless, negligent or inadvertent. The registered hauler shall
further indemnify and hold the Township harmless from and
against all claims, demands and causes of action which may be
asserted by any person arising out of injury or death suffered by
any of the officers, employees or agents of the registered hauler,
including, but not limited to, third-party actions for any injury or
death, whether covered by the applicable worker's compensation
laws or not.
(2) The registered hauler's obligations for indemnification provided in
these regulations shall apply regardless of any sole or concurring
negligence of the Township. The registered hauler shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Township against and from any and all loss,
damages, costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees,
suffered or incurred as a result of any breach by the registered
hauler or enforcement by the Township of these regulations.
H. Grounds for refusal, suspension or cancellation of license.
(1) Upon written recommendation of the Township's staff member who
is charged with the responsibility of the enforcement of this article
that a registered hauler is in violation of this article, the Township
Manager-Secretary may take any or all of the following actions by
written notice as shall, in the Township Manager-Secretary's sole
discretion, be warranted:
(a) Send a notice of violation with a reasonable amount of time to
correct the violation.
(b) Suspend the right of the registered hauler to collect regulated
municipal waste or recyclable materials for a period of time
reasonably related to the violation of this article.
(c) Prohibit the right of the registered hauler to collect regulated
municipal waste or recyclable materials.
§ 421-28 MANHEIM CODE § 421-28
1:326
§ 421-29. Vehicles used for collection and transportation. [Amended
10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
§ 421-30. Care and maintenance of vehicles.
Collection and transportation vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
§ 421-31. Hazardous materials.
Hazardous materials shall be collected as follows:
(2) Any notice of violation, of suspension, or of prohibition shall specify
the section or sections of this article that have been violated.
(3) Registered haulers shall promptly notify their customers of any
suspension or prohibition and provide proof thereof to the
Township.
I. Hearing and judicial review.
(1) The Township Manager-Secretary may suspend or cancel any
license immediately upon notification that the registered hauler
has violated any provision of this article or is performing or
attempting to perform any act prohibited by this article.
(2) In the event the Township Manager-Secretary shall suspend or
prohibit the right to collect regulated municipal waste or recyclable
materials, the registered hauler may appeal such decision to the
Township Commissioners by filing a written appeal within 15 days
of receipt of notice of suspension or prohibition by submitting the
appeal to the Township office. The appeal shall specify the reasons
why the registered hauler believes it is not in violation of this
article. The Commissioners shall promptly schedule a hearing on
the appeal.
A. Registered haulers shall be required to collect and remove regulated
municipal waste in motor-driven vehicles having steel, nonleakable,
automatic packer-type bodies and to collect, remove and transport the
regulated municipal waste so as to assure general cleanliness and
sanitation throughout the entire process and operation thereof.
B. Registered haulers shall be required to collect and remove recyclable
materials in motor-driven vehicles or trailers designed for recyclables
collection and transportation and to collect, remove and transport the
recyclable materials so as to assure general cleanliness and sanitation
throughout the entire process and operation thereof.
C. The name of the owner of the vehicle and any license sticker issued by
the Department of Environmental Protection shall be displayed in a
prominent and legible manner on the driver's side of all vehicles used
for collection and transportation.
§ 421-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-31
1:327
§ 421-32. Collection of recyclable materials. [Amended 10-9-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-08]
§ 421-33. Disposal of regulated municipal waste. [Amended
10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
All regulated municipal waste shall be hauled directly to a LCSWMA facility
for disposal. Registered haulers shall not transfer any regulated municipal
waste from vehicles after collection or prior to disposal at the LCSWMA
facility.
A. Chemicals, poisons, explosives, radiological wastes and other
hazardous materials shall not be collected during regular pickups.
B. Hazardous waste shall not be allowed to accumulate in violation of Act
97, Act 101 or Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority
regulations.
C. Collection and transportation of hazardous materials shall be in
accordance with the requirements of LCSWMA, local, state and federal
regulatory controls.
A. Registered haulers shall notify their residential and commercial
customers of the procedures for the separation, segregation, and
packaging of designated recyclable materials. Dry cell batteries shall
be placed for collection, along with the recyclable items, in a battery
bag provided by the Township. The procedure shall allow for residential
units to commingle all designated recyclable materials, except yard
waste, in a single recycling container.
B. Registered haulers shall provide multiresidential and nonresidential
units the following:
(1) Recycling containers at easily accessible locations for source
separation of designated recyclable materials.
(2) Written instructions on the recycling plan.
(3) Collection of source-separated designated recyclable materials at a
frequency of not less than once per month.
(4) The property owner or the condominium association in case of
condominiums shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions
of this subsection.
C. Multiresidential units and nonresidential units shall source-separate
and set out leaves, grass clippings, mower-collected leaves and yard
waste for collection in accordance with the Code of the Township of
Manheim.
§ 421-31 MANHEIM CODE § 421-34
1:328
§ 421-34. Disposal of recyclable materials. [Amended 10-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-08]
Registered haulers shall transport the collected recyclable materials either
to a LCSWMA facility or directly to markets. Registered haulers shall take
ownership of recyclable materials upon collection, excluding leaves, grass
and yard waste. It is the responsibility of the community contractor or
registered hauler to remove and dispose of recyclable materials generated
in the Township in a manner which is consistent with the intent and effect
of the recycling program. Registered haulers shall be responsible to ensure
that all recyclable materials that are collected are transported to markets
for sale and not disposed of as regulated municipal waste. Registered
haulers shall transport leaves, grass and yard waste to DEP-approved sites
designated by the Township.
§ 421-35. Unlawful acts. [Amended 10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Violate any provision of this article.
(2) Deposit, dump, spill, throw, place, bury or allow to be blown, or
permit another to deposit, dump, spill, throw, place or bury or allow
to be blown, in or upon any parcel of land, lot, street, highway,
gutter, alley, water, stream, quarry, or ditch within the geographical
boundaries of this Township any solid waste material. This
prohibition shall not apply when a person deposits, dumps, spills,
throws, places or buries the following:
(a) Manure, fertilizer and refuse used as fertilizer in farming or
gardening;
(b) Dead household pets interred in places set aside for the
purpose.
(3) Collect or remove regulated municipal waste or recyclable
materials if that person is not a registered hauler.
(4) Permit the accumulation of residue of liquids, solids or a
combination of such material on the bottom or sides of containers.
(5) Collect, transport or convey regulated municipal waste or
recyclable materials in nonconforming vehicles.
(6) Scavenge any materials delivered and deposited for disposal.
(7) Salvage or reclaim any solid wastes, except at a properly permitted
LCSWMA facility in which salvage is an integral part of the
operation.
(8) Make refuse available for animal consumption unless such refuse
has been heat-treated to kill any disease therein.
§ 421-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-35
1:329
§ 421-36. Scavenging. [Amended 10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
From time of placement at curbside, all designated recyclable materials
shall be and become the property of the registered hauler servicing the
customer who placed the recyclable materials at the curbside. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person other than the appropriate registered
hauler to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
designated recyclable materials.
§ 421-37. Permit and registration requirements. [Amended
10-9-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-08]
§ 421-38. Inspection procedures.
§ 421-39. Violations and penalties.109
Any person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a summary
offense, which is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding
(9) Use, maintain or operate an open dump.
(10) Burn any solid waste, except in accordance with applicable
ordinances and statutes.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit any practices which are
otherwise in contravention of applicable federal, state or local laws or
regulations.
A. No person shall engage in any disposal or processing of any solid waste
material without a valid permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. No registered hauler shall use any vehicle for collection of regulated
municipal waste or recyclable materials without having completed and
filed an application to become a registered hauler with the Township.
A. All containers, vehicles, and equipment of applicants and registered
haulers shall be subject to inspection by the Township at any reasonable
time without prior notice.
B. The Township may inspect vehicles and equipment before being put
into operation and during operation. All vehicles must meet
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations.
C. If violations of this article are discovered in the course of these
inspections, the Township may proceed with prosecution under this
article or may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County
for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce this
article.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 421-35 MANHEIM CODE § 421-39
1:330
$1,000. Each day in violation of this article is a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 421-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 421-39
1:331
Chapter 435
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 352.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 367.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 480.
§ 421-39 MANHEIM CODE § 421-39
1:332
ARTICLE I
Street Acceptance Policy
[Adopted 4-9-1962 by Ord. No. 1962-17 (Part 12, Ch. 1, Art. A, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 435-1. Adoption of policy.
It shall be the policy of the Township, as it has been in the past, that
the Township Commissioners will consider accepting a road or street as
a Township road or street when the road or street is built according to
plans previously approved by the Township Commissioners and according
to Township specifications and upon the construction of houses or other
buildings on at least 25% of the lineal frontage of the properties facing the
road or street.
§ 435-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-1
1:333

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk and Curb Requirements
[Adopted 3-11-1963 by Ord. No. 1963-3 (Part 12, Ch. 2, of the 1976
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 435-2. Sidewalks and curbs required in certain instances.
All new developments or subdivisions in the Township shall make provisions
for curbing and, when required by the Lancaster County Planning
Commission, sidewalks, in accordance with the specifications hereinafter
appearing in this article, and the owners of divided tracts or tracts being
developed shall give assurances satisfactory to the Commissioners that
curbing and, when required, sidewalks shall be erected in accordance
with these specifications. The same specifications shall be adhered to in
constructing sidewalks and curbs in developments previously accepted
without sidewalk or curb and in parts of the Township where sidewalk or
curb had not previously been required and, in reconstructing or repairing
any sidewalk or curb, wherever located.
§ 435-3. Requirements for street acceptance.
No streets will be accepted unless the required curbing and, where required
by the Lancaster County Planning Commission, sidewalks have been
completed by the developer or owner.
§ 435-4. Construction specifications.
A. Line and grade. Curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with plans, lines and grades established by or approved by
the Township Engineer. Forms shall be straight and true to grade.
Before starting work, the contractor shall stretch string lines to check
the line and grade. The contractor shall notify the Engineer for final
inspection of string line prior to setting forms.
B. General requirements.
(1) Cleaning up. The contractor shall clean and remove from the
project and adjacent property all surplus and discarded materials,
equipment and temporary structures and shall have the project in a
presentable condition throughout within 48 hours after completion
of the work.
(2) Protection. Suitable barricades shall be placed around the work
area in such a manner as to protect both pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. Such barricades shall be properly lighted during the night
hours.
(3) Obstructions.
(a) When existing structures such as light standards, poles, fire
hydrants, etc., are within the limits of construction, prior to
§ 435-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-4
1:335
placing the concrete around such structures, a premolded
expansion joint 1/4 inch in thickness shall be placed around
the structure for the full depth of the concrete. The concrete
shall be scored in a block eight inches wider than the maximum
dimension of the structure.
(b) The distance from top of curb to center of the nut on the
pumper connection of fire hydrants shall be not less than 10
inches. Where the grade will not permit this clearance, a
circular depression shall be placed in the curb to provide the
necessary space.
(4) Restoration of existing sidewalks. When construction under this
specification covers only curbs, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to restore existing brick sidewalk for a distance of 18
inches back of the curb, or for the first square of concrete sidewalk.
The foundation of the sidewalk shall be thoroughly rammed before
the sidewalk is replaced.
(5) Intersections. At all street intersections, curb returns shall be
constructed with a radius as shown on the plans or directed by the
Engineer. Under no circumstances shall a curb radius be depressed
to form a driveway.
(6) Expansion joints.
(a) Where a sidewalk abuts the curb and a building, wall or other
permanent structure, a premolded expansion joint 1/4 inch in
thickness shall be placed between the curb and the sidewalk
for the full length of such permanent structure. Sidewalks shall
be constructed in separate slabs 30 feet in length, except for
closures. The slabs shall be separated by a transverse
premolded expansion joint 1/4 inch thick. The slabs between
expansion joints shall be divided into blocks five feet in length
by scoring transversely.
(b) Curbing shall be constructed in ten-foot sections. A premolded
expansion material having a minimum thickness of 1/4 inch
shall be placed between sections of curved curb and at
intervals of not more than 120 feet in a straight line or straight
grade. Intermediate joints between ten-foot sections shall be
formed of two layers of one-ply bituminous paper.
(7) Monuments. No monuments or property corners shall be covered
or disturbed by the construction of permanent sidewalk or curb.
Whenever monuments are either above or below the finished grade
of the sidewalk, the owner shall have the monument reset by an
engineer prior to pouring concrete.
(8) Guarantee. Concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be guaranteed by
the contractor for a period of one year from the date of completion.
§ 435-4 MANHEIM CODE § 435-4
1:336
If the concrete should fail within the guarantee period, the
contractor shall replace all broken or disintegrated sections.
C. Materials and mix. All materials shall conform to specifications for
Class A concrete, as specified by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, with a minimum compressive strength of 2,500 pounds
per square inch after 28 days.
D. Dimensions.
(1) Curbs. Curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed to the dimensions
shown on the plan of curb and street standards approved by the
Commissioners and Planning Commission.
(2) Sidewalk thickness. Sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of
four inches.
(3) Driveways. The curb shall not be depressed to more than one inch
above the street surface for driveways. For driveways to public
garages, gas stations and places of business, the length of this
depressed curb shall not exceed 35 feet without a safety island.
This safety island shall not be less than 15 feet in length. Pipes or
grates or other constructions shall not be placed in the gutter to
form a driveway ramp.
E. Foundation.
(1) Excavation material. Excavation for straight curb shall be made to
the required depth, and the material upon which the curb is to be
constructed shall be compacted to a firm even surface. Where the
subgrade is soft or spongy, a layer of crushed stone or cinders not
less than four inches thick shall be placed under straight curb.
Where excavation is carried below specified subgrade, the
excavation shall be refilled to grade with crushed stone thoroughly
compacted.
(2) Sidewalk and rolled curb. Excavations shall be made to the
required depth, and a layer of crushed stone or cinders not less
than four inches thick shall be placed and thoroughly compacted
prior to laying the sidewalk or rolled curb.
F. Forms. Forms for straight sections shall be of wood or metal, straight,
free from warp, and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the
concrete without springing. If wood forms are used, they shall be twoinch
planks, surfaced on the inside and the top. Forms for curbed
sections shall be wood, tempered hardboards, or metal, free from warp
and imperfections. Curved forms shall be adequately braced to resist
pressure and accurately set to conform to the arcs of the curves. Forms
shall be equal to the depth of the concrete. A front and back form shall
be used for curbs except where a good concrete sidewalk, which is not
to be removed, abuts the new curb. Forms shall be accurately set to line
and grade in such a manner as to prevent settlement or displacement.
§ 435-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-4
1:337
§ 435-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28110]
Any violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a public
nuisance, abatable as such, and, in addition, the violator shall be subject to
a fine or penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000, and costs.
G. Finishing.
(1) Curb. All forms must be removed within 24 hours after the concrete
has been placed, and minor defects shall be filled with mortar
composed of one part portland cement and two parts' fine
aggregate. The top and face of the curb from the top to nine inches
below or to the top of the street surface, when in place, shall be
finished while the concrete is still green by rubbing the surface
with a carborundum stone, soft brick or wood block and water until
a smooth, even surface is produced. Brush finishing or plastering
will not be permitted. All joints in the curb shall be promptly
opened from top to bottom, and edges adjacent to the joints shall
be sharp and clean cut.
(2) Sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be finished after pouring before the
concrete sets. Finish shall be broomed to form an abrasive surface.
H. Curing. Concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be protected from
rainstorms with paper, burlap, canvas or similar materials. In warm
weather, they shall be made wet daily for a minimum of four days.
During cool weather, when concrete is to be placed at temperatures
below 50° F. but not below 35° F., mats or double-thickness burlap shall
be placed over concrete, and, in addition, the contractor shall place hay
or straw over concrete not covered by forms to a depth of one foot. No
concrete shall be placed when the temperature is below 35° F.
I. Restoration of surfaces. After the concrete has cured sufficiently,
spaces adjacent to the curb and sidewalk shall be refilled with
acceptable material in layers of not more than four inches in depth. The
final layer of backfill shall consist of topsoil previously stripped, or new
topsoil, and shall be properly seeded. On the roadway side of all curbs,
backfill shall be brought to subgrade elevation, and the subsequent six
inches shall be backfilled with crushed stone, macadam base material
and surfaced with 2 1/2 inches of bituminous material approved by the
Engineer. Concrete curb and bituminous surfacing material shall be
sealed with a thin coating of BM-1 road oil.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 435-4 MANHEIM CODE § 435-5
1:338
ARTICLE III
Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7 (Part 12, Ch. 1, Art. B, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 435-6. Definitions.
Except in those instances when the context indicates otherwise, the
following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application under this article for a
permit.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit under this article
and has agreed to fulfill all the provisions of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, utility or
corporation.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any utility company, excluding Township authorities,
licensed by the Public Utility Commission of the commonwealth.
STREET — The entire right-of-way of a public street, highway, alley, road
or easement within the geographical limits of the Township, but shall not
include any state-designated highway over which the Department of
Transportation of the commonwealth has jurisdiction.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP AUTHORITY — Any governmental corporation created by the
Township pursuant to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Municipality
Authorities Act.111
§ 435-7. Permit requirements. [Amended 12-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-20]
A. No person or public utility shall excavate or open the surface of any
street without having first obtained a permit for that purpose in the
manner and subject to the conditions provided in this article. Neither
the Township, any Township department nor any Township authority,
the City of Lancaster ("city") or the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority
("LASA") shall be required to obtain a permit under this article;
however, any person or contractor performing work under contract
with the Township or a Township authority shall obtain a permit. Such
exemption shall only be applicable directly to the city and to LASA, and
not to any contractor or third party engaged by the city or LASA, and
shall only be applicable with respect to excavations or street opening
undertaken by the city or LASA in connection with the public sewer or
water systems of the city or LASA located within the Township.
B. Although exempted from obtaining a permit under this section:
111. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 435-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-7
1:339
§ 435-8. Application for permit.
Street opening permits shall be granted upon compliance with the following
conditions:
(1) The city and LASA shall, except in the case of emergency
excavations, provide the Township, by delivery to the Township
Manager-Secretary, with written notification of any intention to
undertake excavation or street opening, such written notification to
provide the formation as otherwise required of an applicant under
§ 435-8 of this article.
(2) The city and LASA shall provide to the Township, by delivery to the
Township Manager-Secretary, prior to undertaking any
nonemergency street opening or excavation, with proof of
compliance with requirements of § 435-8B as to surety, § 435-8C as
to insurance, and § 435-8D as to indemnity of the Township.
(3) The city and LASA shall undertake and restore any street opening
or excavation in compliance with the requirements of §§ 435-10 and
435-11.
(4) The city and LASA shall provide proof of guaranty and
maintenance, by delivery to the Township Manager-Secretary, and
shall be subject to the maintenance work requirements of § 435-12.
A. A written application signed and properly executed on behalf of the
applicant desiring to open the surface of or excavate any street shall be
filed with the Manager-Secretary or his designee. The application shall
state the name and address of the person or public utility intending to
perform the street opening or excavation work and, if different, the
name and address of the person or public utility for whom such work is
to be performed, the purpose for which such work is to be performed,
the size and location of the proposed work and the dates upon which the
work is to be commenced and completed.
B. The applicant shall submit and pay, with the application, a permit fee in
the amount established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for
each proposed to make an opening in excess of two square yards; the
applicant shall provide the Township with a surety bond or fund to be
held in escrow by the Township in lieu thereof, in a form designated and
approved by the Manager-Secretary and in an amount sufficient to
satisfy the cost of the work proposed in the application, as determined
by the Manager-Secretary.112
C. The applicant shall furnish proof, satisfactory to the Manager-
Secretary, that the applicant is insured in a reasonable amount,
satisfactory to the Manager-Secretary, against liability for any and all
claims, including personal injury and property damage claims which
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 435-7 MANHEIM CODE § 435-8
1:340
§ 435-9. Emergency excavations.
Public utilities may make excavations without a permit in emergency
situations, but shall apply for a permit within two business days from the
date such emergency work was begun.
§ 435-10. Regulation of opening and closing of excavations.
may arise from or out of the performance of the excavation work,
whether such work is to be performed by the applicant or by anyone
employed by the applicant.
D. The applicant shall be responsible for and shall agree to save the
Township, its Board of Commissioners, officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages, liabilities, claims or causes
of action which may arise or be claimed to arise by reason of the work
to be performed in the application. The acceptance of any permit under
this article shall constitute an agreement by the applicant to so save the
Township, its Board of Commissioners, officers, employees and agents
harmless, whether or not so expressed in the permit as issued.
E. No excavation work, except emergency utility work as provided in
§ 435-9, shall be commenced until a permit is issued.
F. The Manager-Secretary shall review each application and grant or deny
a permit to the applicant upon completion of the review. If a permit is
issued, the permittee shall be provided with a street opening release
card, which shall be addressed to the office of the Manager-Secretary
and shall be in a form designated by the Manager-Secretary.
G. No permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have paid to the
Township all moneys then due the Township upon any prior excavation
or excavations or for any loss, damage, or expense incurred by the
Township by reason of any prior excavation or excavations.
A. The permittee shall provide all barricades, flashers, flares, signs,
fencing, plating and all other devices necessary for the proper
protection of the public and the regulation of traffic during the time a
street is under excavation and until such work is completed. The
permittee shall provide trench shoring to protect workers, inspectors
and all personnel involved with the excavation and as may be required
by law.
B. No more than 200 feet of excavation measured longitudinally shall be
opened in any street at any one time. Accesses to private properties
adjacent to the excavation shall be maintained for emergency vehicle
traffic at all times. No street shall be closed entirely to traffic at any
time, unless written permission to so close an entire street to traffic is
granted by the Manager-Secretary.
C. The permittee shall remove all excavated materials from the site and
dispose of such materials at the permittee's expense. After the work is
§ 435-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-10
1:341
§ 435-11. Permanent restoration.
§ 435-12. Maintenance requirements.
The permittee shall guarantee and maintain his work for 12 months from
the date on which the Manager-Secretary actually receives the permittee's
street opening release card. Within such twelve-month period, the
permittee shall, upon receipt of a written notification from the Manager-
Secretary, perform or cause to be performed any and all necessary work
then required to correct any defect which has arisen in or to correct
the restoration work previously performed. The Manager-Secretary shall
determine the extent and methods of corrective work which shall be
required. Should the permittee fail to perform such required corrective
work within five days of receipt of written notification from the Manager-
Secretary, the Township, at its discretion, may complete such work and shall
invoice the permittee for the actual total expense incurred by the Township
to perform the work, including expense incurred for labor, equipment,
materials, plus 10% of the amount of such total expense. Upon the
permittee's failure to pay the amount of such invoice within 30 days of the
invoice date, the invoice amount, as well as all fees and costs involved in
completed, the excavation shall be backfilled with crushed stone and
thoroughly tamped to stabilize the base to prevent any and all
shrinkage. No stones over three inches in diameter shall be used in
such backfilling. The disrupted cartway area shall receive a temporary
wearing surface of asphalt cold patch mix until the time of permanent
restoration of the excavation. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to maintain inspection of and complete all rehabilitation work
on the street openings during the time the temporary paving is in place.
D. The permittee shall immediately remove any earth or other excavated
material which rolls, flows, spreads or washes upon any street.
A. The permittee shall be responsible for the permanent restoration of the
street upon completion of excavation and closing. The permittee shall
use materials of the same type and depth of the materials in the existing
street. Any and all disrupted entities shall be replaced in the same
condition as existed prior to removal. All backfilling, paving and
associated procedures shall conform to Township specifications. The
Township shall establish standards for backfilling and paving materials
and procedures. Details specifying backfilling and paving procedures
and materials shall be obtained from the Manager-Secretary prior to
commencement of any street opening or excavation work.
B. The permittee shall complete final restoration within the period of six
months from the date of issuance of the permit. Upon completion of
final restoration work, the permittee shall personally deliver or mail by
first-class mail, postage prepaid, the street opening release card to the
office of the Manager-Secretary.
§ 435-10 MANHEIM CODE § 435-12
1:342
collection of that amount, shall be chargeable against the posted bond or
escrowed fund.
§ 435-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-28113]
Any person or public utility who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, for every such violation, be subject to a fine or penalty of not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000, and costs, provided that each failure
to obtain a permit, or, if a permit has been obtained, each failure to comply
with any requirement of this article and each day on which such violation
continues, shall constitute a separate violation. The Township reserves
the right to deny the issuance of permits to any person or public utility
under this article if that person or public utility has previously violated any
provision of this article.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 435-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-13
1:343

ARTICLE IV
Obstructions in Streets and Easements
[Adopted 7-14-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-7 (Part 12, Ch. 1, Art. C, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 435-14. Prohibited acts.
Except as permitted in § 469-1, no person shall construct, plant, maintain,
or permit to be constructed, planted or maintained any tree, plant, crops,
shrubs, underbrush, refuse or other obstructions in the legal right-of-way
of any street, highway, alley, road, or easement within the geographical
limits of the Township, not including any streets or highways over which
the Department of Transportation of the commonwealth has jurisdiction,
so as to cause water runoff, discharge, or deposit of earth, stones, rubble,
branches, leaves, stalks, or any debris of any kind upon the cartway, or so
as to cause a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of any driver.
§ 435-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-28114]
Any person who violates any provision of this article by constructing,
planting or maintaining an obstruction on a street or on a portion of a street
is required to cut, alter or remove every such obstruction within 10 days
of written notice by the Township to do so, and, upon failure of any such
person to do so, the Township may so remove or cause such obstruction to
be removed at the expense of that person, and, in addition, that person shall
be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000,
and costs, provided that each day on which a violation is committed shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 435-16. Removal of obstructions by Township.
The Township may, but shall have no obligation to, cut, alter, or remove the
type or types of obstructions listed in § 480-71, Schedule I-M, as pertaining
to such street; and, to the extent any such removal shall involve removal of
trees, the Township shall make any logs, cordwood, or other forms of wood
available to the abutting owner in accordance with Section 2070 of the First
Class Township Code, Act of June 24, 1931 (P.L. 1206, No. 331), reenacted
and amended May 27, 1949 (P.L. 1955, No. 569, as amended).115
§ 435-17. Limited obligations and duties of Township.
Nothing in this article shall obligate or place any affirmative duty upon the
Township to inspect or examine any street for obstructions or to notify any
person of the existence of such obstructions or to cause the removal thereof.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 57070.
§ 435-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-17
1:345

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
§ 435-18. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Manheim Township
Snow Removal Ordinance."
§ 435-19. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
word "shall" is always mandatory.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
OWNER — The person(s) holding legal title to real estate.
PERSON — A natural person, trust, partnership, corporation, limitedliability
company, association or any other legal entity.
SIDEWALK — The concrete, paved or other improved pedestrian path
intended for public use, located adjacent to or within a street, as defined
below.
STREET — Any public right-of-way intended primarily for vehicular use, the
cartway of which is maintained by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
County of Lancaster, or the Township of Manheim. "Street" shall include the
cartway, shoulder, berm, curb and sidewalk (if located within the right-ofway).
TOWNSHIP OF MANHEIM — The elected or appointed officials of the
Township of Manheim, or any authorized representatives, or agencies of the
Township appointed by the Commissioners of the Township.
§ 435-20. Responsibility for removal; method.
A. The owner of any real property fronting or abutting on a sidewalk shall
remove and clear away or cause to be removed or cleared away snow
and/or ice from a path of at least 36 inches in width from those portions
of the sidewalk which front or abut on the owner's property.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D below, the owner shall remove and
clear away snow and ice from sidewalks fronting or abutting the
owner's property, as required by Subsection A above, within 24 hours
after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
C. Except as provided in Subsection D below, the owner shall remove and
clear away, as required by Subsection A above, snow and/or ice that
may come to rest upon the sidewalks fronting or abutting the owner's
§ 435-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-20
1:347
§ 435-21. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or within any street (including any
sidewalk, curb, cartway, shoulder or berm) or loading and unloading area
of a public transportation system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Township of Manheim, County of Lancaster and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, may deposit or mound snow, ice and abrasive material on or
within streets (including any sidewalk, curb, cartway, shoulder or berm)
incident to the clearing of streets or sidewalks.
§ 435-22. Violations and penalties; work performed by Township.
property as a result of drifting, melting and refreezing, street-clearing
activities or other method on a daily basis.
D. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
owner shall, within the time mentioned in Subsection B or C (as
applicable) hereof, cause enough salt, sand, or other suitable abrasive
material to be put on the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe for
pedestrians and shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause to
be cleared a path in said sidewalk of at least 36 inches in width and to
clean such sidewalks of slush or unneeded abrasives.
E. Snow, slush, ice, and/or abrasives removed from sidewalks shall be
placed or stored on the owner's property and in no case be placed or
stored on the street side of the sidewalk.
F. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent an owner, by lease
or otherwise, from delegating the obligations imposed by this article to
a tenant or occupant, but such delegation shall not relieve the owner of
the owner's obligations, duties and liabilities under this article.
A. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article, upon
conviction thereof in summary proceedings, shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(1) For a first violation, a fine of up to $200.
(2) For a second violation or any subsequent violation, a fine of not less
than $200 and not more than $1,000 for each violation and, in
default of payment thereof, imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days.
B. In the event that the property owner refuses or fails to comply with the
provisions of § 435-20, the Township may cause the violation to be
corrected, keeping an account of the expenses. All such costs and
expenses shall be charged to and paid by the owner. All costs and
expenses incurred by the Township in the correction of violations may
be a lien upon the responsible owner's property, and whenever a bill
therefor remains unpaid for a period of 60 days after it has been
§ 435-20 MANHEIM CODE § 435-22
1:348
rendered, the Township may request that the Township Solicitor file a
municipal claim for such costs and expenses, together with a penalty
often 10% thereon, in the manner provided by law for collection of
municipal claims. Alternatively, the Township may request that the
Township Solicitor file an action in assumpsit for collection of the
amount due, including attorneys' fees and costs, without filing a
municipal claim.
§ 435-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-22
1:349

ARTICLE VI
Dumpsters and Portable Storage Devices
[Adopted 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
§ 435-23. Purpose.
The primary purpose of public streets is for use by vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. Reasonable regulation of obstruction in public streets and sidewalks
is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
§ 435-24. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
DUMPSTER — A metal storage receptacle used to temporarily store debris
or garbage which is then emptied of its contents or removed with its
contents by a truck specially equipped for this purpose.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, utility or
corporation.
PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICE — Any portable structure, not self-propelled,
designed to store personal belongings, whether constructed of flexible or
inflexible material, including but not limited to, containers commonly known
as "portable storage devices" or "PODS®."
STREET — The entire right-of-way of a public street, highway or road within
the geographical limits of the Township, but shall not include any statedesignated
highway over which the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has jurisdiction.
UNIT — A dumpster or portable storage device.
§ 435-25. Permit required.
No person shall place or cause to be placed a unit upon any street without
first having obtained a permit from the Police Department. It shall be
the responsibility of the property owner benefitting from the use of the
dumpster to obtain a permit and to publicly display a copy of the permit
before placement of any dumpster.
§ 435-26. Permit application.
A permit application shall be submitted to the Township Police Department
on an application form provided by the Township Police Department for
this purpose. The application must set forth the special circumstances
necessitating the placement of the unit upon the street and the proposed
location.
§ 435-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-27
1:351
§ 435-27. Permit fee and duration.
Upon approval of the permit application by the Township Police
Department, a permit for placement of the unit shall be issued by the
Township Police Department upon payment of the permit fee and shall be
for a term not to exceed 30 days. The permit fee shall initially be set at $50.
Any change in the permit fee by the Township shall be by resolution of the
Commissioners from time to time.
§ 435-28. Permit conditions.
Upon issuance of the permit, the permit holder shall comply with the
following requirements:
§ 435-29. Permit revocation.
Any permit issued by the Township Police Department as provided herein
may be immediately revoked by the Township Police Department upon
mailing of notice of revocation to the permit holder at the address stated in
the permit application for any of the following reasons:
A. Any unit for which a permit is issued shall bear reflective tape or
illuminated markings in order to provide adequate warning of the
placement of the unit to pedestrians and motorists.
B. No unit shall be placed nearer than 15 feet to any fire hydrant or other
intended fire-fighting equipment.
C. The location of any unit on any street shall not obstruct any pedestrian
way or the lane of travel of any street.
D. The location of any unit upon any street shall not interfere with any
required clear sight distance across any intersection or driveway.
E. No materials contained in a unit shall emit any noxious or offensive
odor or otherwise create any hazard or risk to public health.
F. The permit shall be conspicuously place in a location that permits it to
be identified from the street.
G. If any damage or injury to the street shall be caused or done by the use
or occupancy of any street hereunder, the party to whom the permit is
issued shall be responsible and liable for the same and shall restore the
street to its original condition. If the permit holder refuses to properly
restore the street to its original condition, the Township may do so and
collect the cost of the same from the permit holder.
A. Failure to comply with any provision of this article or any requirement
as set forth in the permit or permit application.
B. The emission of any foul or noxious odor from material contained in the
dumpster, regardless of whether the dumpster is filled to capacity or
not.
§ 435-27 MANHEIM CODE § 435-29
1:352
§ 435-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall upon conviction
thereof, be fined no less than $25 and nor more than $1,000. Failure to
immediately remove a unit for which a permit has been revoked shall
constitute a separate violation for each day after revocation and the
Township may so remove or cause the unit to be removed at the expense of
the person identified as the permit holder on the revoked permit.
§ 435-31. Severability.
Should any paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of the article shall
remain in full force and effect, and the same shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this article.
C. The presence of any vehicular, pedestrian, fire, health or safety hazard
or potential hazard arising after issuance of a permit.
§ 435-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-31
1:353
Chapter 455
TAXATION
§ 435-31 MANHEIM CODE § 435-31
1:354
ARTICLE I
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-37 (Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. B, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 455-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax Ordinance
of the Township of Manheim."
§ 455-2. Statutory authority.
This realty transfer tax is levied under authority of Article XI-D, entitled
"Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer
Tax Act, which is a new article added by Act 77-1986 (Act of July 2, 1986,
No. 77) to the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Tax Act, Act 14-1981 (Act
of May 5, 1981, No. 14, P.L. 36), as amended. The Pennsylvania Real Estate
Transfer Tax Act is codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., and Article XI-D is
codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq. This realty transfer tax is also levied
under authority of the "Local Tax Enabling Act," Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, as amended.
§ 455-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons.
COLLECTOR — The Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby appointed Collector of the tax levied by this
article.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States, or any other state,
territory, foreign country, or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys,
transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise
of title to real estate within the Township, but does not include wills,
mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments of like character given
as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land
contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until
the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable over a period
of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest
or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 455-9 of this article.
§ 455-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-3
1:355
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75%
of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least
75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by
members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall include
the leasing to members of the same family of property which is directly
and principally used for agricultural purposes. The business of
agriculture shall not be deemed to include:116
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75%
of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least
75% of the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by
members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall include
the leasing to members of the same family of property which is directly
and principally used for agricultural purposes. The business of
agriculture shall not be deemed to include:117
LIVING TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust, intended as
a will substitute by the settlor, which becomes effective during the
lifetime of the settlor, but from which trust distributions cannot be
made to any beneficiaries other than the settlor prior to the death of
the settlor.118
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
(1)
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
(2)
(3) Fur farming.
(4) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
(5) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
(1)
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
(2)
(3) Fur farming.
(4) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
(5) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
117. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
118. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 455-3 MANHEIM CODE § 455-3
1:356
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors or lineal descendants of any
of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any
of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption
shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living
trust, which takes effect during the lifetime of the settlor and for which
the trustees of the trust take title to property primarily for the purpose
of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution to the named
beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that
has an objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either
expressly or impliedly have any of the following features: the treatment
of beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the interests in the trust
as personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in
the trust, centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries,
or continuity of life.119
PERSON — Every natural person, association, corporation, or entity of
any kind. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine
or imprisonment, or both, the term "person," as applied to associations,
shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof and,
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is
primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments, including without
limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas,
quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees,
and other improvements, immovables or interests which, by
custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial
plant.
(1)
(2) A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or
occupancy agreement.
(3)
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
(1)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
(2)
119. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 455-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-3
1:357
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering,
accepting or presenting for recording of a document.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Manheim, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
VALUE —
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time,
the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific
number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate, or perpetual leasehold; or
(1)
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of
a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of
a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple,
life estate or perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a
leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or
occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has
equity. In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that
a right or option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the
rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating
the rental charge is established.
(2)
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length
for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration
therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances
thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby,
whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and
ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens
or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are
charged against other real estate, provided that where the
document shall set forth a nominal consideration, the value thereof
shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale.
(1)
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary
worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement,
a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or
the real estate of an acquired company, value shall be the actual
monetary worth of the real estate within the Township, determined
by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local real
estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district in which the Township is
(2)
§ 455-3 MANHEIM CODE § 455-3
1:358
§ 455-4. Imposition of tax.
A tax is hereby levied and imposed for general revenue purposes, on every
real estate transaction, at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by the document involved in the real estate transaction.
located as established by the State Tax Equalization Board, or
a commensurate part of the assessment where the assessment
includes other real estate.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection (1) or (2) of this
definition, the actual monetary worth of such interest.
(3)
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures
or other permanent improvements to real estate between the
grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not
removed thereby, or between the grantor, the agent or principal of
the grantor or a related corporation, association or partnership and
the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
(4)
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
A. The tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the document is
presented for recording, within 30 days of acceptance of the document,
or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. If the real estate is located partially within and partially outside the
Township, the tax shall be calculated on the value of the portion within
the Township.
C. The tax imposed hereunder shall be due and payable to the Collector, as
a joint and several liability, by every person who makes, executes,
delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document, or in whose
behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or
presented for recording. In the case of an acquired company, the
company shall also have liability for payment of the tax. All such
persons shall also be liable for any penalties imposed under this article.
D. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
on a real estate transaction by the Township and other political
subdivisions shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in Section 8 of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6908, so that if any other political
subdivision imposes a tax on real estate transactions taxed under this
article, the provisions of said Section 8 shall apply.
§ 455-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-5
1:359
§ 455-5. Evidence of payment.
Payment of the tax imposed hereunder shall be evidenced by the Collector
affixing on the document an official stamp or writing setting forth the date
of payment of the tax and amount of tax paid.
§ 455-6. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a real
estate transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 455-7. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions, by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed or confirmation
in connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance
by the condemning body of the property condemned to the owner
of record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided said reconveyance is
made within one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at Sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or the
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
§ 455-5 MANHEIM CODE § 455-7
1:360
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this subsection. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.120
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust instrument.121
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
considered for the purposes of this article as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee.122
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed.123
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor.124
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
121. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
123. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
124. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 455-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-7
1:361
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(14) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Township reasonably determines that the primary
intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the
tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee, or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conservation, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
§ 455-7 MANHEIM CODE § 455-7
1:362
§ 455-8. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 455-7 of this article, documents which
make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate
between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for
historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space
opportunities or a transfer from such a conservancy to the United
States, the commonwealth or to any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions; or any transfer from such a
conservancy where the real estate is encumbered by a perpetual
agricultural conservation easement as defined by the Act of June
30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the "Agricultural Area
Security Law,"125 and such conservancy has owned the real estate
for at least two years immediately prior to the transfer.126
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.127
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.128
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
125. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 901 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
127. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 455-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-8
1:363
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of
this article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 455-9. Acquired companies.
§ 455-10. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm corporation under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.129
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the Collector for recording and
for the affixation of the official stamp or writing evidencing payment of
the tax. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings
of the acquired company in the Township.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
129. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 455-8 MANHEIM CODE § 455-10
1:364
§ 455-11. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Collector for recording
shall set forth therein and as part of such document the true, full and
complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this
article. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship, provided the relationship is specified in the deed, instrument
or writing. Documents which are not to be recorded shall be presented to
the Collector and shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document
and a statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with
the transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and
complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not
subject to tax under this article. Evidence of payment shall be affixed to the
original document and the certified copy. The certified copy and statement
of value shall be filed with the Collector.
§ 455-12. Unlawful acts.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make, execute, deliver, accept, or present for recording or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted, or presented for recording
any document without the full amount of tax thereon being duly
paid;
(2) Fail to record a declaration of acquisition, as required by this
article;
(3) Fraudulently affix to any document any forged evidence of
payment; or
(4) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of
this article or any rules and regulations promulgated by the
Township under this article or any rules and regulations of the
§ 455-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-12
1:365
§ 455-13. Civil penalties.
§ 455-14. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article, together with all penalties, shall be a lien
against the real estate to which the document relates and, in the case of
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue to the extent applicable to
the tax levied hereunder.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a summary offense.
C. A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition, when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
A. If any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be paid when
due, 10% of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected as an
initial penalty for nonpayment or underpayment of the tax.
B. In addition, if any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be
paid when due, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax
at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a month, on the amount
of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid
in full.
C. In addition, in the case of failure of any acquired company to record a
declaration of acquisition, as required by this article, unless it is shown
to the satisfaction of the Township that such failure is due to reasonable
cause, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax at the rate
of 5% per month or fractional part of a month, on the amount of the
unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid in full.
This penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties, but shall not in
the aggregate exceed 50% of the amount of the unpaid tax.
D. In addition, if any part of any underpayment of tax is due to fraud, there
shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
E. In addition, if the Township files suit in order to collect the amount of
any tax not paid when due under this article, at the discretion of the
court, any person liable for payment of the tax shall also be liable for
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township in prosecution of
the suit.
F. No document upon which tax is imposed by this article shall at any time
be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall
proof thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of this
commonwealth or recorded in the office of any Recorder of Deeds or
any county of this commonwealth, unless the tax imposed hereunder
shall have been paid in full and evidence of payment shall have been
affixed thereto by the Collector.
§ 455-12 MANHEIM CODE § 455-14
1:366
an acquired company, the real estate owned by the acquired company. The
lien shall date from the time when the tax is due and payable and shall
continue until discharged by payment in full of the tax, together with all
penalties. In order to enforce the lien, the Township may proceed under the
Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., or in any
other appropriate manner.
§ 455-15. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax imposed under this article shall be fully paid and have priority out of
the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the Sheriff, or other officer, conducting said sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first monies paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 455-16. Enforcement.
§ 455-17. Collector.
A. In order to determine whether the proper amount of tax has been paid,
without limiting any other rights of the Township, the Township shall
have the right to review all documents or records relating to any real
estate transaction or any related transactions and to take such other
steps as the Township shall deem necessary or appropriate, including a
review or audit of any documents or records of any party to a real estate
transaction to determine the fair market value of the real estate or any
other relevant matter as determined by the Township. Upon request of
the Township, and at such place and time as specified by the Township,
any party shall make available to the Township any documents or
records requested by the Township.
B. In the event any tax is not paid when due, the Township may enforce
payment of the tax, together with all penalties, by suit in assumpsit or
any other appropriate means.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the
collection agent for this tax, without compensation from the Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Collector shall not
accept for recording any document unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each political
subdivision.
C. On or before the 10th day of each month, the Collector shall pay over to
the Township all taxes collected under this article, less 2% for use of the
county, and shall also provide a report containing the information
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
§ 455-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-17
1:367
§ 455-18. Rules and regulations.
The Township may promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and
regulations for the interpretation, collection and enforcement of the tax.
§ 455-19. Interpretation; effect.
§ 455-20. Effective date; duration.
The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 8, 1987, and
shall continue in force hereafter without annual reenactment.
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. In accordance with Act 77-1986,130 any Recorder of Deeds who shall
record any document upon which tax is imposed under this article
without payment of tax as required under this article, as is indicated in
the document or accompanying statement of value, shall, upon
summary conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of
prosecution.
A. To the extent this article imposes a tax on a real estate transaction
which is subject to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax imposed by Act 77-1986,131 and to the extent not inconsistent
herewith or with rules or regulations adopted by the Township, this
article shall be interpreted in the same manner as Act 77-1986 and in
accordance with regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. This article shall impose a tax on all transactions which the municipality
is permitted to tax under Act 77-1986 to the fullest extent permissible.
C. In the event this article is declared invalid, the prior ordinance or
ordinances of the municipality levying a realty transfer tax or taxes
shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any way
by enactment of this article.
D. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any ordinance in force prior to enactment of this article.
130. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
131. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
§ 455-17 MANHEIM CODE § 455-20
1:368
ARTICLE II
Tax Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-21 (Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. A, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 455-21. Discounts on taxes paid within two months of tax
notice.132
Except as provided in Article I, Real Estate Transfer Tax, and Article III,
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax, of this chapter, all taxpayers subject
to the payment of taxes levied by the Board of Commissioners of Manheim
Township on persons, property and occupations shall be entitled to a
discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon payment in full within two
months of the date of the tax notice.133
§ 455-22. Failure to pay taxes.
All taxpayers failing to make payment of such taxes within four months of
the date of the tax notice shall pay a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be
added to the tax due and collected by the Tax Collector.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
133. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 3-2001, Tax rate for current year, which immediately preceded
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 455-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-22
1:369

ARTICLE III
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-21 (Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. C, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 10-24-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-14]
§ 455-23. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act134 shall have the meanings
set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Manheim Township Board of Commissioners.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Township of Manheim.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted,
or reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 455-24. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1.00% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1.00% on
earned income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a
resident of the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or
134. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 455-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-24
1:371
§ 455-25. Exemption for persons under age 16.
This governing body finds that minors of various age groups have
traditionally, and with judicial sanction, been considered as comprising
separate classes for many legislative purposes; and minors under the age
of 16 are generally unemancipated and subject to compulsory school
attendance and child labor laws, and therefore have limited earned income
and net profits and control of money such that enforcement of reporting
and collection of tax hereunder against them would yield inconsequential
amounts and be unduly difficult, expensive, and not in the public interest.
For these reasons, individuals under the age of 16 years are exempt from
liability for the tax.
§ 455-26. Exemption from municipal nonresident tax.
activity of any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing
authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1.0%. This combined tax rate is included solely for the
purpose of providing information applicable on the date of adoption of
this article. This combined tax rate might change if the school district
changes the tax rate imposed by the school district.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 0.0%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the
TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and
procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 455-24 MANHEIM CODE § 455-26
1:372
§ 455-27. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 455-28. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax and file tax returns in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 455-29. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
§ 455-30. Interest; penalties; costs; fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 455-31. Purpose; prior enactments.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and
restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required by
Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net profits
of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this
article. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting
with the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior to
adoption of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a
continuation of such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If this
article is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
article. If any part of this article is declared invalid, the similar part of any
prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be
affected by adoption of this article. The provisions of this article shall not
affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any
A. Individuals who are residents of a state other than Pennsylvania are
exempt from liability for the tax, but only if all local governments of the
locality where the individual resides either:
(1) Impose no tax on the income of a Pennsylvania resident derived
from activities within the locality; or
(2) Exempt that income from tax.
B. In addition to this exemption from municipal nonresident tax, certain
credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations.
§ 455-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-31
1:373
suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty
or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to
adoption of this article. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,
this article shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 455-31 MANHEIM CODE § 455-31
1:374
ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-24 (Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. D, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 455-32. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person or persons appointed by this article or by
subsequent enactment of the governing body to collect the tax imposed
by this article.
COMPENSATION — Salary, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees, or
any other payment or income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS — The meanings as set forth in
the Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6913.135
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2008.
EMPLOYEE — An individual paid compensation by an employer to
perform an occupation of any kind.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, government
agency, or other entity engaged in business or operating within the
taxing authority, employing one or more individuals engaged in an
occupation.
ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,
and as amended in the future.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of Manheim
Township.
OCCUPATION — Any work, job, activity, livelihood, trade, profession,
business or enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or
other, for which any compensation is received. A person may have more
than one occupation.
REGULATIONS — Regulations duly adopted by the Collector for
administration of the tax. To the extent allowed by law, including,
but not limited to, 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937, the governing body intends to
incorporate future amendments to the regulations. If a court prohibits
such construction, the governing body intends to incorporate the
regulations as they exist on the date of adoption of this article. A
copy of the regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
135. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 6913 was repealed 7-2-2008 by P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective
6-30-2012. For current provisions, see 53 P.S. § 6924.501 et seq.
§ 455-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-32
1:375
§ 455-33. Imposition of tax; regulations.
§ 455-34. Exemptions from tax.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Manheim Township.
TAXPAYER — Any individual on whom the tax is imposed.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of any tax deducted from an employee or otherwise owed under
this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. The taxing authority hereby imposes a tax of $52 on each individual
who engages in an occupation within the boundaries of the taxing
authority. Pursuant to the terms of the Enabling Act, although the tax is
imposed at the rate of $52 per annum, $10 per annum will be paid to
the Manheim Township School District for so long as the Manheim
Township School District imposes a tax upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation within Manheim Township, and $42 per annum will be
paid to the Township. The tax is imposed for the tax year starting on the
effective date and ending on the next December 31. The tax is imposed
for each tax year thereafter without annual reenactment, until this
article is repealed or amended.
B. The tax is based on an individual engaging in an occupation within the
taxing authority at any time during the tax year and shall be known as
the "local services tax" or the "occupation privilege tax." The Enabling
Act, as amended by Act 7 of 2007, has denominated any occupation
privilege tax as a local services tax.
C. All provisions of the Enabling Act imposing requirements applicable to
a local services tax and all provisions of the regulations are
incorporated into this article. If there is any discrepancy between the
regulations and the Enabling Act, or this article and the Enabling Act,
the provisions of the Enabling Act shall control.
D. The tax is imposed and proceeds of the tax shall be used in accordance
with all applicable requirements of the Enabling Act.
A. An individual whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the taxing authority in any tax year is less than $12,000
is exempt from the tax for the tax year.
B. Individuals may also be exempt for other reasons, including disability
resulting from serving in the armed forces, active duty as a member of a
reserve component of the armed forces, and other reasons as set forth
in the regulations.
§ 455-32 MANHEIM CODE § 455-34
1:376
§ 455-35. Multiple jurisdictions; multiple employers.
Rules applicable to individuals who engage in an occupation in multiple
jurisdictions or have multiple employers are as set forth in the regulations.
§ 455-36. Duty of employer to collect.
C. An individual may obtain an exemption prospectively by filing a local
services tax exemption certificate on a form provided by the Collector in
accordance with the regulations. The exemption certificate shall be
filed with the Collector and, if the individual is an employee, also with
the individual's employer.
D. If an individual pays the tax and at the end of any tax year has total
income during the tax year that is less than the income exemption
amount, or otherwise qualifies for an exemption, the taxing authority
will, on request, after the end of the tax year, refund to the taxpayer the
tax paid for the tax year.
A. Every employer not registered under the provisions of an enactment of
the taxing authority imposing a tax on earned income and net profits
shall, within 30 days after the effective date, or within 30 days after first
becoming an employer, register with the Collector the employer's
name, address and any other information required by the Collector on
an employer registration form prescribed by the Collector.
B. Every employer is required to deduct the tax as set forth in the
regulations from any compensation payable to any employee on whom
the tax is imposed, unless the employee has filed a local services tax
withholding exemption certificate in accordance with the regulations.
As set forth in the regulations, the full amount of the tax shall be
deducted in lump sum if the combined municipal and school district tax
rate is $10 or less. As set forth in the regulations, the tax shall be
deducted pro rata on a per-payroll basis if the combined municipal and
school district tax rate exceeds $10.
C. As set forth in the regulations, no employee is required to pay tax
through more than one employer during any payroll period.
D. An employer is excused from withholding to the extent provided in the
regulations if the employee has filed a local services tax withholding
exemption certificate in accordance with the regulations. The
exemption certificate may provide exemption from withholding based
on:
(1) Low income or other exemption from tax as stated in the
regulations;
(2) Withholding by another principal employer;
(3) Prior payment to the taxing authority of the full amount of the tax
imposed by the taxing authority; or
§ 455-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-36
1:377
§ 455-37. Self-employed individuals.
Every individual who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason
is not deducted by an employer under § 455-36 of this article, shall file a
tax return and pay the tax directly to the Collector. Except as otherwise
stated in the regulations, every such individual engaged in an occupation
within the taxing authority at any time after the effective date and on or
before March 31 shall file a tax return and pay the full amount of the
tax to the Collector on or before April 30. Except as otherwise stated in
the regulations, every such individual who has not previously paid the full
(4) Prior payment during the same tax year of $52 as a tax imposed
under the Enabling Act on an individual based on engaging in an
occupation in Pennsylvania.
E. If an employee has filed a local services tax withholding exemption
certificate and it is determined as set forth in the regulations that the
employee is not eligible for exemption or no longer eligible for
exemption, the employer shall start or restart withholding as set forth
in the regulations.
F. As to each taxpayer employed at any time after the effective date and on
or before March 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the regulations
and shall file a tax return and pay to the Collector, on or before April 30,
the amount of tax deducted on or before March 31. As to each taxpayer
for whom the full amount of the tax has not previously been deducted or
paid directly by the taxpayer to the Collector, who is employed at any
time in any of the three-month periods ending June 30, September 30,
and December 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the regulations
and shall file a tax return and pay to the Collector on or before the
following July 30, October 30, and January 30 the amount of tax
deducted on or before June 30, September 30, and December 31,
respectively. Every employer shall follow this same procedure in every
tax year.
G. Tax amounts deducted from compensation by an employer shall at all
times be the property of the taxing authority and shall constitute a trust
fund held by the employer until remitted to the Collector, and deduction
of tax from wages shall, as between the employee and the taxing
authority, constitute payment of the tax by the employee, regardless of
any insolvency or failure to remit by the employer.
H. Any employer who fails to deduct the tax or who fails to pay the tax to
the Collector shall be liable for the tax and applicable penalties in full as
though the tax had originally been imposed against such employer. If
the employer is a partnership, the partners thereof, and if the employer
is a corporation, limited liability company, or other organization or
entity, all officers thereof, and any other person responsible for
payment of taxes shall have the same liability as the employer.
§ 455-36 MANHEIM CODE § 455-37
1:378
amount of the tax who engages in an occupation within the taxing authority
at any time in any of the three-month periods ending June 30, September
30, and December 31 shall file a tax return and pay the full amount of the
tax to the Collector on or before the following July 30, October 30, and
January 30, respectively. Every individual who is self-employed, or whose
tax for any other reason is not deducted by an employer under § 455-36 of
this article, shall follow this same procedure in every tax year.
§ 455-38. Nonresident taxpayers.
By virtue of engaging in an occupation within the taxing authority, both
resident and nonresident individuals are subject to the tax.
§ 455-39. Duties of Collector; administration and enforcement of
tax.
§ 455-40. Interest; penalties; costs; fines.
A. The Collector shall collect the tax, fines and penalties imposed by this
article and shall keep records of collection.
B. The Collector may examine the books, papers, and records of any
individual or employer in order to verify compliance with this article.
Every individual the Collector believes might be subject to the tax and
every employer or person the Collector believes might be an employer
shall, on request, meet with and show to the Collector all books, papers,
and records requested by the Collector. Every employer or person the
Collector believes might be an employer shall also provide access to the
employer's books, papers, and records at the employer's place of
business and provide a place for the Collector's review of such books,
papers, and records. For purposes of this article, "records" shall include
records in any form, including computer and other electronic records.
C. The Collector may file suit in its name or in the name of the taxing
authority for recovery of any amount owed to the taxing authority.
D. Except as limited by any applicable law, the Collector shall have all of
the powers that the taxing authority has or that the law prescribes for
tax collectors relating to administration and enforcement of this article.
E. The Collector may promulgate and enforce regulations relating to
administration and enforcement of this article.
A. If any tax is not paid when due, the following penalty shall apply: a
penalty of 5% of the amount unpaid for each month or a fraction of a
month during which the amount remains unpaid.
B. Any individual or entity who or which fails or refuses to pay tax or other
amounts owed or to pay tax deducted from employees shall, in addition
to paying the amount owed, pay reasonable costs incurred, as set forth
in the regulations, by the taxing authority, Collector, or any other
person or entity appointed to collect the amount, to provide notices of
§ 455-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-40
1:379
§ 455-41. Appointment of Tax Collector; tax collection agreement.
The Lancaster County Tax Collection Bureau, also doing business as the
Middletown Area Tax Collection Bureau, is appointed Collector according to
the terms of a tax collection agreement as presented this date or previously
executed. The officers of this taxing authority are authorized to take any
actions necessary or appropriate to carry out the terms of this article and
the tax collection agreement.
delinquency or to implement similar procedures to collect delinquent
taxes.
C. If legal proceedings are commenced for failure to pay any amount
owed, the person or entity liable therefor shall, in addition to the
amount owed, pay to the taxing authority, Collector, or any other person
or entity appointed to collect the tax the costs of collection, including
reasonable attorney fees.
D. Any individual or entity who or which fails or refuses to file any
employer registration form or tax return required by this article or the
regulations, who or which fails or refuses to pay tax or other amounts
owed or to pay tax deducted from employees, who or which refuses to
permit the Tax Collector to examine books, papers, and records, or who
or which makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent filing or return
shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and
costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days. If an employer is a
partnership, the partners thereof, and if an employer is a corporation,
limited liability company, or other organization or entity, all officers
thereof, and any other person responsible for payment of taxes, shall be
subject to prosecution under this section as the employer.
E. The failure of any individual or entity to receive or procure forms
required for making a required filing or return shall not excuse making
such a filing or return.
§ 455-40 MANHEIM CODE § 455-41
1:380
Chapter 462
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned and junked vehicles and
equipment — See Ch. 474.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 480.
§ 462-1. No-preference towing lists and regulations adopted.
The no-preference towing lists and modified regulations relating thereto are
hereby adopted as part of the rules and regulations of Manheim Township
as promulgated by the Manheim Township Police Department. Applications
for placement on the lists shall be on the form or forms prepared and
maintained by the Manheim Township Police Department.
§ 462-2. Requirements for no-preference towers.
A. The Police Department will maintain two lists of towers for vehicles the
owner of which does not have a specific tow company he/she prefers to
remove his/her vehicle.
(1) List 1 is for cars, motorcycles, and legally loaded trucks which do
not have more than four wheels and tires.
(2) List 2 is for heavy trucks and any other vehicles with more than
four wheels and tires.
B. To comply with the requirements of the Vehicle Code in regard to the
removal of a vehicle to the nearest place of safety, no-preference towers
must have a storage area located within Manheim Township, East
Petersburg, or Lancaster Township; however, if police service to East
Petersburg or Lancaster Township is ever discontinued, then the
storage facility must be located within Manheim Township or such
remaining municipality to which Manheim Township continues to
provide police services. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15]
C. This storage location must be a storage facility with a minimum of 1,500
square feet. A company on both the car list (1) and the heavy duty list
(2) will be required to have a minimum of 3,000 square feet.
D. This facility must be owned or leased by the company, proof of which
must be furnished to the Police Department prior to a company being
placed on the tow list. If a leased property, a current copy of the lease
must be provided to the Police Department. The storage location must
have a business office on site which is staffed during normal weekday
business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. or 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) by an
§ 455-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-2
1:381
employee of the company. Equipment must be dispatched from and
stored at this location. [Amended 5-29-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
E. Customers and Police Department personnel must be able to contact
the towing service by phone, to have a representative be at the storage
area within 20 minutes of the call, unless mutually agreed upon by both
parties, during normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, except holidays).
F. Normally be available for contact and/or response 24 hours/day, 365
days/year.
G. Have in effect and maintain at least $100,000 worth of garagekeeper
liability insurance for the indemnifying of the owner of every vehicle
against the loss thereof, or injury or damage thereto, while in the
custody of such business. A certificate of said insurance shall be
provided to the Police Department by the insurance carrier.
H. Maintain automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than
$500,000. A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the Police
Department by the insurance carrier.
I. A List 1 tower is required to have one of the trucks listed in Subsection
I(1) or (2) directly below, but not both. A company that has a tow truck
and not a rollback/carrier unit is required to have dolly wheels on the
tow truck.
(1) Must have at least one light-duty towing unit for passenger cars,
pickup trucks and other light vehicles, which shall meet the
following specifications:
(a) The truck chassis must have a minimum manufacturer's
capacity of 145,000 pounds' GVWR.
(b) Have a boom capacity of 8,000 pounds minimum and power
winch pulling capacity of 8,000 pounds minimum.
(c) Have a minimum of 100 feet of three-eighths-inch or larger
cable on each drum.
(d) Wheel lift apparatus or belt-type cradle sling to pick up
vehicles.
(e) Dual rear wheels.
(2) Have a rollback or carrier-type unit with the following minimum
characteristics:
(a) The truck chassis shall have a minimum manufacturer's
capacity of 145,000 pounds' GVWR.
(b) Have power winch pulling capacity of at least 8,000 pounds.
§ 462-2 MANHEIM CODE § 462-2
1:382
(c) Have 100 feet of three-eighths-inch or larger cable, or 50 feet
of three-eighths-inch or larger cable with 50 feet or extension
cable of equal or greater strength.
(d) Dual rear wheels.
J. List 2 towers must have a heavy-duty tow truck, which shall meet the
following minimum manufacturer's specifications:
(1) The truck chassis shall have a minimum manufacturer's capacity of
36,000 pounds' GVWR.
(2) Have a boom capacity of not less than 50,000 pounds.
(3) Have a power winch pulling capacity of not less than 50,000
pounds.
(4) Have a minimum of 150 feet of five-eighths-inch or larger cable on
each drum.
(5) Have air brakes and be constructed so that wheels lock
automatically upon failure and maxi-brake-type parking brake.
(6) Be equipped with a brake-buddy-type device for towing heavy
vehicles with brakes on the towed vehicle.
K. Towers are required to file with the Police Department and keep current
a list of equipment, including:
(1) Make, model, and year.
(2) Title number.
(3) VIN number.
(4) Registered gross weight.
L. All tow trucks must be owned by the tow company, or leased to the tow
company from a bank, dealer, or recognized leasing company.
M. All tow trucks shall display the company name, city located, and any
other information required by state law. This information shall be of
contrasting color to the truck color and shall be permanently affixed to
both sides of the truck. All lettering shall be at least three inches high.
Magnetic signs are not permitted.
N. Towers are required to file with the Police Department and keep current
a list of all drivers and equipment operators, giving:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Driver's license number and state.
(3) License class and endorsements or restrictions.
§ 462-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-3
1:383
§ 462-3. Required towing equipment.
§ 462-4. Nonliability of Township.
The application shall contain and the tower shall separately sign a
nonliability of Township agreement, in which the tower agrees that
A. When contacted for towing service, the tower must normally arrive at
the scene within 20 minutes, Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except holidays. At all other times, a tower must normally arrive
at the scene within 30 minutes from the time of notification.
B. The responding tow truck must be from the list of equipment provided
to the Police Department. No calls may be referred to another company,
nor another company's tow truck used as a substitute.
C. When towing a vehicle from the scene of an accident, it is the tower's
responsibility to remove any and all debris, dirt, leaked fluids, etc., from
the scene.
D. Towing service operators shall transport a vehicle to any location
requested by the owner/driver after payment arrangements have been
made, unless directed otherwise by police. If the owner/driver has no
specific location for the vehicle to be taken, and no instructions are
given by the police as to where the vehicle is to be towed, all vehicles
must be taken to the storage location listed on the application.
E. If a vehicle involved in an accident needs to be towed, and the request
for towing service goes directly to the tower, the vehicle shall not be
towed without notifying and receiving approval from the Police
Department.
F. Until legislation or PennDOT rules and regulations are enacted, all tow
trucks must be equipped with flashing or revolving yellow lights, as
authorized by the Vehicle Code.136 The flashing or revolving lights shall
be operated while at the scene and as required by the Vehicle Code. In
addition to Vehicle Code limitations and requirements:
(1) The flashing or revolving lights shall not be operated when
responding to the scene.
(2) The flashing or revolving lights may be operated on a tow truck
when in engaged in actual towing of a vehicle from the scene to the
storage facility or place of repair.
(3) The flashing or revolving lights shall not be operated on a rollback
or carrier-type unit when hauling a vehicle unless a vehicle is
actually in tow.
G. All charges for services shall not exceed those as published by the tow
company and filed with the Police Department.
136. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 462-3 MANHEIM CODE § 462-4
1:384
Manheim Township and its Police Department shall not be liable to the
tower for any services performed by the tower in connection with the
removal and storage of vehicles pursuant to this chapter or charges
incidental thereto. The tower shall seek reimbursement exclusively from the
owner of the vehicle.
§ 462-5. Application for placement on no-preference tow list.
[Amended 5-29-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
Applications to be placed on the no-preference tow list(s) will be on a form
as prescribed by the Police Department. Towers who wish to be on the list
shall pay an annual fee of $250 to the Police Department.
§ 462-6. Hold harmless agreement.
The application shall contain and the tower shall separately sign a hold
harmless agreement in which the tower agrees to hold the Township and
Township Police Department, and officials, officers, agents and employees
of the Township and the Township Police Department, harmless from any
and all claims arising out of any activities on the part of the tower pursuant
to the towing and storage of vehicles, including but not limited to any claims
for personal injury or property damage, economic loss, and attorneys' fees
and costs, including any claims by the tower or tower's employees. (This
provision is intended to include any negligence on the part of the Township
as well as on the part of the tower and its employees and any other persons.)
§ 462-7. Inspections.
The tower agrees that a representative of the Police Department may, at any
time, inspect the premises of the business, including tow bills for service, to
insure compliance with the regulations as set forth. These inspections may
be unannounced and take place at the discretion of the Police Department.
Refusal by the tower or his employee to produce any documents requested
or verification of any documents or documents altered to show erroneous
information shall be grounds for permanent removal from the tow list(s).
§ 462-8. Violations and penalties.
The application shall contain and the tower shall separately sign an
agreement to fully and faithfully abide by the regulations as set forth, and
violations of any of the provisions shall be handled in accordance with the
following:
A. Violation of any of the provisions of § 462-2 or 462-3 shall be, for a first
offense, 30 days' suspension from the no-preference tow list(s); for a
second offense, 60 days' suspension from the no-preference tow list(s);
and for a third offense, permanent removal from the no-preference tow
list(s).
§ 462-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-8
1:385
§ 462-9. Appendixes.
Chapter 469
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass and weeds — See Ch. 277. Property maintenance — See Ch. 367.
B. Violations of any of the provisions of § 462-4, 462-5, 462-6 or 462-7 shall
be grounds for immediate and permanent removal from the nopreference
tow list(s).
C. Any application received by the Police Department from a nopreference
tower which contains any false information shall be
immediately rejected, and the tower shall not be permitted to reapply
for the no-preference tow list(s) for a period of one year.
A. Attached are the following appendixes:
(1) Manheim Township application for no-preference towing.
(2) Equipment (light- and heavy-duty).
(3) Drivers.
(4) Published rates of charges for service.
(5) Statement of nonliability and hold harmless agreement.
(6) Agreement to abide by all regulations.
B. Copies of the documents comprising the appendix are available at the
Police Department.
C. The information in these appendixes is subject to change. If there are
any changes, a supplemental appendix will be issued. The date of the
reissue will be designated in the lower left-hand corner of the reissued
appendix. The reissued appendix should be attached to this order and
will replace the changed appendix.
§ 462-8 MANHEIM CODE § 462-9
1:386
ARTICLE I
Shade Trees
[Adopted 7-26-1954 by Ord. No. 1954-9137 (Part 9, Ch. 2, of the 1976
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 469-1. Permit required for certain work.
No person, owner, tenant or agent owning or having in charge or control
any lot or other piece of ground in the Township shall plant, set out, trim
or remove any shade tree on any of the public streets or highway within
the Township, unless he shall obtain a permit in writing from the Board of
Township Commissioners.
§ 469-2. Application for permit.
Every person desiring to plant, set out, trim or remove any shade tree on or
from any public street or highway in the Township shall make application
in writing to the Board of Township Commissioners for permission to do
so, which application shall state specifically the location and kind of tree
proposed to be planted, set out, trimmed or removed, and how it is to be
maintained, cared for, trimmed or removed.
§ 469-3. Kind and location of trees to be planted along streets.
In order to secure uniformity and the best results, the kind and the location
of shade trees to be planted in and upon the public streets and highways
in the Township shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Commissioners.
§ 469-4. Injuring or tampering with shade trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break or injure the roots, trunk,
limbs or branches of any shade tree planted or growing in or upon the
streets or highways in the Township, or to hitch a horse or other animal to
any such shade tree, or to tack or post a notice, handbill or advertisement of
any kind upon any such tree, or guards around the same, or to do any other
thing whereby any shade tree may be marred, disfigured or injured.
§ 469-5. Deleterious substances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any salt water, oil, dye
or any other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak or flow on or into
the soil about the base of a tree in or along any public street or highway in
the Township.
137. Editor's Note: Sections 1 through 5, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 17 of Ord. No. 1954-9 were
repealed 12-27-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-12. Furthermore, the Shade Tree Commission was
abolished by Ord. No. 1982-3, adopted 2-22-1982, and the Board of Commissioners was
directed to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties imposed by the First Class
Township Code upon shade tree commissions.
§ 469-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 469-6
1:387
§ 469-6. Guarding of trees during construction work.
In the erection or repair of any building or structure, the builder, contractor
or owner thereof shall place such guards around all the nearby trees on the
public street or highway as shall effectually prevent injury to them.
§ 469-7. Notice to remove diseased trees.
The Board of Township Commissioners may, upon 10 days' notice, require
owners of property to cut and remove trees afflicted with the Dutch Elm or
other disease which threatens to injure or destroy the shade trees in the
Township, and thereupon, the Township may exercise the authority vested
in it by Section 3027.1 of the First Class Township Code.138
§ 469-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28139]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, for every such
violation, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor more than
$1,000, and costs.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 58027.1.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 469-6 MANHEIM CODE § 469-8
1:388
Chapter 474
VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT, ABANDONED AND JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 367.
Solid waste — See Ch. 421.
Towing — See Ch. 462.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 480.
§ 474-1. Certain property constitutes nuisance.
The Commissioners of the Township find that the storage or parking of
wrecked, junked, stripped or abandoned motor vehicles on private property
or the storage, placement or accumulation on private property of junked,
wrecked, discarded or abandoned machinery, equipment, household
appliances or other debris and waste materials of any kind or description
constitutes a nuisance and is detrimental to the public health, safety, morals
and welfare, except when such vehicles or other herein-named items are
parked or stored in a building, or unless the same be authorized in
conjunction with a business properly operated pursuant to the zoning and
other laws of the Township.
§ 474-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKED, WRECKED, STRIPPED, ABANDONED and DISCARDED — The
items or materials so described are no longer in current usage as evidenced
by an apparent relinquishment of all rights thereto through continued
disuse.
§ 474-3. Storage of motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any motor vehicle of any kind
in a wrecked, junked, stripped or abandoned condition on private property,
unless in a building, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of such motor
vehicle, or the owner or occupant of any property, to allow, permit or suffer
the same to be left upon any privately owned property, unless the same be
authorized in conjunction with a business properly operated pursuant to the
zoning laws and other laws of the Township.
§ 474-4. Storage of machinery, equipment, appliances or other
debris or waste materials.
It shall be unlawful to store, place or accumulate on private property any
junked, wrecked, discarded or abandoned machinery, equipment, household
appliances or other debris and waste materials of any kind or description,
unless in a building, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of such items, or
§ 469-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 474-4
1:389
the owner or occupant of any property, to allow, permit or suffer the same to
be left upon any privately owned property, unless the same be authorized in
conjunction with a business properly operated pursuant to the zoning laws
and other laws of the Township.
§ 474-5. Notice to remove property.
If the Commissioners or any of their authorized agents find that a violation
of this chapter exists, they shall notify the owner of the property on which
the violation exists or the owner of the motor vehicle or other discarded or
abandoned item, or both, of the violation and order the owner of the motor
vehicle or vehicles or other items, within 10 days thereof, and the owner
of the property on which the motor vehicle or vehicles or other items are
stored or parked, within 10 days thereof, to remove the motor vehicle or
vehicles or other items.
§ 474-6. Manner of service of notice.
Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail to the last
known address of the violator. In the event that, on diligent search, the
address of either the property owner or the owner of the motor vehicle
or other items cannot be ascertained, the posting of the notice or copies
thereof on the real property, motor vehicle or other items, structure or area
immediately adjacent thereto shall constitute sufficient notice.
§ 474-7. Request for hearing.
Within 10 days after notice, the party or parties affected may request
a hearing with the Commissioners by filing a written request with the
Manager-Secretary. The Commissioners, after the hearing, shall affirm,
withdraw or modify the notice.
§ 474-8. Effect of failure to request hearing.
If a hearing is not requested, then the parties affected shall proceed to
remove or have removed the motor vehicle or vehicles or other items from
the property in question in accordance with the notice and order.
§ 474-9. Notice of hearing.
On proper request, a hearing on the matter shall be given forthwith, and,
where more than one party is involved, it shall be the duty of the party
requesting the hearing to notify the Manager-Secretary of the names and
addresses of all other parties affected or interested.
§ 474-10. Failure to comply; costs.
If the violation complained of shall not have been remedied within the
period as required by the order, the Township shall, through its own agents,
contractors and/or employees, remedy the violations and charge the costs
thereof to the real property owner on whose property the vehicles or other
§ 474-4 MANHEIM CODE § 474-10
1:390
items are located. The cost shall, after a proper demand and refusal or a
failure to pay after 30 days, constitute a lien on the realty at such time as it
shall thereafter be filed by the Solicitor.
§ 474-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-28]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor more than
$600, and costs, and, in default of payment of fine or penalty and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided each day's failure to
comply with an order of the Board of Commissioners issued by authority of
this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 480
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Towing — See Ch. 462.
Abandoned and junked vehicles and
equipment — See Ch. 474.
§ 474-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 474-11
1:391

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 480-1. Definitions.
§ 480-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
Except as may be permitted by law by less formal action, all traffic and
parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances
or as parts of or amendments to ordinances of the Township.
§ 480-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (Act of 1976, June 17, P.L. 162, No.
81, as now in force or as hereafter amended, "Vehicle Code"),140 except:
(1) Where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; and
(2) That the word "street" is used interchangeably with the word
"highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway"
as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The word "holiday," as used in this chapter, shall mean and include New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day.
A. The Commissioners or, if the Commissioners are not in session, the
Manager-Secretary shall have the power to regulate traffic and parking
on a temporary basis in the following instances:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm, or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or the
conduct of public events of limited scope or duration, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency traffic and parking regulations shall be
enforced by the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle in violation
of any such regulation or who moves, removes, destroys, injures or
defaces any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of
any such regulation shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction,
shall be liable:
(1) To the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of that nature; or
140. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 480-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-3
1:393
§ 480-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 480-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
(2) In case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter, to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. To allow for testing and experimentation with traffic and parking
regulations and to provide for a basis to determine the feasibility of
permanent changes in such regulations, the Commissioners or, if the
Commissioners are not in session, the Manager-Secretary may, from
time to time, designate places upon and along the streets in the
Township where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic
and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in
force and effect and shall designate those locations by proper signs and
markings.
B. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective as if
they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park
a vehicle in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction,
and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable:
(1) To the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of that nature; or
(2) In case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter, to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The Commissioners or, if the Commissioners are not in session, the
Manager-Secretary shall have the authority to close any street or any
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion and to place barriers or station police officers or
flagmen at each end of the closed portion.
B. The Commissioners or, if the Commissioners are not in session, the
Manager-Secretary shall have the authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street or any specific part of a street where
construction or maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen
at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time
when a flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is
signaling that vehicle, by flag or other device, not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
§ 480-3 MANHEIM CODE § 480-6
1:394
§ 480-6. Use of streets by assemblages and processions.
§ 480-7. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Township are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the streets in the Township and at intersections of those streets, in
public parks and in other places where the Vehicle Code141 or this chapter
applies. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the powers and
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people, without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving or being moved along a street in a way that interferes
with the normal movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a
funeral caravan or military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Manager-Secretary, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least
three weeks in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed
to be held. The permit shall state the place where and the date when the
assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene
and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any assemblage
unless a permit has been granted or at any time or place other than that
authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Manager-Secretary, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least
three weeks in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to
be held. The permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to
be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and
place where participants are to assemble before commencement of the
procession, the time when the procession may commence to move along
its route, and the time by which the end of the procession shall have
reached the end of the route and the procession shall have been
disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in
any procession unless a permit shall have been granted or under any
conditions as to time, route or otherwise except as stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
141. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 480-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-7
1:395
authority otherwise conferred upon the police officers of the Township by
the Vehicle Code or other applicable law.142
142. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-1008, Use of electrical or mechanical speed-timing devices
authorized, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 480-7 MANHEIM CODE § 480-7
1:396
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 480-8. Speed limits.
§ 480-9. Traffic signals.
§ 480-10. Prohibited turns on red signal.
§ 480-11. One-way streets.
A. No person shall operate a vehicle upon any portion of a street listed in
Schedule I-A, Schedule I-A being incorporated herein by reference,143
at a greater rate of speed than the maximum speed prescribed for that
part of the street in Schedule I-A.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $35, and costs. Any person
exceeding a maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Official traffic signals shall be erected (or are ratified if previously
erected) at those intersections listed in Schedule I-B, Schedule I-B
being incorporated herein by reference,144 and traffic at those
intersections shall be directed by those signals.
B. Any operator of a vehicle who shall disobey the direction of an official
traffic signal shall, upon conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and
costs.
A. Those intersections listed in Schedule I-C, Schedule I-C being
incorporated herein by reference,145 are hereby established as
intersections where operators of vehicles traveling in the direction or
directions indicated in Schedule I-C are prohibited from making a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into a one-way street) on a
steady red signal.
B. Any driver of a vehicle who makes a turn on a red signal in violation of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and
costs.
A. One-way streets are hereby established as listed in Schedule I-D,
Schedule I-D being incorporated herein by reference.146 On the days
and between the hours applicable to a specific street, as set forth in
Schedule I-D, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle
143. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
144. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
145. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
146. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
§ 480-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-11
1:397
§ 480-12. Prohibited turns at intersections.
§ 480-13. No-passing zones.
§ 480-14. Through highways.
upon a one-way street other than in the direction established for traffic
upon that street.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. The intersections listed in Schedule I-E, which is incorporated herein by
reference,147 are hereby established as intersections where turns are
restricted or prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle, of the type indicated in Schedule I-E, traveling upon the first
street named in Schedule I-E, in the direction indicated in Schedule I-E,
to make a left turn and/or right turn at any intersection named in
Schedule I-E and into the second-named street at any time when a turn
is prohibited as set forth in Schedule I-E.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. No-passing zones are hereby established as listed in Schedule I-F,
which is incorporated herein by reference.148 It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or drive on
the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. Through highways are hereby established as listed in Schedule I-G,
which is incorporated herein by reference.149 Stop or yield signs shall
be erected at every intersection of every through highway (except those
intersections where traffic signals are erected and maintained as
provided in § 480-9) to face traffic approaching a through highway on
intersecting highways. Every operator of a vehicle approaching a
through highway on any intersecting street where there is a stop or
yield sign shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) or (c) of the
Vehicle Code,150 as the case may be, and shall not proceed into or
across the through highway until he has complied with all requirements
of the applicable section of the Vehicle Code.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs of prosecution.
147. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
148. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
149. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
150. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) or (c).
§ 480-11 MANHEIM CODE § 480-15
1:398
§ 480-15. Stop intersections.
§ 480-16. Yield intersections.
§ 480-17. Vehicle weight limits.
A. Those intersections listed in Schedule I-H, which is incorporated herein
by reference 151 (in addition to streets intersecting with through
highways as established by § 480-14), are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street upon the first-named street at each stop
intersection, in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every operator of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction indicated in
Schedule I-H, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code152 and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
street until he has complied with all requirements of that section of the
Vehicle Code.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. Those intersections listed in Schedule I-I, which is incorporated herein
by reference153 (in addition to streets intersecting with through
highways as established by § 480-14), are hereby established as yield
right-of-way intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or
ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street at
each yield intersection, in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every operator of a vehicle approaching the intersection
upon the first-named street, in the direction indicated in Schedule I-I,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code154 and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
section of the Vehicle Code.
B. Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
A. Pursuant to § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,155 weight limits are hereby
established on those streets and portions of streets listed in Schedule IJ,
which is incorporated herein by reference.156 It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a vehicle on any street or portion of a street set
forth in Schedule I-J if such vehicle or combination has a gross weight in
151. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
152. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
153. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
154. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
155. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
156. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
§ 480-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-17
1:399
§ 480-18. Restrictions on truck traffic. [Amended by 1-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-04]
§ 480-19. Snow and ice emergency routes.
excess of the maximum prescribed for that street or portion of a street
as set forth in Schedule I-J.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code and, upon conviction,
shall be liable to pay a fine of $150, and costs, and an additional penalty
of $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds
over the maximum allowable weight as established by Schedule I-J.157
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a Class V or higher
class truck or truck tractor (11,001 pounds or higher) with or without
trailer or semitrailer or any semitrailer or full trailer on any street or
portion of a street listed in Schedule I-K, which is incorporated herein
by reference,158 except that this section shall not prohibit the operation
or parking of emergency or authorized vehicles as defined in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code or authorized by local authorities or vehicles
making local deliveries to or pickups from any premises located on any
such street or portion of a street, provided that such operation and
parking is limited to the period of time during which such delivery or
pickup actually occurs. Construction vehicles are prohibited, except
during the time required for the construction project.
B. The streets or any portion thereof listed in Schedule I-K may be added
to or removed by resolution after completion of the appropriate studies.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$300.
A. Snow and ice emergency routes are hereby established on those streets
and portions of streets listed in Schedule I-L, which is incorporated
herein by reference.159 In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and
to reduce the hazards of snow and ice on snow emergency routes, the
Manager-Secretary, or, in his absence, one of the Commissioners, may,
at his discretion, declare a snow and ice emergency. Information on the
declaration and/or termination of a snow and ice emergency may be
given by radio announcement, newspaper notice or other available
means.
B. After any snow and ice emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at
any time during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
158. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
159. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
§ 480-17 MANHEIM CODE § 480-19
1:400
(1) To park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle to remain parked on any
snow and ice emergency route; or
(2) To operate a vehicle which is not equipped with snow tires or
equivalent type tires or chains on a snow and ice emergency route.
C. If, at any time during a period of a snow and ice emergency, a person
parks a vehicle anywhere upon a snow and ice emergency route, that
person shall be in violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be
liable to pay a fine of $15, and costs.
D. If, at any time during a period of a snow and ice emergency, a person
operates a vehicle which is not equipped with snow tires or equivalent
type tires or chains upon a snow and ice emergency route, that person
shall be in violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be liable
to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
§ 480-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-19
1:401

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 480-20. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Whenever a space shall be marked off on any street or highway for the
parking of an individual vehicle, a vehicle parked in such space shall be
parked entirely within the lines bounding that space.
§ 480-21. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked, at any
time, in any location along any of the streets listed as a prohibited zone in
Schedule II-A, which is incorporated herein by reference.160
§ 480-22. Parking prohibited certain days and hours.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times on the days, between the hours and
at the locations set forth in Schedule II-B, which is incorporated herein by
reference.161
§ 480-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked in the
locations, on the days and between the hours set forth in Schedule II-C,
which is incorporated herein by reference,162 for a period of time longer
than the periods of time set forth in Schedule II-C.
§ 480-24. Special purpose parking zones.
Special purpose parking zones are hereby established in the locations listed
in Schedule II-D, which is incorporated herein by reference,163 and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle to remain
parked in any such zone, except as specifically provided in Schedule II-D.
§ 480-25. No-stopping zones.
The locations listed in Schedule II-E, which is incorporated herein by
reference,164 are hereby established as no-stopping zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop a vehicle in any such nostopping
zone, except in an emergency or in compliance with the directions
of any police officer.
160. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
161. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
162. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
163. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
164. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
§ 480-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-26
1:403
§ 480-26. Parking of certain large vehicles limited.
In any of the locations listed in Schedule II-F, which is incorporated herein
by reference,165 it shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to
remain parked, any semitrailer, any truck with a gross chassis weight in
excess of 15,000 pounds, any truck tractor, any construction truck, or any
motor-carrier vehicle for a period of time in excess of two hours.
§ 480-27. Fire lanes.
The locations listed in Schedule II-G, which is incorporated herein by
reference,166 are hereby established as fire lanes. It shall be unlawful for
any person to park or stand in any fire lane any vehicle, pedalcycle or
horse-drawn vehicle; provided, however, that parking or standing of a police
vehicle, fire truck, or other fire equipment, ambulance or other emergency
vehicle or the temporary stopping of a vehicle for the purpose of loading or
unloading shall not be unlawful.
§ 480-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-08167]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $35, and costs of prosecution. The Police
Department may, prior to prosecuting a violator, first attach to or place a
notice upon a vehicle in violation stating that the vehicle was parked in
violation of this article and/or the Vehicle Code.168 The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or operator of the vehicle that if payment of the
sum of $35 is made within five days of the date of the notice, the violator
will not be liable to further prosecution.
165. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
166. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
168. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 480-26 MANHEIM CODE § 480-28
1:404
ARTICLE IV
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 480-29. through § 480-34. (Reserved)
§ 480-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-29
1:405

ARTICLE V
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 480-35. through § 480-39. (Reserved)
§ 480-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-35
1:407

ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Unmetered Parking
§ 480-40. through § 480-44. (Reserved)
§ 480-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-40
1:409

ARTICLE VII
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 480-45. Applicability and scope.
Pursuant to § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code,169 the Township may remove
and impound, or cause to be removed and impounded:
§ 480-46. Authority to remove and impound.
Under the circumstances prescribed by § 480-45, the police officers of the
Township are hereby given authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding of, any vehicle, provided that no vehicle shall
be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of
this article.
§ 480-47. Approved storage garages.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Commissioners. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the
Commissioners that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in
an amount satisfactory to the Commissioners as sufficient to indemnify
owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to vehicles while
in the custody of the garage keeper. An approved storage garage shall
submit a schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under
this article to the Commissioners, and, upon approval of such schedule
by the Commissioners, such charges shall be adhered to by the approved
storage garage, and no different schedule of charges shall be adopted nor
demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or
impounded under this article by any approved storage garage without prior
approval of the Commissioners. The Commissioners shall delete any garage
that shall make any unapproved charge from its list of approved storage
garages.
§ 480-48. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Chief of Police or his designee to the owner of record of the
vehicle. The notice shall designate the place from which the vehicle was
A. Vehicles that are parked overtime on any street in the Township in
violation of any provision of Article III or Article IV of this chapter; and
B. Vehicles parked in metered and unmetered parking lots in violation of
any ordinance enacted by the Township regulating such lots, provided
that the Township operates such lots.
169. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 480-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-48
1:411
removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, and the garage in
which it was impounded.
§ 480-49. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized under this
article shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive
and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
If payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge or
court of record having jurisdiction, in which case such defendant shall be
proceeded against and shall receive such notice as is provided in the Vehicle
Code170 in cases of summary offenses and shall have the same rights as to
appeal and waivers of hearing. Payment of towing and storage charges shall
not relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine
or penalty for the violation of the provisions of this chapter on account of
which the vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 480-50. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded under this
article and shall, at all reasonable times, furnish the owners or the agents
of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of storage
of the vehicles.
§ 480-51. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person then in charge of the
vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention to immediately
remove the vehicle.
170. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 480-48 MANHEIM CODE § 480-51
1:412
ARTICLE VIII
Pedalcycles
§ 480-52. Riding and parking on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the portions of the streets listed in Schedule IV-A, which is
incorporated herein by reference.171
§ 480-53. Violations and penalties.172
Any person who violates any provision of § 480-52 shall, upon conviction, be
liable to pay a fine of $25, and costs.
171. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 480-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-53
1:413

ARTICLE IX
Pedestrians
§ 480-54. Pedestrians to obey traffic control signals.
In all locations in the Township where official traffic control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian
control signals installed under § 480-55, shall obey the directions of those
traffic control signals as follows:
§ 480-55. Pedestrian control signals.
§ 480-56. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Schedule IV-C, which lists locations where there are pedestrian crossing
restrictions not covered in Schedule IV-B, is incorporated herein by
reference and made a part of this section and of § 480-57.174 In locations
listed in Schedule IV-C as "pedestrian crossing unlawful," it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian, except where authorized by a police officer or
other person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, to cross the
roadway at such locations.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway; and
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the locations listed in Schedule IV-B, which is incorporated herein by
reference,173 pedestrian control signals shall be erected (or are ratified
if previously erected).
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady signal exhibiting "Don't Walk" shall
not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't Walk"
signal is showing.
C. Whenever the "Don't Walk" indication is flashing, pedestrians shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone, and all drivers of
vehicles shall yield to the pedestrian.
173. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
174. Editor's Note: Said schedule is located in Article X, Schedules, of this chapter.
§ 480-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-57
1:415
§ 480-57. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 480-58. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-25-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be liable to pay a fine of $20, and costs.
A. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Township except
in a crosswalk; and
B. In locations listed as "cross in crosswalk only" in Schedule IV-C, to cross
the roadway except in a crosswalk.
§ 480-57 MANHEIM CODE § 480-58
1:416
ARTICLE X
Schedules
§ 480-59. Schedule I-A: Speed Limits.
No person shall operate a vehicle upon any portion of the following streets
at a greater rate of speed than the maximum speed prescribed for that part
of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Airport Road, West [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-05]
Lititz Pike (SR 272)
and Koser Road
35
Amesbury Road [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
Longmeadow Road
and Wallingford
Road
25
Anne Avenue [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-09]
East Roseville Road
and Murry Hill
Drive
25
Arbor Road [Added 4-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-05]
Blossom Hill Drive
and Buch Avenue
25
Ashford Drive [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
East Oregon Road
and Haverhill Road
25
Aster lane [Added 9-24-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-17]
Bluebell Drive and
Aster Lane
25
Baneberry Lane [Added
7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-16]
100 block of
Baneberry Lane
between
Winterberry Court
and Village Drive
25
Baneberry Lane [Added
3-25-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-07]
Cypress Drive and
the terminus of the
100 block of
Baneberry Lane
25
Basset Drive [Added
10-13-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-13]
Delp Road and the
terminus of Bassett
Drive
25
Becker Road [Added
7-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-11]
East Oregon Road
and northern
Township line
40
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:417
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Belle Meade Drive [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
Oakmont Drive and
Oakmont Drive
25
Beverly Drive [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-05]
East Roseville Road
and Santa Barbara
Drive
25
Billview Drive [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-09]
Santa Barbara
Drive and Murry
Hill Drive
25
Bloomfield Drive [Added
11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-21]
Lititz Pike and
Squire Lane
25
Bloomingdale Avenue [Added
5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
Lititz Pike and Park
Plaza
25
Bloomingdale Avenue [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Lititz Pike and
Sterling Place
35
Blossom Hill Road [Added
4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-05]
Delp Road and Delp
Road
25
Blossom Valley Road [Added
6-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-14]
Delp Road and Delp
Road
25
Bluebell Drive [Added
9-24-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-17]
Lititz Pike and
Bloomfield Drive
25
Bluestone Drive [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
Snyder Road and
Stonehedge Drive
25
Bluff View Drive [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-09]
Santa Barbara
Drive and Murry
Hill Drive
25
Brentwood Drive [Added
4-25-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-08]
600 to 700 Block 25
Brockton Road Belair Drive and
Candlewyck Road
(school speed limit
zone)
15 (during restricted
hours)
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:418
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Brookfield Road [Added
3-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-05]
Valley Road and
Kissel Hill Road
25
Buch Avenue [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Lititz Pike and East
Hempfield
Township line
35
Buckfield Drive [Added
2-9-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-02]
Koser Road and
Hammersmith Lane
25
Buckwalter Road [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Entire length 35
Buckwalter Road [Added
11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
Harvest Drive and a
point 1250 feet to
the south
15 (during the times:
8:30 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.)
Buckwalter Road [Added
11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
Snyder Road and a
point 350 feet to
the north
15 (during the times:
8:30 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.)
Butler Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Oregon Pike and
eastern end of
Butler Avenue
25
Butler Road [Added
6-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-14]
Landis Valley Road
and New Holland
Pike (Avenue)
35
Butler Road New Holland Pike
and Hunsicker Road
25
Cambridge Place [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-03]
Candlewyck Road
and Revere Road
25
Candlewyck Road [Amended
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Coventry Road and
Brockton Road
(school speed limit
zone)
15 (during restricted
hours)
Candlewyck Road [Added
3-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-05; amended
11-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-35]
Delp Road and
Fruitville Pike
25
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:419
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Carlton Place [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-13]
Glenridge Drive and
Teddy Avenue
25
Carter Moir [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Weaver Road and
Copley Drive
25
Cedar Road Crescent Avenue
and Elmwood
Terrace
25
Charlotte Street, North
[Added 5-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-11]
Liberty Street and
Lincoln Street
25
Clayton Road [Added
4-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-07]
Between Hamilton
Road and Orchard
Lane
25
Cobblestone Lane [Added
11-1-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Buch Avenue and
Pebblebrook Drive
25
Commerce Drive [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Manheim Pike and
Flory Mill Road
35
Copley Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Carter Moir Drive
and Carter Moir
Drive
25
Country Club Drive [Added
12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-28]
Entire length 25
Creek Road [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Oregon Pike (SR
272) and East
Oregon Road (SR
722)
25
Creek Road [Added
12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-25]
Route 222 and
Oregon Road
35
Creek Road Route 222 and
Pinetown Road
25
Crescent Avenue Lititz Pike and
Elmwood Terrace
25
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:420
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Crooked Hill Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Oregon Pike and
Eden Road
25
Delp Road Fruitville Pike and
S-curve on New
Delp Road
35
Delp Road [Added 4-13-1987
by Ord. No. 1987-12]
Landis Valley Road
and dead end
35
Delp Road Manheim Pike and
Lititz Pike
35
Dogwood Drive [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
Rosemont Drive and
East Oregon Road
25
Duke Street, North [Added
10-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-17]
McGovern Avenue
and Liberty Street
25
East Airport Road [Added
12-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-21]
Route 501 (Lititz
Pike) and East
Oregon Road
35
East Oregon Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Route 501 and
Kissel Hill Road
35
East Petersburg Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Station 70+00 and
Station 74+32
35
Eden Road [Amended
7-27-1970 by Res. No.
1970-22]
New Holland Pike
east to Township
line at Conestoga
Creek
25
Eden Road Route 222 and New
Holland Pike
25
Eden Road, North [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
Euclid Drive and
Northbrook Drive
25
Elmwood Terrace Lititz Pike and Glen
Moore Circle
25
Erb's Quarry Road [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-03]
Fruitville Pike and
the boundary of
Manheim Township
35
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:421
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Erb's Quarry Road [Added
7-8-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-13]
Fruitville Pike and
the Manheim
Township-Warwick
Township boundary
40
Erb's Quarry Road [Added
1-14-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-02]
Fruitville Pike and
Snyder Road
25
Esbenshade Road [Added
8-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-17]
Pleasure Road and
Butler Avenue
25
Euclid Drive Eden Drive and
Butler Road
35
Farm Drive, North [Added
5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
Kreider Road and
Kingsbridge Drive
25
Farmingdale Road [Added
4-10-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-05]
Harrisburg Pike
and East Hempfield
Township line
25
Farnum Road [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
Kissel Hill Road and
Tiffany Drive
25
Flory Mill Road [Added
6-10-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-10]
Route 72 and the
East Hempfield
Township line
35
Fountain Avenue Pleasure Road and
New Holland Pike
25
Foxshire Drive [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-09]
Fruitville Pike and
Heatherton Drive
25
Glendower Drive [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Heatherstone Way
and Pickering Trail
25
Glen Moore Circle [Added
2-10-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-02]
Keller Avenue and
Orchard Street
(school speed limit
zone)
15 (during restricted
hours)
Glen Moore Circle Lititz Pike and
Keller Avenue
25
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:422
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Grandview Boulevard [Added
8-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-13]
Pleasure Road and
Pleasure Road
25
Grandview Road Pleasure Road
(west intersection)
and Pleasure Road
(east intersection)
35
Granite Run Drive [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-13]
Route 72 and
Fruitville Pike
35
Grofftown Road [Added
9-14-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-24]
All portions of the
road located in the
Township
35
Hammersmith Lane [Added
2-9-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-02]
Koser Road and
Buckfield Drive
25
Harrington Drive [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-09]
Foxshire Drive and
Roseville Road
25
Hartwell Court [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Copley Drive and
Carter Moir Drive
25
Harvest Drive [Added
11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
Buckwalter Road
and a point 160 feet
to the east
15 (during the times:
8:30 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.)
Haskel Drive [Added
10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-17]
Route 272 and
Queen Lane
25
Haverhill Road [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01; amended
11-23-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-19]
Ashford Drive and
Amesbury Road
25
Hess Boulevard [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-03]
Fruitville Pike and
Lititz Pike
25
Hillcrest Avenue [Added
12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-25]
Route 23 and
Mission Road
25
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:423
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Hilltop Approach [Added
5-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-12]
Pleasure Road and
Parkside Lane
25
Hollywood Drive [Added
12-9-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-16]
Hillcrest Avenue
and Park Road
25
Homeland Drive [Added
8-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-17]
Country Club Drive
and eastern end of
private road
25
Hunsicker Road Route 272 (Oregon
Pike) and Butter
Road
35
Jackson Street [Added
5-12-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-11]
North Prince Street
and North Charlotte
Street
25
Janet Avenue [Added
2-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-03]
Marshall Avenue
and Fountain
Avenue
25
Jetstar Drive [Added
2-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-03]
Koser Road and
Airport Road
35
John Adams Drive [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
Belle Meade Drive
and Eden Road
25
Juliette Avenue [Added
5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-10]
Marshall Avenue
and Pleasure Road
25
Kendale Place [Added
7-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-11]
Ruth Ridge Road
and Dolly Drive
25
Kingsbridge Drive [Added
11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-16]
Koser Road and
Squire Lane
25
Kingsbridge Drive [Added
10-13-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-13]
Royal Hunt Way and
Squire Lane
25
Kissel Hill Road East Oregon Road
and Valley Road
35
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:424
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Kissel Hill Road [Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-23]
Oregon Road and
northern Township
line
40
Knollwood Drive [Added
2-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-03]
Sunnybrook Drive
and the end of
Knollwood Drive
25
Koser Road [Added 6-9-1986
by Ord. No. 1986-16A]
Lititz Pike and
Petersburg Road
40
Koser Road [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Petersburg Road
and Lititz Pike
35
Landis Valley Road [Added
2-11-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-03]
Butter Road and
Route 23
35
Landis Valley Road [Added
2-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-23]
Kissel Hill Road and
New Holland Pike
35
Lausch Lane [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-03]
PA Route 72 and
Delp Road
35
Lincoln Street [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Charlotte Street
and North Prince
Street
25
Linden Avenue [Added
12-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-26]
Eden Road and
Sycamore Avenue
Route 23
25
Lititz Pike Delp Road and
Route 30
40
Lititz Pike Keller Avenue and
Liberty Street
25
Lititz Pike Oak Lane and
Keller Avenue
35
Lititz Pike Oregon Pike and
Route 30
30
Long Farm Lane [Added
12-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-21]
Brookfield Road and
Valley Road
25
Longmeadow Road [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
Ashford Drive and
Haverhill Road
25
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:425
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Longview Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Ashbourne Road
and Blue Grass
Road
25
Manheim Avenue [Added
5-12-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-11]
North Prince Street
and the western
end of Manheim
Avenue
25
Manheim Pike (See also
Manheim Avenue; Manheim
Road.)
Service Road and
Township line
35
Manheim Road (See also
Manheim Pike.)
Old Manheim Road
and North Prince
Street
35
Manheim Road (See also
Manheim Pike.)
Steelway and
Service Road
35
Maple Lane Fruitville Pike and
Glen Moore Circle
25
Marshall Avenue Lititz Pike and a
point 1,115 feet
east thereof
(northern half only)
35
Marshall Avenue Penn Central
underpass and
Stadium Road (both
sides)
35
McGrann Boulevard
[Amended 8-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-08]
New Holland Pike
and Pleasure Road
25
Meadow Lane [Added
2-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-03; amended
5-13-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-07]
Route 501 and
Shaub Road
30
Millpond Drive [Added
5-23-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
Kreider Road and
the eastern
terminus of
Millpond Drive
25
Millport Road [Added
8-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-16]
Lititz Pike and
Kissel Hill Road
45
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:426
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Municipal Drive [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
Murray Hill Drive,
Roseville Road and
Route 272
25
Murry Hill Drive [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-17; amended
2-27-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-02]
Oregon Pike and
Lititz Pike
25
New Holland Pike Penn Central
underpass and
Pleasure Road
35
New Holland Pike Pleasure Road and
Hillcrest Avenue
40
Nicholson Square Drive
[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-23]
Delp Road and the
terminus of
Nicholson Square
Drive
25
Northbrook Drive [Added
10-9-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-20]
Euclid Drive and
the end of
Northbrook Drive
25
Northview Drive [Added
4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-05]
Buch Avenue and
Buch Avenue
25
Oak Avenue [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
Zarker Road and
Eden Road
25
Oak Lane Lititz Pike and
Crescent Avenue
25
Oakmont Drive [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
Belle Meade Drive
and John Adams
Drive
25
Old Delp Road Blossom Hill Drive
and Delp Road
35
Old Delp Road [Added
5-23-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
Delp Road and the
western terminus of
Old Delp Road
25
Olde Field Drive [Added
7-8-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-13]
Koser Road and
Harvest Drive
25
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:427
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Orchard Road [Added
4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-05]
Peach Lane and
Blossom Hill Drive
25
Orchard Street Fruitville Pike and
Keller Avenue
25
Oregon Boulevard [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Homeland Drive
and Pleasure Road
25
Oregon Pike Lititz Pike and
Route 30
35
Oregon Pike Route 30 and a
point 400 feet north
of Ruth Ridge Drive
40
Oregon Road, West [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
Petersburg Road
and Lititz Pike
25
Park Road [Added 6-13-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-14]
Country Club Drive
and New Holland
Pike (Avenue)
25
Peach Lane [Added 4-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-05]
Lititz Pike and
Blossom Hill Drive
25
Pebblebrook Drive [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
West Oregon Road
and the southern
end of Pebblebrook
Drive
25
Pendleton Drive [Added
7-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-11]
Petersburg Road
and Koser Road
25
Pickering Trail [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Glendower Drive
and Heatherstone
Way
25
Pinetown Road [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
Creek Road and
Bushong Road
25
Pinetown Road [Added
9-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-19]
Jake Landis Road
and Creek Road
25
Pleasure Road Esbenshade Road
and New Holland
Pike
25
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:428
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Pleasure Road [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Grandview
Boulevard and
Hilltop Approach
(school speed limit
zone)
15 (during restricted
hours)
Pleasure Road Oregon Pike and
Esbenshade Road
35
President Avenue [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Lititz Pike and
Sterling Place
35
Primrose Avenue [Added
6-9-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-09]
Kendale Place and
Harclay Place
25
Princess Avenue [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Oregon Pike and
Gilbert Avenue
25
Prince Street, North [Added
10-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-17]
A point
approximately 75
feet north of
Manheim Avenue
and a point
approximately 40
feet south of
Jackson Street
25
Quarry Road [Added
9-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
Fruitville Pike and
the Manheim
Township/East
Hempfield
Township boundary
line
35
Queen Street, North [Added
10-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-17]
McGovern Avenue
and Liberty Street
25
Rachael Drive [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
Rhoda Drive and
Richland Drive
25
Raleigh Drive [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-02]
Buch Avenue and
the end of Raleigh
Drive
25
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:429
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Raleigh Drive [Added
5-29-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-09]
Buch Avenue, the
2200 Block of
Raleigh Drive and
the end of the 2300
Block of Raleigh
Drive
25
Raleigh Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Copley Drive and
Hartwell Court
25
Raleigh Drive [Added
2-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-03]
The commencement
of the 2200 block
and the terminus of
the 2300 block of
Raleigh Drive
25
Rhoda Drive [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
Kendale Place and
Rachael Drive
25
Ringneck Lane [Added
2-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-03]
Buch Avenue and
the terminus, culde-
sac of Ringneck
Lane
25
Robindale Avenue [Added
5-7-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
Lititz Pike and
Sterling Place
25
Roosevelt Boulevard Glen Moore Circle
and cul-de-sac at
eastern end
25
Roosevelt Boulevard [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-12]
Lititz Pike and the
end Roosevelt
Boulevard
25
Rosemont Drive [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
Kissel Hill Road and
the terminus of
Rosemont Drive
25
Roseville Road Fruitville Pike and
Oregon Pike
35
Roseville Road, East Route 222 and Eden
Road
35
Rotary Road [Added
11-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-13]
Petersburg Road
and Petersburg
Road
15
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:430
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Royal View Drive [Added
9-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
Entire length 25
Ruthridge Drive [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-09]
25
Rutledge Avenue [Added
8-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-17]
Entire length 25
St. Thomas Road [Added
1-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-01]
St. Thomas Road
and the end of St.
Thomas Road
25
Sammar Road [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
Zarker Road and
Euclid Drive
25
Santa Barbara Drive [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-09]
East Roseville Road
and Murry Hill
Drive
25
Settlers Bend [Added
8-24-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-19]
Weaver Road and
Buch Avenue
25
Shaub Road [Added
5-13-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-07]
Meadow Lane and
Valley Road (SR
1014)
30
Shreiner Road [Added
12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-27]
Bushong Road and
Riveredge Drive
25
Skyline Drive [Added
9-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-12]
Pleasure Road and
the terminus of
Skyline Drive
25
Snyder Road [Added
11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
Buckwalter Road
and a point 950 feet
to the west
15 (during the times:
8:30 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.)
Snyder Road [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Erb's Quarry Road
and Buckwalter
Road
35
Southwick Drive [Added
1-10-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
East Oregon Road
and Haverhill Road
25
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:431
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Squire Lane [Added
9-24-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-17]
Bloomfield Drive
and Royal Hunt Way
25
Squire Lane [Added
10-13-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-13]
Kingsbridge Drive
and Royal Hunt Way
25
State Street [Added
11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-16]
Harrisburg Pike
and the
geographical
boundary of the
City of Lancaster
25
Sterling Place [Added
2-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-03]
East Roseville Road
and East Roseville
Road
25
Suncrest Road [Added
1-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-01]
Oregon Pike and
the end of Suncrest
Road
25
Sunnybrook Drive [Added
6-27-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-18]
Pleasure Road and
the eastern
terminus of
Sunnybrook Drive
25
Sunset Avenue [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-03]
Elizabeth Drive and
Avenue
25
Sunset Drive [Added
12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-28]
Entire length 25
Unnamed roadways located in
Overlook Park
Fruitville Pike and
Bassett Drive
15
Valley Road Lititz Pike and
Oregon Pike
35
Village Drive [Added
3-25-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-07]
West Oregon Road
and River Birch
Drive
25
Wagonwheel Road [Added
10-10-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-16]
East Oregon Road
and Wallingford
Road
25
Wallingford Road [Added
4-25-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-08]
700 to 800 Block 25
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-59
1:432
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Wallingford Road [Added
3-12-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-06]
Ashford Drive to
Thornberry Lane
25
Walnut Street, East Grofftown Road and
Broad Street
25
Warren Way [Added
11-9-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-20]
Pebblebrook Drive
and Petersburg
Road
25
Water Street [Added
5-12-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-11]
Liberty Street and
Steven Street
25
Waverly Avenue [Added
10-14-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-16]
A point
approximately
1,003 feet of Lititz
Pike and Lititz Pike
25
Weaver Road [Added
2-10-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-05; amended
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Buch Avenue and
Petersburg Road
35
Weaver Road [Added
6-9-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-09]
Koser Road and
North Farm Drive
25
Wheatfield Drive [Added
8-10-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-14]
Fruitville Pike and
Magnolia Drive
25
Wheatfield Drive [Added
3-26-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-09]
Magnolia Drive to
Snyder Road
25
White Oak Drive [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
Oregon Pike and
Pinewood Road
25
Whitemarsh Drive [Added
7-10-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-19]
Lehn Drive and
Oregon Pike
25
Winchester Drive [Added
11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-17]
Butter Road and the
terminus of
Winchester Drive
25
§ 480-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-59
1:433
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Wynfield Drive [Added
5-12-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-11]
Landis Valley Road
and the western
end of Wynfield
Drive
25
Zarker Road [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
Euclid Drive and
Eden Road
25
§ 480-60. Schedule I-B: Traffic Signals.
Official traffic signals shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected)
at the following intersections, and traffic at those intersections shall be
directed by those signals:
At Intersection Of With
Duke Street, North McGovern Avenue/Amtrak Train Station
driveway
Fruitville Pike Alcoa entrance
Fruitville Pike Buch Avenue
Fruitville Pike Delp Road
Fruitville Pike Dillerville Road
Fruitville Pike Erb's Quarry Road/Bent Creek Drive
Fruitville Pike Keller Avenue
Fruitville Pike Roseville Road
Harrisburg Pike Dillerville Road
Harrisburg Pike Driveway to Toys-R-Us
Harrisburg Pike Lara Drive
Harrisburg Pike Park City South Mall entrance/exit
Harrisburg Pike Postal Drive
Harrisburg Pike Race Avenue
Harrisburg Pike Route 30 ramps
Lititz Pike Airport Road
Lititz Pike Delp Road
Lititz Pike Keller and Marshall Avenues
Lititz Pike Oregon Pike
Lititz Pike Oregon Road
Lititz Pike Roseville Road
§ 480-59 MANHEIM CODE § 480-60
1:434
At Intersection Of With
Lititz Pike Valley Road
Manheim Pike Delp Road
Manheim Pike Dillerville Road
Manheim Pike Howmet property
Manheim Pike Plaza Boulevard
New Holland Pike Butter Road
New Holland Pike Eden Road
Oregon Pike Eden Road
Oregon Pike Jake Landis Road
Oregon Pike Roseville Road
Oregon Pike Valleybrooke Drive/Olde Hickory Road
Oregon Road, East Kissel Hill Road
Prince Street McGovern Avenue
Queen Street McGovern Avenue
§ 480-61. Schedule I-C: Prohibited Turns on Red Signal.
The following intersections are hereby established as intersections where
operators of vehicles traveling in the following direction or directions are
prohibited from making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into a one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicle Traveling On Facing
(Reserved)
§ 480-62. Schedule I-D: One-Way Streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby established as one-way
streets:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Broad Street East Walnut
Street
East Chestnut
Street
South
Chestnut Street, East North Broad
Street
Grofftown Road East
Duke Street, North McGovern
Avenue
Liberty Street South
Gilbert Avenue Pleasure Drive Elizabeth Drive North
Grofftown Road North Broad
Street
East Walnut
Street
Northeast
§ 480-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-62
1:435
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Jackson Street North Prince
Street
North Charlotte
Street
West
Lincoln Street Charlotte Street North Prince
Street
East
Lititz Pike Liberty Street McGovern
Avenue
North
Loop Road Route 72 Grossman's
Lumber property
South
Manheim Avenue Prince Street Stevens Street Northwest
Manheim Township
Police Station parking
lot, northern driveway
[Added 10-13-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-17]
Municipal Drive Northeastern
parking lot
East
Manheim Township
Police Station parking
lot, southern driveway
[Added 10-13-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-17]
Municipal Drive Western parking
lot
North
McGovern Avenue Lititz Pike North Prince
Street
West
Oak Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-02]
Eden Road Linden Avenue South
Old Bushong Road
[Added 5-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-11]
Route 272 Bushong Road East
Paxton Place [Added
3-8-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
Paxton Place Thornberry Lane East
Paxton Place [Added
3-8-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
Paxton Place Thornberry Lane West
Prince Street McGovern
Avenue
Liberty Street South
Queen Street, North Liberty Street McGovern
Avenue
North
Rose Avenue Pleasure Road Buttonwood
Street
South
§ 480-62 MANHEIM CODE § 480-62
1:436
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Shreiner Station Road
[Added 2-27-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-02]
McGovernville
Road
Flory Mill Road North
Stadium Road Pleasure Road Marshall Avenue Southwest
Stadium Road Spur Stadium Marshall Avenue West
Tollgate Lane Crown Avenue Rose Avenue West
Walnut Street, East Grofftown Road North Broad
Street
West
§ 480-63. Schedule I-E: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
The following intersections are hereby established as intersections where
turns are restricted or prohibited:
Vehicles
Travelling On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Fruitville Pike
[Added 4-10-2000
by Ord. No.
2000-06]
Left turn
Granite Run Drive
[Added 9-13-1999
by Ord. No.
1999-14]
West Left turn,
except from
center lane
Route 72 At all times
Landis Avenue
[Added 2-8-1988
by Ord. No.
1988-05]
North Left turn Harrisburg
Pike
At all times
Lititz Pike North Left turn Keller
Avenue
Weekdays,
between
4:30 p.m.
and 5:30
p.m.
Water Street,
vehicles with more
than 2 axles
[Added
10-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-17]
North Left turn Jackson
Street
At all times
§ 480-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-63
1:437
Vehicles
Travelling On
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Water Street,
vehicles with more
than 2 axles
[Added
10-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-17]
North Left turn Lincoln
Street
At all times
Water Street,
vehicles with more
than 2 axles
[Added
10-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-17]
South Right turn Jackson
Street
At all times
Water Street,
vehicles with more
than 2 axles
[Added
10-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-17]
South Right turn Lincoln
Street
At all times
§ 480-64. Schedule I-F: No-Passing Zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established as follows:
Street Between
Direction of
Travel
Foxshire Drive [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-09]
The intersection with
Fruitville Pike and the
intersection with
Heatherton Drive
East and West
Harrington Drive [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-09]
The intersection with
Foxshire Drive and the
intersection with Roseville
Road
North and
South
§ 480-65. Schedule I-G: Through Highways.
Through highways are hereby established as follows:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
§ 480-66. Schedule I-H: Stop Intersections.
The following intersections are hereby established as stop intersections:
§ 480-63 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:438
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Airport Road Oregon Road South
Airport Road, West [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
Koser Road South
Amesbury Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Haverhill Road South
Amesbury Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Longmeadow Road Southwest
Amesbury Road [Added
3-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-05]
Wallingford Road South
Amity Drive West Roseville
Road
North
Anne Avenue East Roseville
Road
North
Anne Avenue Murry Hill Drive South
Apollo Drive McGovernville
Road
West
Apple Lane [Added 6-12-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-07]
Arbor Road East
Apple Road [Added 12-14-1998
by Ord. No. 1998-26]
Fiddler's Green
Road
North
Apple Road Kissel Hill Road East
Apple Road Long Farm Road East and West
April Lane [Added 12-13-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Summer Lane
(northern section)
West
Arbor Road [Added 6-12-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-07]
Blossom Hill Drive Southeast
Arbor Road Buch Road North
Ashbourne Avenue Crooked Hill Drive East and West
Ashford Drive Haverhill Road North and South
Ashford Drive Oregon Road North
Ashton Place [Added 7-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-14]
Pendleton Drive East
Aster Lane [Added 11-27-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-26]
Aster Lane North
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:439
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Aster Lane [Added 2-12-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-02]
Bluebell Drive North
Autumn Drive [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
April Lane Northeast
Autumn Drive [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Summer Lane South
Barclay Drive [Added 8-10-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-17]
North Eden Road East
Barre Drive, North [Added
6-12-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-07]
Wilkes Road East
Barre Drive, South [Added
6-12-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-07]
Wilkes Road East
Bassett Drive [Added 8-13-1984
by Ord. No. 1984-13]
Delp Road North
Beaconfield Lane (west
intersection) [Added 4-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-07]
Olde Saybrook
Road
North
Beaconfield Road [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
Hunsicker Road North
Beacon Hill Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Revere Road (west
intersection)
South
Becker Road Oregon Road South
Beechwood Road [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
St. Thomas Road West
Belair Drive Brockton Road North and South
Beverly Drive East Roseville
Road
North
Beverly Drive [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Santa Barbara
Drive
West
Bible School Drive Eden Road South
Billview Drive Murry Hill Drive North
Billview Santa Drive [Added
3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Barbara Drive South
Biltmore Avenue [Added
5-8-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-11]
Hiemenz Road West
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:440
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Biltmore Avenue [Added
6-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-14]
Hollywood Drive East
Biscayne Road Brockton Road North and South
Blacksmith Way [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Derbyshire Road South
Blacksmith Way [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Pulte Road North
Blaikley Circle [Added
11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-20]
Travis Lane South
Bloomingdale Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Park Plaza South
Bloomington Avenue Sterling Place North and South
Blossom Hill Drive Buch Avenue North
Blossom Hill Drive Delp Road South
Blossom Hill Drive Old Delp Road North and South
Blossom Hill Drive [Added
12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Peach Lane Northeast
Blossom Valley Road Delp Road (east
intersection)
North
Blossom Valley Road Delp Road (west
intersection)
North
Bluebell Drive [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
Bloomfield Drive North
Blue Grass Road Bible School Drive East and West
Blue Grass Road Crooked Oak Drive West
Blue Grass Road Longview Drive East and West
Bluff View Drive Murry Hill Drive North
Bluff View Drive Santa Barbara
Drive
West
Bob White Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Candlewyck Road East
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:441
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Bob White Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Partridge Lane Northeast
Bonnie Drive [Added 2-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Dolly Drive Southeast
Bracken Drive [Added
8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-13]
Basset Drive East
Bracken Drive [Added
8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-13]
Nicholson Square
Drive
West
Breezewood Drive [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
St. Thomas Road West
Brentwood Avenue [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Crooked Oak Drive West
Brentwood Avenue [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Long View Drive East
Bridge Road [Added 11-15-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-25]
Pinetown Road West
Brockton Road Candlewyck Road North
Brookfield Road [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Kissel Hill Road East
Buckfield Drive [Added
10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-17]
Hammersmith
Lane
East
Buckfield Drive [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02; 1-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-01]
Koser Road Southeast
Bucky Drive [Added 2-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-03]
Koser Road South
Burlington Drive Crooked Oak Drive East
Burlington Drive East Roseville
Road
West
Butler Avenue [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
Crown Avenue Southwest
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:442
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Butler Avenue (3-way) [Amended
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Sunset Avenue East and West
Butterfield Road Butter Road East
Butterfield Road [Added
4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-07]
Old Orchard Road East
Butter Road (4-way) Landis Valley Road Northeast and
Southeast
Cambridge Road Delp Road North and South
Cambridge Road (3-way) Candlewyck Road South
Camellia Court [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
Dogwood Drive East
Cameron Avenue Grandview
Boulevard
North and South
Cameron Avenue New Holland
Avenue
Southeast
Cameron Avenue Pleasure Road North
Candlewyck Road (3-way) Cambridge Road East and West
Candlewyck Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Delp Road North and South
Candlewyck Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Salem Drive North
Canterbury Turn [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Heatherstone Way Southwest
Canterbury Turn [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Landis Valley Road East and West
Canterbury Turn [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Wyndham Way West
Carerra Drive [Added 6-11-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-13]
Granite Run Drive North
Carlton Drive Butter Road East
Carlton Drive [Added 9-11-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-18]
Northbrook Drive East and West
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:443
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Carlton Drive [Added 6-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
North Eden Road West
Carlton Place Ruth Ridge Drive North and South
Carriage Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Hunsicker Road Southwest
Carriage Drive [Added 5-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Tracy Road North
Carriage Drive [Added
5-11-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-11]
Whitemarsh Drive South
Carter-Moir Drive [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Weaver Road Northeast
Cedar Road [Added 5-10-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-12]
Crescent Avenue North
Center Avenue [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Homeland Drive East
Center Avenue [Added 8-9-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-17]
Windsor Avenue West
Chase Drive [Added 5-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-07]
Saddle Drive South
Chelsea Drive [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Brockton Road West
Chowning Place [Added
11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-20]
Raleigh Drive East
Chowning Place [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07; amended 11-14-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-20]
Wetherburn Drive South
Christian Place Liberty Street South
Church Street [Added 9-9-1987
by Ord. No. 1987-28]
North Duke Street East
Circle Drive [Added 6-12-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-07]
Blossom Hill Drive East
Citation Lane [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
West Airport Road North
Clay Street President Avenue West
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:444
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Clayton Road [Added 2-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-03]
Hamilton Road East
Clearview Avenue Butler Avenue North
Clearview Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Cortland Avenue South
Clearview Avenue Elizabeth Drive North and South
Clearview Avenue Pleasure Road North and South
Clearview Avenue [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Rutledge Avenue North
Clover Court [Added 9-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-19]
Farmstead Lane West
Coachhouse Lane [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-03]
Devon Drive South
Coachhouse Lane [Added
3-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-05]
Wagonwheel Road North
Cobblers Court [Added
2-12-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-02]
Bloomfield Drive North and South
Cobblestone Lane [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Buch Avenue South
Cobblestone Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Pebblebrook Drive Northwest
Commerce Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Flory Mill Road North
Concord Place East Roseville
Avenue
South
Cortland Avenue Esbenshade Road East
Cortland Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Sunset Avenue East and West
Country Club Drive (eastern
branch) [Added 9-11-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-18]
Country Club Drive
(northern branch)
North
Countryside Drive Fiddlers Green
Road
South
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:445
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Countryside Drive Long Farm Lane East
Coventry Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Blair Drive North
Coventry Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Candlewyck Road North
Covington Place [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Crooked Oak Drive East
Creek Road Oregon Road North and South
Crescent Avenue [Added
3-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-07]
Elmwood Terrace East
Crest Lane Pleasure Road South
Crest Lane [Added 1-14-1985 by
Ord. No. 1985-01]
Skyline Drive North
Crestmont Court [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
Farnum Road North
Crooked Oak Drive [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Ashbourne Avenue North and South
Crooked Oak Drive Brentwood Avenue North and South
Crooked Oak Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Eden Road North and South
Crooked Oak Drive Maplewood Avenue North and South
Crown Avenue [Amended
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
Butler Avenue North
Crown Avenue Princess Avenue North
Crown Avenue [Added
10-9-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-12]
Tollgate Lane South
Crown Road Pleasure Road North and South
Danbury Road [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Sturbridge Road
(east intersection)
East
Danbury Road [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Sturbridge Drive
(west intersection)
West
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:446
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Deerford Drive [Added
2-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-03]
Pleasure Road Southwest
Delp Road (4-way) [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Valleybrook Drive Northwest and
Southeast
Derbyshire Road Pebblebrook Drive East
Derbyshire Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Pulte Road Northwest
Devon Drive [Added 2-11-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-03]
Haymarket Lane East
Dogwood Drive [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
East Oregon Road North
Dogwood Drive [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
Rosemont Drive South
Dolly Drive [Added 6-11-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-12]
Carlton Place West
Draper Circle [Added 6-11-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-13]
Randolph Drive North
Duke Street [Added 5-10-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-12]
Valley Road South
Dunharrow Drive [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-09]
Harrington Drive West
Ecker Drive [Added 2-27-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-02]
Weaver Road West
Eden Road Euclid Drive East and
Northwest
Eden Road [Added 6-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-14]
Mission Road and
Sunset Drive
West
Eden Road (angle road) Euclid Drive Southeast
Eden Road, North [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Euclid Drive South
Eden Road, North [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-03]
Northbrook Drive North
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:447
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Eden Road, North [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Winchester Drive North and South
Edenwald Lane Euclid Drive South
Edenwald Lane [Added 8-9-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-17]
Winchester Drive North
Edgemoore Court [Added
8-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-07]
Esbenshade Drive East
Edgemoore Court [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-02]
Hilltop Approach North
Edgemoore Court Oregon Boulevard East and West
Edgemoore Court (4-way)
[Amended 5-23-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983-07]
Pleasure Road East and West
Elizabeth Avenue [Added
3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Juliette Avenue Northwest and
Southeast
Elizabeth Drive Esbenshade Road East and West
Elizabeth Drive [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
Fellowship Drive East and West
Elmwood Terrace [Repealed
3-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-07]
Elmwood Terrace [Added
5-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-12]
Cedar Road Southwest
Elmwood Terrace [Added
8-12-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-16]
Glen Moore Circle South
Esbenshade Road Butler Avenue North
Esbenshade Road Rutledge Avenue North and South
Esbenshade Road (4-way)
[Amended 5-23-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983-07]
Pleasure Avenue South
Euclid Drive Butter Road East
Euclid Road [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Eden Road South East
Falcon Lane [Added 3-8-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-05]
West Airport Road Northeast
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:448
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Farmington Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Harrington Drive North
Farmstead Lane [Added
2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-02]
Harvest Drive West
Farmstead Lane [Added
9-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-19; amended 6-12-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-08]
Olde Field Drive South
Farnum Road [Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-15]
Kissel Hill Road West
Farnum Road [Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-15]
Tiffany Drive East
Fellowship Drive Friendship Avenue North and South
Fellowship Drive [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-14]
Rutledge Avenue North and South
Ferree Circle [Added
10-13-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-13]
Fondersmith Drive East
Fiddlers Green Road (3-way)
[Amended 5-23-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983-07]
Long Farm Lane East
Fieldcrest Road [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-13]
Brookfield Road North
Fondersmith Drive [Added
5-11-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-11]
Whitemarsh Drive Northwest
Fountain Avenue Pleasure Road West
Foxcroft Drive [Added
10-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-20]
Country Club Drive West
Foxcroft Drive [Added
12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-28]
Country Club Drive
(eastern branch)
East and West
Foxshire Drive [Added 6-4-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-09]
Heatherton Drive East
Frances Avenue Janet Avenue Northwest and
Southeast
Frances Avenue Juliette Avenue Northwest
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:449
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Frances Avenue [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Martha Avenue Southeast
Friendship Avenue Esbenshade Road West
Gardenia Court [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
Tiffany Drive East
Garfield Avenue [Added
12-14-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-20]
Northwest End
Avenue
South
Garfield Road [Added 8-8-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-13]
North West End
Avenue
West
Georgetown Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Belair Drive North
Georgetown Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Biscayne Road South
Geraldson Drive [Added
8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-14]
Rhoda Drive South
Geraldson Drive [Added
8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-14]
Richland Drive North
Gilbert Avenue [Added 2-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Elizabeth Drive North
Glen Moore Circle Keller Avenue South
Glen Moore Circle [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Maple Lane North
Glen Moore Circle Orchard Road Northwest and
Southeast
Glen Moore Circle [Added
8-12-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-16]
Roosevelt
Boulevard
East and West
Glenridge Drive [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Carlton Place West
Grandview Boulevard Pleasure Road
(east intersection)
East
Grandview Boulevard Pleasure Road
(west intersection)
North
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:450
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Greenhowe Drive [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-14]
Pendleton Drive East
Greenhowe Drive [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-14]
Randolph Drive West
Hammersmith Lane [Added
10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-17]
Buckfield Drive North
Hammersmith Lane [Added
9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-26;
amended 2-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-02]
Koser Road South
Hampton Lane [Added
9-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-19]
Buch Avenue South
Hancock Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Revere Road South
Harclay Place East Roseville
Road
South
Harclay Place [Added
12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-25]
Primrose Avenue North
Haroldson Drive [Added
8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-14]
Rhoda Drive South
Haroldson Drive [Added
8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-14]
Teddy Avenue North
Harrington Drive [Added
6-4-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-09]
Foxshire Drive North
Harrington Drive [Added
6-12-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-07]
West Roseville
Road
North
Harvest Drive [Added 3-13-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-04]
Buckwalter Road Southwest
Haskell Drive [Added
10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-17]
Queen Lane East
Haymarket Lane [Added
3-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-05]
Wagonwheel Road North
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:451
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Hazelwood Road [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
St. Thomas Road West
Heatherstone Way [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
Butter Road Northwest and
Southeast
Heatherstone Way [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Landis Valley Road Northeast
Heatherton Drive [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-09]
Dunbarrow Drive South
Hedgerow Lane Crooked Oak Drive East
Hedgerow Lane East Roseville
Road
West
Helen Avenue Cameron Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Helen Avenue Coyle Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Helen Avenue Fountain Avenue West
Helen Avenue Pleasure Road Northeast
Henbird Lane [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Bob White Lane Southwest
Henbird Lane [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Ringneck Lane North
Henbird Lane (3-way) [Added
12-9-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-40]
Salem Drive North and South
Hibiscus Court [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
Rosemont Drive South
Hiemenz Road [Added
6-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-14]
Mission Road South
Hiemenz Road [Added
10-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-20]
Sunset Drive North
Highland View Drive [Added
5-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-12]
Bluff View Drive Northwest
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:452
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Hillcrest Avenue [Added
6-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-14]
Mission Road West
Hilltop Approach Pleasure Road South
Holbrook Avenue [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-21]
Brockton Road East
Holbrook Avenue [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-21]
Georgetown Drive West
Hollywood Drive [Added
6-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-14]
Hillcrest Avenue North
Hollywood Drive Park Road North and South
Homeland Drive Country Club Drive East
Hunsicker Road Butter Road East and West
Hunter Drive [Added
10-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-20]
Country Club Drive East
Hunter Drive Country Club Drive West
Ivy Terrace Lane [Added
6-12-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-07]
Arbor Road West
Jackson Street [Added
5-23-1989 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
North Charlotte
Street
West
Jackson Street [Added
12-9-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-16]
North Water Street West
Jake Landis Road Butter Road Southwest
Janet Avenue Cameron Avenue East and West
Janet Avenue Fountain Avenue East and West
Janet Avenue Marshall Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Janet Avenue McGrann
Boulevard
East and West
Janet Avenue (east intersection) Grandview
Boulevard
East
Janet Avenue (west intersection) Grandview
Boulevard
East
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:453
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Jay Avenue [Added 12-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-23]
Rachael/Rhoda
Drive
West
Jay Avenue [Added 12-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-23]
Robindale Avenue East
Jestar Drive [Added 3-8-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-05]
West Airport Road South
John Landis Road [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-13]
Millport Road North
John Landis Road Oregon Road South
Judith Lane [Added 12-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-23]
Brookfield Road South
Juliette Avenue Marshall Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Juliette Avenue Pleasure Road Northeast
Keens Road [Added 12-13-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-21]
John Landis Road East
Keens Road [Added 12-13-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-21]
Kissel Hill Road West
Kendale Place [Added 7-13-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-12]
Dolly Drive North
Kendale Place [Added 9-8-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-15]
Ruth Ridge Road South
Kentwood Drive Belair Drive North
Kentwood Drive Biscayne Road South
Kingsbridge Drive [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02; amended 7-8-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-11]
Koser Road Northwest and
West
Kingsbridge Drive [Added
11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-17]
Royal Hunt Way East
Kissel Hill Road Millport Road North and South
Kissel Hill Road Oregon Road North and South
Knollwood Drive [Added
2-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-03]
Sunnybrook Drive North
Kreider Road [Added 2-27-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-02]
Weaver Road North
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:454
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Lambeth Road [Added
5-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-12]
Sammar Road West
Lambeth Road [Added
5-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-12]
Zarker Road East
Lancaster Country Day School
parking lot exit lane [Added
3-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-03]
Shreiner Avenue East
Landis Valley Road (4-way) Butter Road Northwest and
Southeast
Landis Valley Road (right turn
keep moving) [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-02]
Paper Mill Road Southwest
Larchmont Lane Carlton Drive North and South
Larchmont Lane Euclid Drive South
Larchmont Lane Northbrook Drive North
Laurel Lane [Added 11-13-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-20]
Brookfield Road Southeast
Laurel Lane [Added 2-11-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-03]
Judith Lane East and West
Lausch Lane Delp Road North
Lehn Drive [Added 5-10-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-05]
Fondersmith Drive West
Lehn Drive [Added 5-11-1998 by
Ord. No. 1998-11]
Whitemarsh Drive South
Leona Avenue [Added 1-1-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-02]
Fellowship Drive East and West
Leona Drive [Added 9-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-19]
Butler Avenue North
Levingston Circle [Added
11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-20]
Travis Lane South
Liberty Street North Plum Street East
Linden Avenue Eden Road Northwest
Linden Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Sycamore Avenue Northeast
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:455
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Locust Lane [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Longview Drive West
Long Farm Lane [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
Brookfield Road North
Long Farm Lane (3-way) Fiddlers Green
Road
North and South
Longmeadow Drive [Added
8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-13]
Ashbourne Avenue North
Longmeadow Drive Haverhill Road South
Longmeadow Drive Southwick Drive East and West
Longmeadow Road [Added
11-9-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-20]
Ashford Drive North
Longview Drive [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Blue Grass Road South
Longview Drive Maplewood Avenue North and South
Louise Avenue Cameron Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Louise Avenue Coyle Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Louise Avenue Fountain Avenue West
Louise Avenue McGrann
Boulevard
East and West
Louise Avenue Pleasure Road Northeast
Ludwell Drive [Added
11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-20]
Raleigh Drive West
Ludwell Drive [Added 8-8-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-16]
Weaver Road East
Magnolia Drive [Added
10-14-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-16]
Wheatfield Drive Southeast
Manchester Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Danbury Road North
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:456
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Manheim Township Police Station,
northeast parking lot exit lanes
[Added 10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-17]
Municipal Drive South
Manheim Township Police Station,
western parking lot exit lanes
[Added 10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-17]
Municipal Drive North and South
Maple Lane [Added 11-10-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-17]
Glen Moore Circle East
Maple Lane [Added 2-27-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-02]
Glen Moore Circle East
Maplewood Avenue [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Crooked Oak Drive West
Maplewood Avenue [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Longview Drive East and West
Marble Drive [Added 6-11-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-13]
Granite Run Drive South
Market Street Liberty Street South
Marquis Court [Added
11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-17]
Squire Lane East
Martha Avenue Cameron Avenue East
Martha Avenue Fountain Avenue Northeast and
Southwest
Martha Avenue Grandview
Boulevard
East and West
Martha Avenue Marshall Avenue Southwest
Martha Avenue McGrann
Boulevard
East and West
Maxson Road (east intersection) Delp Road North
Maxson Road (west intersection) Delp Road North
McCaskey Avenue East Walnut Street North
McCaskey Avenue Grofftown Road South
McGovernville Road McGovernville
Road
East
McGrann Boulevard Grandview
Boulevard
North and South
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:457
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
McGrann Boulevard Pleasure Road North
Midway Avenue [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Center Avenue South
Millport Road [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Kissel Hill Road East
Milton Circle [Added 9-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-19]
Suffolk Drive Southwest
Mission Road Biltmore Avenue North and South
Mission Road Eden Road North
Mondamin Farm Road Butter Road West
Mondamin Road Hunsicker Road South
Municipal Drive East Roseville
Road
North
Municipal Drive Murray Hill Drive South
Municipal Drive (east-west
extension) [Added 7-8-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-11]
Municipal Drive West
Murry Hill Circle Murry Hill Drive North
Myers Court [Added 2-11-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-03]
Erb's Quarry Road East
Nanticoke Road [Added
11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-23]
Overlook Avenue North and South
Neffsville Park Driveway [Added
2-12-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-02]
Bloomfield Drive North
Northbrook Drive Buch Avenue North
Northbrook Drive Carlton Drive North and South
Northbrook Drive Euclid Drive South
Northview Drive (4-way) [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Orchard Road East and South
Norwick Road Peach Lane North
Norwick Road [Added 3-11-1991
by Ord. No. 1991-05;
11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-23]
Wicklyn Road Southwest
Nottingham Avenue Brockton Road West
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:458
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Oak Avenue Eden Road North and South
Oak Avenue [Added 1-11-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-02]
Linden Avenue Southwest
Oak Avenue [Added 5-10-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-12]
Zarker Road North
Oak Lane [Added 5-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-12]
Crescent Avenue South
Old Delp Road Delp Road South
Olde Field Drive [Added
1-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-01]
Harvest Drive North
Olde Field Drive [Added
9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-26;
amended 2-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-02]
Koser Road South
Olde Saybrook Road (east
intersection) [Added 4-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-07]
Beaconfield Lane West
Olde Saybrook Road [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Butter Road Northwest
Old Orchard Road Butter Road East and West
Old Orchard Road Hunsicker Road West
Orchard Drive Blossom Hill Drive South
Orchard Lane [Added 1-9-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-01]
Clayton Road North
Orchard Lane [Added 1-9-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-01]
Newton Road East and West
Orchard Road [Added 12-9-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-21]
Blossom Hill Road West
Orchard Road [Added 1-8-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-01]
Orchard Road (4-way) [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Northview Drive North and
Northwest
Orchard Road [Added 7-13-1987
by Ord. No. 1987-18]
Peach Lane South
Orchard Street Keller Avenue South
Oregon Boulevard [Added
5-13-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-07]
Homeland Drive North
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:459
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Oregon Boulevard Pleasure Road South
Oregon Road Bushong Road East
Overland Lane [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
Pinewood Road South
Overlook Avenue [Added
11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-23]
Amity Drive West
Overlook Avenue [Added
11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-23]
Harrington Drive West
Overlook Road Amity Drive East and West
Overlook Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Manchester Lane East and West
Oxford Drive [Added 7-12-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-15]
Friendship Avenue West
Oxford Drive [Added 6-8-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-09; amended
7-12-1983 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Salisbury Court East
Paper Mill Road [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-02]
Landis Valley Road Northwest
Park Plaza [Added 1-11-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-02]
Concord Place West
Park Plaza [Added 1-11-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-02]
Pleasant Place East
Park Road Country Club Drive Northwest
Park Road [Added 5-23-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-07]
Mission Road East
Parkside Lane [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-02]
Hilltop Approach East and West
Parkside Lane Oregon Boulevard East
Parkside Lane [Added 7-12-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-15]
Oxford Drive Southwest
Parkwynne Road Cambridge Road East and West
Parkwynne Road Candlewyck Road West
Partridge Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Henbird Lane South
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:460
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Peach Lane [Added 12-9-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-21]
Blossom Hill Drive West and South
Pendleton Drive [Added
9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-26;
amended 2-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-02]
Koser Road North
Philmont Drive Cambridge Road East and West
Philmont Drive Candlewyck Road West
Pinehurst Avenue [Added
5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-11]
Hiemenz Road West
Pinehurst Avenue Hollywood Drive Southeast
Pinehurst Avenue [Added
6-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-14]
Mission Road East and West
Pinetown Road Bushong Road Northeast
Pinewood Road [Added
1-14-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-01; amended 11-13-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-20]
Suncrest Road East
Pinewood Road White Oak Drive West
Pleasant Place East Roseville
Avenue
South
Pleasure Road (4-way) [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Esbenshade Road Northwest and
Southeast
Pleasure Road [Added
6-12-1985 by Ord. No.
1995-08]
Oregon Boulevard East
Plum Street (North) [Added
3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Juliette Avenue Northwest and
Southeast
Police parking area, east drive of
east lot [Added 6-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-08]
Municipal Drive South
Police parking area, west drive of
east lot [Added 6-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-08]
Municipal Drive South
Police parking, west drive of east
lot [Added 6-12-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-08]
Rear drive of east
lot
North
Ponderosa Drive [Added
4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-05]
Old Orchard Road East
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:461
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prentice Place [Added
11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-20]
Raleigh Drive East
Preston Road [Added 5-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Carriage Drive West
Preston Road [Added 5-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Saddle Drive North
Primrose Avenue [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
Carlton Place East and West
Primrose Avenue [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
Harclay Place East and West
Primrose Avenue [Added
4-13-1993 by Ord. No.
1992-06]
Kendale Place East
Primrose Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Park Plaza Southwest
Primrose Avenue Sterling Place East and West
Princess Avenue Gilbert Avenue East
Pulte Road [Added 5-23-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-07]
Pebblebrook Drive East and West
Pulte Road [Added 5-23-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-07]
Warren Way Southeast
Queen Lane [Added 1-11-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-02]
Elizabeth Drive South
Queen Lane [Added 12-10-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-18]
Rutledge Avenue North
Raleigh Drive [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Buch Avenue South
Randolph Drive [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
Koser Road South
Randolph Drive [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
Pendleton Drive East
Regent Drive [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Henbird Lane Northwest
Regent Lane [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Bob White Lane South
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:462
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Revere Road (right turn keep
moving for eastbound traffic)
[Added 5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Cambridge Road East and West
Revere Road [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Candlewyck Road West
Rhoda Drive [Added 7-13-1987
by Ord. No. 1987-18; amended
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
Carlton Place East and West
Rhoda Drive [Added 7-13-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-12]
Kendale Place East
Richland Drive [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
Carlton Place East
Richland Drive [Added
2-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-03]
Jetstar Drive East
Richland Drive [Added
8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-14]
Rachael Drive West
Ridgedale Drive [Amended
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-14]
Butler Avenue North
Ridgedale Drive [Added
7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-14]
Rutledge Avenue South
Ridings Way [Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-15]
Tiffany Drive East
Ringneck Lane Buch Avenue North
Robindale Avenue [Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-23]
Sterling Place South
Rockford Lane [Added 6-8-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-13]
Carlton Drive North
Rockford Lane Euclid Drive South
Rockford Lane Winchester Drive North and South
Roesser Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-05]
Lehn Drive South
(easternmost
intersection)
Roesser Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-05]
Lehn Drive South
(westernmost
intersection)
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:463
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Rohrerstown Road McGovernville
Road
East
Roosevelt Boulevard Glen Moore Circle Southeast and
Northwest
Rose Avenue Pleasure Road North and South
Rose Avenue Princess Avenue North
Rose Avenue Tollgate Lane South
Rosemont Drive [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
Kissel Hill Road West
Roseville, East Eden Road South
Ross Avenue, West [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-02]
Race Avenue East
Ross Street President Avenue East and West
Ross Street State Street East and West
Ross Street, West [Added
3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-05]
Landis Avenue Northwest
Ross Street, West [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
Landis Avenue West
Royal Hunt Way [Added
11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-17]
Squire Lane North
Rumford Road [Added
8-10-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-17]
Old Post Lane West
Rutledge Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Esbenshade Road East and West
Rutledge Avenue Sunset Avenue East and West
Saddle Drive [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Hunsicker Road Southwest
Saddle Drive [Added 5-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-07]
Tracy Road South
Saint Thomas Road Pinewood Road North and South
Salem Drive [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Hancock Drive Southeast
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:464
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Salem Drive (3-way) [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Henbird Lane West
Salisbury Court [Added 8-9-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-07]
Esbenshade Drive East
Salisbury Court [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-02]
Hilltop Approach East and West
Salisbury Court Oregon Boulevard East and West
Sammar Road Euclid Drive North
Sammar Road [Added 5-10-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-12]
Zarker Road South
Santa Barbara Drive East Roseville
Road
North
Santa Barbara Drive (east
intersection)
Murry Hill Drive North and South
Santa Barbara Drive (west
intersection)
Murry Hill Drive North and South
Sarsen Drive [Added 3-13-1989
by Ord. No. 1989-04]
Buckwalter Road Northeast
Sarsen Drive [Added 12-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-23]
Stonehenge Drive West
School Road [Added 9-14-1987
by Ord. No. 1987-24]
School Road West
Schreiner Road Bushong Road West
Schreiner Station Road McGovernville
Road
North
Schreiner Station Road Plaza Boulevard South
Service Road (right turn moving)
[Added 5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Arcadia Road Northeast
Shaub Road [Added 10-10-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-22]
Meadow Lane North and South
Sherwal Avenue Belair Road North
Sherwal Avenue Biscayne Road North
Shreiner Avenue (right turn keep
moving) [Added 3-27-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-03]
Shreiner Avenue West
Skyline Boulevard Pleasure Road West
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:465
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Skyline Drive [Added 7-12-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-15]
Esbenshade Drive East
Skyline Drive [Added 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-02]
Hilltop Approach West
Skyline Drive Oregon Boulevard East and West
Skyline Pool Driveway [Added
8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-11]
Eden Road West
Snyder Road [Added 4-14-1986
by Ord. No. 1986-06; amended
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-13]
Buckwalter Road East
Snyder Road [Added 3-10-1986
by Ord. No. 1986-05]
Erb's Quarry Road West
Somerset Road [Added
6-11-1986 by Ord. No.
1990-13]
Brookfield Road North
Somerset Road [Added
12-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1998-26]
Fiddler's Green
Road
South
Southwick Drive Ashford Drive North and South
Southwick Drive Haverhill Road North and South
Southwick Drive Oregon Road North
Sovereign Circle [Added
11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-17]
Royal Hunt Way East
Split Rock Road [Added
2-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-05]
Crooked Hill Drive North
Split Rock Road [Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-23]
Hedgerow Lane Southwest
Squire Lane [Added 11-10-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-17]
Kingsbridge Drive South
Stadium Road spur Marshall Avenue Southwest
Stagecoach Lane [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Cobblestone Lane West
Stagecoach Lane [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Waverly Avenue South
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:466
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Stauffer Road [Added 1-14-1985
by Ord. No. 1985-01]
Millport Road South
Sterling Place [Added
12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-25]
Sunset Place North and South
Sterling Place (east intersection) East Roseville
Road
South
Sterling Place (west intersection) East Roseville
Road
South
Stevens Street [Added
11-26-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-22]
Manheim Avenue North
Stillwater Road [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
Olde Saybrook
Road
North
Stone Heath Drive [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
Olde Saybrook
Road
North
Stone Heath Drive [Added
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-12]
Stillwater Road South
Sturbridge Drive (east
intersection) [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Overlook Road North and South
Sturbridge Drive (east
intersection) [Amended
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
West Roseville
Road
North
Sturbridge Drive (west
intersection) [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Overlook Road North and South
Sturbridge Drive (west
intersection) [Amended
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
West Roseville
Road
North
Suffolk Drive [Added 9-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-19]
Wheatfield Drive South
Summer Lane [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
April Lane (south
intersection)
East and West
Sunglo Road [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Buch Avenue North
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:467
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Sunglo Road [Added 3-11-1991
by Ord. No. 1991-05;
5-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-12]
Northview Drive West
Sunnybrook Drive Pleasure Road West
Sunset Avenue (3-way) [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Butler Avenue North
Sunset Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Elizabeth Drive South
Sunset Drive [Added 6-14-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-14]
Eden Road and
Mission Road
East
Sunset Place [Added 12-30-1985
by Ord. No. 1985-25]
Park Plaza East
Surrey Drive Cambridge Road East and West
Surrey Drive Candlewyck Road West
Susquaw Place [Added
11-14-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-23]
Nanticoke Road West
Sutton Place (east intersection)
[Added 10-14-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-16]
Waverly Avenue South
Sutton Place (west intersection)
[Added 10-14-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-16]
Waverly Avenue South
Sycamore Avenue Eden Road Northwest
Sycamore Avenue [Added
1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-02]
Linden Avenue Southeast
Sycamore Circle [Added
8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-16]
Lititz Road West
Tanglewood Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Pebblebrook Drive West
Tanglewood Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Pulte Road Southwest
Tartan Court [Added 6-8-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-09]
Dunharrow Drive South
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:468
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Taylor Drive [Added 12-12-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-25]
Eden Road South
Teddy Avenue [Added 8-10-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-14]
Bonnie Drive East
Teddy Avenue [Added
11-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-35; amended 6-11-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-12]
Carlton Place East and West
Teddy Avenue [Added 8-10-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-14]
Geraldson Drive West
Thornberry Lane [Added
3-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-05]
Amesbury Road West
Thunderbird Lane [Added
6-12-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-07]
Buch Avenue East
Tiffany Drive [Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-15]
Rosemont Drive Northwest
Tracy Road [Added 5-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-07]
Saddle Drive East
Travis Lane [Added 11-14-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-20]
Raleigh Drive West
Trena Avenue [Added 8-10-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-14]
Bonnie Drive East
Trena Avenue [Added 8-10-1992
by Ord. No. 1992-14]
Teddy Avenue South
Tusitalla Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Crest Lane East
Tusitalla Drive Pleasure Road West
Unnamed connecting road Blossom Hill Drive South
Unnamed connecting road Orchard Road North
Valleybrook Drive Delp Road Northeast and
Southwest
Village Drive [Added 6-13-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-14]
West Oregon Road North
Viscount Place [Added
11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-17]
Kingsbridge Drive South
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-66
1:469
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Vista Road [Added 5-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-12]
Samman Road West
Vista Road [Added 5-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-12]
Zarker Road East
Wallingford Road [Added
3-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-05]
Ashford Drive West
Water Street Jackson Street South
Water Street Lincoln Street North
Waverly Avenue [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Cobblestone Way West
White Oak Street Pinewood Road North
Whitman Drive [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-21]
Brockton Road East
Whitman Drive [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-21]
Georgetown Drive West
Wicklyn Road Delp Road South
Wicklyn Road Peach Lane North
Wilkes Road Delp Road South
Wilkes Road [Added 3-11-1991
by Ord. No. 1991-05]
Peach Lane North
Wilson Drive [Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No. 1983-07]
Clayton Road East
Wilson Drive Newton Road North and South
Winchester Drive Butter Road East
Winchester Drive Larchmont Lane East and West
Winchester Drive Northbrook Drive East and West
Windover Turn [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Butter Road East
Windover Turn [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Hunsicker Road North
Windsor Avenue [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Green Terrace North
§ 480-66 MANHEIM CODE § 480-66
1:470
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street
Direction of
Travel
Windsor Avenue [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Homeland South
Winterhill Road [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
April Lane North
Winterhill Road [Added 3-8-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-05]
Summer Lane South
Woodside Road [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
Blossom Hill Drive South
Woodside Road [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
Northview Drive North
Woodwick Road (east intersection) Peach Lane South
Woodwick Road (west
intersection)
Peach Lane South
Wright Avenue [Added 9-8-1986
by Ord. No. 1986-26; amended
8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-16;
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
Koser Road Southeast
Wyeth Circle [Added 11-14-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-20]
Chowning Place South
Wyndham Way [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Butter Road South
Wyndham Way [Added
8-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-14]
Canterbury Turn North
Wynnewood Drive [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Larchmont Lane West
Wynnewood Drive [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-03]
Northbrook Drive East
Zarker Road Eden Road West
Zarker Road Euclid Drive North
§ 480-67. Schedule I-I: Yield Intersections. [Amended 12-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-21]
The following intersections are hereby established as yield right-of-way
intersections:
§ 480-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-67
1:471
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Ramp from Route 23 [Added
8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-11]
Landis Valley Road North
§ 480-68. Schedule I-J: Vehicle Weight Limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on any of the
following streets or portions of streets if such vehicle or combination has a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed for that street or portion
of a street as set forth below:
Street Portion
Maximum Weight
Limit
(tons)
Buch Avenue [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02; amended
4-10-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-05]
The bridge structure over
Little Conestoga Creek
10
Delp Road [Added
8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-13]
Between Old Delp Road
and Route 501
30
Fruitville Pike at Delp
Road [Added 8-14-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-11]
Northbound on the
property line between
2257 and 2261 Fruitville
Pike indicating right and
southbound approximately
25 feet south of the
driveway of 2320 Fruitville
Pike indicating left
30
Fruitville Pike at
Roseville Road [Added
8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-11]
Northbound approximately
15 feet north of
Farmington Lane
indicating right and
southbound approximately
50 feet south of the
entrance to 1950 Fruitville
Pike indicating left
15
Koser Road [Added
1-10-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-02]
The bridge structure over
tributary to the Bachman
Run located approximately
2,000 feet east of Fruitville
Pike
Single vehicles: 25
§ 480-67 MANHEIM CODE § 480-68
1:472
Street Portion
Maximum Weight
Limit
(tons)
Lititz Pike (Route 501) at
Delp Road [Added
8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-11]
Northbound on the
property line between
2277 and 2281 Lititz Pike
indicating left and
southbound approximately
25 feet south of Peach
Lane indicating right
30
Lititz Pike (Route 501) at
Roseville Road [Added
8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-11]
Northbound on the
property line between
1863 and 1875 Lititz Pike
indicating left and
southbound on the
property line between
1956 and 1950 Lititz Pike
indicating right
15
West Roseville Road
[Added 3-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 1986-05]
Between Route 501 (Lititz
Pike) and Fruitville Pike
15
§ 480-69. Schedule I-K: Restrictions on Truck Traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a Class V or higher
class truck or truck tractor (11,001 pounds or higher) with or without trailer
or semitrailer or any semitrailer or full trailer on any of the following streets
or portions of streets, except as set forth in § 480-18:
Street Between
Apple Lane [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Arbor Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Barre Drive [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Barrister Place [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Belair Drive [Added 6-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Biscayne Road [Added 6-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Blacksmith Way [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
§ 480-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-69
1:473
Street Between
Blaikley Circle [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Bloomingdale Avenue [Added
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Blossom Hill Drive [Added
1-10-2005 by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Bonnie Drive [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Buch Avenue [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Butler Avenue Oregon Pike and eastern terminus
of Butler Avenue
Cambridge Road [Added 6-27-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Delp Road, the
entire length, both sides
Candlewyck Road [Added 6-27-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Delp Road, the
entire length, both sides
Candlewyck Road [Added 6-27-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Carlton Place [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Carter Moir Drive [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Cedar Road Crescent Avenue and Elmwood
Terrace
Chelsea Drive [Added 6-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Chowning Place [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
300 Block, both sides
Chowning Place [Added 12-8-2008
by Res. No. 2008-22]
Wetherburn Drive and Fruitville
Pike
Circle Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Cobblestone Lane [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03; amended
10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-19]
Buch Avenue and Waverly Avenue
Concord Place [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Copley Drive [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Coyle Avenue New Holland Avenue and
Grandview Boulevard
§ 480-69 MANHEIM CODE § 480-69
1:474
Street Between
Crescent Avenue Lititz Pike (north intersection) and
Lititz Pike (south intersection)
Derbyshire Road [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Dolly Drive [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Elmwood Terrace Crescent Avenue and Glen Moore
Circle
Esbenshade Drive Pleasure Road and Edge Moor
Court
Fountain Avenue New Holland Avenue and Pleasure
Road
Geraldson Drive [Added 4-13-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Glen Moore Circle Lititz Pike and Keller Avenue
Glenridge Drive [Added 4-13-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Hampton Lane [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Harclay Place [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Haroldson Avenue [Added
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Hartwell Court [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Haskell Drive [Added 10-13-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-17]
Route 272 and Queen Lane
Jackson Street [Added 10-13-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-17]
North Charlotte Street and North
Prince Street
Janet Avenue Marshall Avenue and Fountain
Avenue
Jay Avenue [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Juliette Avenue Marshall Avenue and Pleasure
Road
Kendale Place [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Landis Valley Road [Added
10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
Butter Road and New Holland
Pike, the entire length, both sides
Levingston Circle [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
§ 480-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-69
1:475
Street Between
Ludwell Drive [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Maple Lane Glen Moore Circle and Fruitville
Pike
Martha Avenue Marshall Avenue and Fountain
Avenue
McGrann Boulevard [Added
1-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
Intersection with New Holland
Avenue and Fountain Avenue, the
entire length, both sides
Northview Drive [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Norwick Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Nottingham Avenue [Added
6-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Oak Lane Lititz Pike and Crescent Avenue
Old Delp Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Orchard Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Orchard Street Fruitville Pike and Keller Avenue
Park Plaza [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Parkwynne Road [Added 6-27-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Peach Lane [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Pebblebrook Drive [Added
1-10-2005 by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Philmont Drive [Added 6-27-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Pinetown Road [Added 3-9-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-04]
Creek Road and Bushong Road,
the entire length, both sides
Pleasant Place [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Pleasure Road [Added 3-11-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-05]
Lititz Pike and Juliette Avenue
Pleasure Road New Holland Avenue and Juliette
Avenue
Prentis Place [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
§ 480-69 MANHEIM CODE § 480-69
1:476
Street Between
Pulte Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Rachel Drive [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Rhoda Drive [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Richland Drive [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Robindale Avenue [Added 4-13-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Roosevelt Boulevard Glen Moore Circle and western
terminus of Roosevelt Boulevard
Roseville Road, West Lititz Pike and Fruitville Pike
Ruth Ridge Drive [Added 4-13-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Settler's Bend [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Snyder Road [Added 11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-18]
Quarry Road and Buckwalter Road
Stagecoach Lane [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Sterling Place [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Sunglo Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Sunset Place [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Surrey Drive [Added 6-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-12]
Intersection with Fruitville Pike,
the entire length, both sides
Sutton Place [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Tanglewood Lane [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Teddy Avenue [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Travis Lane [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Trena Avenue [Added 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-06]
Entire length, both sides
Warren Way [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
§ 480-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-69
1:477
Street Between
Waverly Avenue [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Weaver Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Wetherburn Drive [Added 12-8-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-22]
The terminus of Wetherburn Drive
and Fruitville Pike
Wicklyn Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Wilkes Road [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Woodside Road [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Woodwick Drive [Added 1-10-2005
by Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
Wythe Circle [Added 1-10-2005 by
Res. No. 2005-03]
Entire length, both sides
§ 480-70. Schedule I-L: Snow and Ice Emergency Routes.
Snow and ice emergency routes are hereby established on the following
streets and portions of streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 480-71. Schedule I-M: Removal of Certain Types of Obstructions
Required.
The following types of obstructions are to be removed from the following
streets or portions of streets:
Street Portion Types of Obstructions
(Reserved)
§ 480-72. Schedule II-A: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked at any
time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
§ 480-69 MANHEIM CODE § 480-72
1:478
Street Side Between
Airport Road, West
[Added 3-9-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-05]
North and
South
Intersection with Lititz Pike
and a point approximately 350
feet west of intersection with
Lititz Pike
Apple Lane [Added
9-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-21]
All sides From and to Arbor Road
Aster Lane [Added
2-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-02]
West Beginning across from 2963
Aster Lane, continuing south
into and around Aster Lane,
ending at the property line of
2952 Aster Lane
Basset Drive [Added
10-13-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-13; amended
12-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-20; 7-31-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-21]
Both On the east side from the
southern terminus of Basset
Drive to a point approximately
300 feet to the north, and on
the west side from such
southern terminus to a point
approximately 58 feet to the
north
Bible School Drive [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
East Eden Road and Blue Grass
Road
Brentwood Drive [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-05]
West Wallingford Road to a point 20
feet south of the alley at the
property line with 715
Brentwood Drive
Brockton Road [Repealed
11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
Brockton Road [Added
11-26-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-18]
West Chelsea Drive and Belair Drive
Buckwalter Road [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
West Southern edge of
Reidenbaugh School property
and intersection with Snyder
Road
Bushong Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Northeast Oregon Pike and a point 150
feet from Oregon Pike
Bushong Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Southwest Oregon Pike and a point 265
feet from Oregon Pike
§ 480-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-72
1:479
Street Side Between
Butler Avenue [Added
8-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-17]
North A point approximately 430 feet
east of PA Route 272 and
intersection with PA Route
272
Butler Avenue [Added
12-14-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-32]
North A point 15 feet west of Sunset
Avenue and the intersection
with Oregon Pike
Butler Avenue [Added
8-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-17]
South A point approximately 430 feet
east of PA Route 272 and
intersection with PA Route
272
Butter Road [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
East side of
northbound
lane
Landis Valley Road and a point
800 feet north of Landis Valley
Road; and between Landis
Valley Road and Heatherstone
Way; and between
Heatherstone Way and a point
470 feet south of
Heatherstone Way
Candlewyck Road [Added
10-14-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-13]
East The intersection with Surrey
Drive and a point
approximately 100 feet south
of at the property line
between 485 Candlewyck
Road and 490 Surrey Drive
Candlewyck Road South Brockton Road and a point 30
feet west
Christian Street, North West Liberty Street and McGovern
Street
Clayton Road [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Both Hamilton Road and a point 30
feet west
Coyle Avenue [Added
11-9-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-20]
North and
South
New Holland Avenue (PA
Route 23) and a point 70 feet
west
Crest Lane East Skyline Drive and a point 45
feet south
Crooked Oak Drive
[Added 8-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-23]
East Eden Road south to the
terminus of Crooked Oak
Drive
Crooked Oak Drive
[Added 2-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-03]
West The intersection with Eden
Road a point approximately 60
feet to the south
§ 480-72 MANHEIM CODE § 480-72
1:480
Street Side Between
Crooked Oak Drive
[Added 4-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-06]
West Eden Road and the terminus
of Crooked Oak Drive
Delp Road [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Both Valleybrook Drive and a point
200 feet southwest
Delp Road East Manheim Pike and a point 125
feet north
Dillerville Road East A point 322.5 feet north of
Harrisburg Avenue and a point
677.5 feet north of the first
point
Dillerville Road West Harrisburg Pike and a point
1,000 feet north
Duke Street [Added
5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-07]
East Alley at rear of 2653 Lititz
Pike southwardly to dead end
of street
Duke Street [Added
4-13-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-09]
East McGovern Avenue and Liberty
Street as follows: from
McGovern Avenue to a point
152 feet south of McGovern
Avenue and from a point
beginning 163 feet north of
Liberty Street to a point 88
feet north of Liberty Street
Duke Street [Added
5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-07]
West Unnamed alley at 2610 Duke
Street southward to a point
approximately 63 feet north of
dead end of street
Duke Street [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
West McGovern Avenue and a point
97 feet south
Eden Road [Added
5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-07]
North Intersection with New Holland
Pike and west side of
Conestoga River Bridge
Eden Road [Added
5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-07]
South Intersection with New Holland
Pike and west side of
Conestoga River Bridge,
excluding approximately 65
feet across from 1831 to 1835
Eden Road
Eden Road South New Holland Pike and east
end of Eden Fire Company
parking lot
§ 480-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-72
1:481
Street Side Between
Farmingdale Road [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
Northwest and
Southeast
Harrisburgh Pike and
Township line
Farmingdale Road Northwest and
Southeast
Old Harrisburg Pike and East
Hempfield Township line at
the Little Conestoga Creek
Fellowship Drive [Added
8-8-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-13]
West Calvary Drive and the private
drive to Rohrer Apartments
Fountain Avenue [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Both Martha Avenue and a point 50
feet east
Fountain Avenue
[Amended 4-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-04]
Southwest New Holland Avenue and a
point 245 feet northwest
Fountain Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Southwest Between entrances to
Lancaster Catholic High
School parking lot
Frances Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Northeast A point approximately 30 feet
southeast of intersection with
Juliette Avenue and a point
approximately 270 feet to the
southeast
Frances Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Northeast Northwest edge of entrance to
Lancaster Catholic High
School parking lot closest to
Juliette Avenue and northwest
corner of alley to southwest,
as indicated by signs
Frances Avenue [Added
9-7-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-12]
Northeast and
Southeast
Juliette Street and points
approximately 30 feet south
Fruitville Pike [Added
3-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-07]
East From 2179 Fruitville Pike to a
point approximately 650 feet
to the north
Fruitville Pike [Added
10-14-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-16]
East Points 100 feet north and 100
feet south of intersection with
Orchard Street
Glen Moore Circle Both Lititz Pike and a point 243 feet
west
Grofftown Road [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-03]
Northwest East Chestnut Street and
eastern end of property at 325
Grofftown Road
§ 480-72 MANHEIM CODE § 480-72
1:482
Street Side Between
Hampton Lane [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
West Buch Avenue and a point 400
feet north
Harrisburg Avenue South Race Avenue and a point 125
feet west
Harrisburg Pike [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-09]
South The intersection with U.S.
Route 30 and the intersection
with the entrance road of the
U.S. postal facility
Hilltop Approach East A point 25 feet north of
Pleasure Road a point 75 feet
north of Pleasure Road
Hilltop Approach West Pleasure Road and a point 75
feet north
Hunsicker Road [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
East and West Intersection with Oregon Pike
(Route 272) and a point
approximately 300 feet to the
south of such intersection
Jackson Street [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
South Charlotte Street and a point
30 feet east
Juliette Avenue [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
North and
South
Frances Avenue to a
designated point west of the
intersection of Frances
Avenue
Juliette Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Northwest A point approximately 40 feet
southwest of the northeast
edge of the crosswalk at
Frances Avenue and a point
approximately 20 feet
northeast of the northeast
edge of the crosswalk at
Frances Avenue
Juliette Avenue [Added
5-8-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-10; amended
9-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-12]
Northwest Approximately 20 feet south of
Pleasure Road and a point
approximately 110 feet south
on Juliette Avenue
Juliette Avenue Northwest A point 55 feet from Pleasure
Road and a point 85 feet from
Pleasure Road
§ 480-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-72
1:483
Street Side Between
Juliette Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Southeast The northeast corner of the
intersection with Frances
Avenue and a point
approximately 30 feet to the
northeast
Juliette Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Southeast The southwest corner of the
intersection with Frances
Avenue and a point
approximately 85 feet to the
southwest
Juliette Avenue [Added
7-12-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-15]
Southeast A point approximately 15 feet
northeast of the fire hydrant
in front of Lancaster Catholic
High School and a point
approximately 30 feet to the
northeast
Keller Avenue [Added
8-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-14]
North A point 20 feet to the north of
the existing fire hydrant
located at 117 Keller Avenue
to a point 15 feet to the south
of such hydrant
Kent Gardens [Added
11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-21]
North, East
and West
The intersections of Kent
Gardens with Brighton Avenue
Knollwood Drive [Added
11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
East A point 618 feet south of
Sunnybrook Drive and a point
551 feet south of the first
point; and between a point
1,341 feet south of
Sunnybrook Drive continuing
south into and around the culde-
sac located at the southern
end of Knollwood Drive and
ending at a point on the west
side of Knollwood Drive on the
northern edge of the cul-desac
Lititz Avenue East Kreider Avenue and Lititz
Road
Lititz Avenue East A point in front of 1025 Lititz
Avenue and a point 38 feet
distant in front of 1031 Lititz
Avenue
Lititz Avenue West Buch Avenue and Delp Road
§ 480-72 MANHEIM CODE § 480-72
1:484
Street Side Between
Lititz Avenue West Liberty Street and McGovern
Avenue
Lititz Avenue [Added
4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-07]
West Westernmost point of the
bridge structure to the west of
Lititz Avenue to the end of the
bridge structure to the north
Lititz Avenue West Petersburg Road and driveway
of Long Memorial Methodist
Church
Lititz Pike [Added
2-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-03]
Both The intersections of Airport
Road and Millport Road
Lititz Pike [Added
9-14-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-25]
West A point 352 feet south of
Crescent Avenue and a point
12 feet south of the first point
Lititz Pike [Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-23]
West Oak Lane and Crescent
Avenue
Manheim Avenue Northeast Rice Avenue and a point 75
feet northeast
Manheim Avenue Southwest First driveway of bulk oil plant
in 1000 Block and second
driveway 42 feet distant
Manheim Avenue Southwest Price Street and City line
Manheim Pike [Amended
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
Both Plaza Boulevard and Route 30
Maple Lane Both Fruitville Pike and a point 206
feet west
Marshall Avenue North Lititz Pike and a point 418 feet
east
Marshall Avenue [Added
8-23-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-10; amended
5-12-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
North Janet Avenue and a point 20
feet east
Marshall Avenue [Added
4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-07; repealed
5-12-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-08]
Marshall Avenue South Juliette Avenue and a point 60
feet southwest
§ 480-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-72
1:485
Street Side Between
Martha Avenue [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
East A point 110 feet north of
Fountain Avenue and a point
90 feet north/northeast of the
first point
Martha Avenue North A point 25 feet east of the
driveway to 734 Martha
Avenue and a point 25 feet
west of that driveway
Martha Avenue [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-02]
West Fountain Avenue and
Grandview Boulevard
McGovern Avenue North The intersection of the
westernmost private driveway
of the railroad station and
McGovern Avenue and a point
22 feet to the east
McGovern Avenue [Added
3-11-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-02]
South The intersection of the
easternmost private driveway
of the railroad station and
McGovern Avenue and a point
20 feet to the west
McGovern Avenue [Added
7-13-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-15]
South North Duke Street and North
Christian Street
Meadow Lane [Added
5-11-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-14; amended
2-13-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-04]
Both Shaub Road and a point
approximately 162 feet west
Municipal Drive Both East Roseville Road and a
point 150 feet south
Municipal Drive [Added
9-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-20]
East A point 50 feet north of the
driveway from the Township
Police Station and a point 50
feet south of that driveway
Municipal Drive [Added
5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-07]
East Intersection with Roseville
Road and the "T" intersection
north of intersection with
Murry Hill Drive, excluding
handicapped parking zone
extending approximately 124
feet westward from a point
approximately 70 feet west of
the "T" intersection
§ 480-72 MANHEIM CODE § 480-72
1:486
Street Side Between
Municipal Drive [Added
10-10-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-22]
West The intersection with East
Roseville Road and a point
approximately 200 feet to the
south
Municipal Drive [Added
9-8-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-15]
West Southern end of driveway of
Manheim Township Police
Ambulance Association
building and intersection with
Murry Hill Drive
Municipal Drive [Added
8-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-09]
West Roseville Road and Murry Hill
Drive
Murry Hill Lititz Pike and a point 70 feet
east
New Holland Avenue
[Added 3-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-13]
East From the ramp from U.S.
Route 30 to a point 900 feet to
the north
New Holland Avenue North Fountain Avenue and a point
143 feet west
New Holland Avenue North 1119 New Holland Avenue and
1121 New Holland Avenue
New Holland Avenue South Coyle Avenue and a point 70
feet north
New Holland Avenue South Fountain Avenue and
Lancaster City line
New Holland Pike [Added
9-11-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-10]
East The private driveway at 1690
New Holland Pike and a point
50 feet west
Nicholson Square Drive
[Added 1-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-01;
repealed 10-13-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-19]
Old Delp Road [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-15]
South The intersection with Blossom
Hill Drive and a point
approximately 230 feet to the
west at a dead end of Old Delp
Road
Old Manheim Avenue
[Added 4-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-07]
South A point 30 feet west of
Manheim Pike and Manheim
Pike
§ 480-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-72
1:487
Street Side Between
Orchard Street [Added
8-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16]
South The intersection of Orchard
Street with the alley adjacent
to the Southern Manheim
Township Fire Company, east
to the eastern boundary of
1394 Orchard Street
Oregon Pike Both Murry Hill Drive and South
Roseville Road
Oregon Pike East Butler Avenue and a point 490
feet north to the ramp to
Route 30 east
Oregon Pike [Added
5-23-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-07]
East Princess Avenue and the north
property line of 1543 Oregon
Pike
Oregon Pike [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-14]
North and
South
Intersection with Hunsicker
Road and those points
approximately 300 feet to the
east and to the west of such
intersection
Oregon Road, East
[Added 7-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-11]
North A distance of 235 feet to the
east and to the west of the
intersection of East Oregon
Road and Pointe Boulevard
Overlook Pool Driveway
[Added 9-8-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-11]
Both Overlook Drive and Overlook
Drive
Petersburg Road South Lititz Pike and point 114 feet
west
Petersburg Road [Added
10-14-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-16]
South A point 20 feet west of
property line between 144 and
148 Petersburg Road and a
point 10 feet east of property
line between 152 and 156
Petersburg Road
Petersburg Road [Added
3-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-05]
Southwest A point approximately 150 feet
northwest of intersection with
Warren Way and end of berm
southwest of intersection with
Warren Way
Pleasure Road [Added
10-12-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-16]
North The intersection with
Cameron Avenue and the
intersection with McGrann
Boulevard
§ 480-72 MANHEIM CODE § 480-72
1:488
Street Side Between
Pleasure Road [Added
11-9-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-20]
North New Holland Road and
Sunnybrook Drive
Pleasure Road [Added
1-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03]
North Points 40 feet to the east and
west of the intersection of
Pleasure Road and Hilltop
Approach
Pleasure Road North Tusitalia Drive and Juliette
Avenue
Pleasure Road [Added
7-8-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-11]
Northeast and
Southwest
A point 50 feet northwest of
New Holland Pike and New
Holland Pike
Pleasure Road South Oregon Pike and Rose Avenue
Pleasure Road [Added
1-14-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-01]
South Access road for St. Matthew
Evangelical Lutheran Church,
700 Pleasure Road, and a
point 40 feet east
President Avenue, North East Harrisburg Avenue and a point
225 feet south
Prince Street, North
[Added 7-8-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996-13]
West The intersection with Liberty
Street and a point
approximately 155 feet to the
north
Queen Street, North
[Added 6-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-09]
East The northern terminus of the
entrance drive to Station
Square and the intersection
with McGovern Avenue
Queen Street, North
[Added 5-23-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-07]
West Driveways to Aument Brake
and E-Z Training Center at
930 North Queen Street
Race Avenue [Added
8-14-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-09]
East Harrisburg Pike and a point
252 feet south
Roseville Road East Eden Road and a point 60 feet
north
Roseville Road North Lititz Pike and a point 196 feet
east
Roseville Road North Oregon Pike and a point 235
feet west
Roseville Road South Lititz Pike and Santa Barbara
Drive
§ 480-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-72
1:489
Street Side Between
Roseville Road South Oregon Pike and a point 235
feet west
Roseville Road West Eden Road and a point 150
feet north
Roseville Road, West North Lititz Pike and Melody Lane
Roseville Road, West
[Added 9-25-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-11]
North The property line between 505
West Roseville Road and 1400
Manheim Pike and a point
approximately 90 feet west at
the beginning of the driveway
for 505 West Roseville Road
Rutledge Avenue [Added
12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-18]
North, West
and South
Rutledge Avenue (entire culde-
sac at the western
terminus of Rutledge Avenue)
Santa Barbara Drive
[Added 5-23-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-07]
East East Roseville Road and a
point 600 feet south
Snyder Road [Added
9-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-18]
South Western edge of Reidenbach
School property and
intersection with Buckwalter
road
Stevens Street West Old Manheim Avenue and a
point 60 feet south
Sunnybrook Drive [Added
6-12-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-08]
North The intersection with
Knollwood Drive and a point
to the east at the location of
the cul-de-sac at Deer Ford
Drive
Tollgate Lane [Added
10-9-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-12]
West Route 501 and Rosemont
Avenue
Valley Road [Added
3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-04]
Both Landis Valley Museum and
Route 272
West Roseville Road
[Added 4-27-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-07]
North and
South
Manheim Pike and Arcadia
Road
§ 480-73. Schedule II-B: Parking Prohibited Certain Days and
Hours.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times on the days, between the hours and
at the locations set forth below:
§ 480-72 MANHEIM CODE § 480-73
1:490
Street Side Between Days Hours
Clayton Road
[Added
3-13-1989 by
Ord. No.
1989-04]
North A point 30 feet west
of Hamilton Road
and a point 170 feet
west of the first
point
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Frances Avenue
[Added
10-13-1997 by
Ord. No.
1997-17]
North A beginning point
40 feet south of the
intersection of
Frances Avenue and
Juliette Avenue, and
the first entrance to
the parking lot of
the Lancaster
Catholic High
School, a distance
of approximately
270 feet
Monday
through
Friday
7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Hamilton Road
[Added
6-13-1988 by
Res. No. 1988-33;
amended
1-12-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-02]
East Newton Road and
Clayton Road
School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Hamilton Road
[Added
2-27-1978 by
Res. No. 1978-16;
amended
5-23-1983 by
Ord. No.
1983-07;
1-12-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-02]
West Newton Road and
Clayton Road
School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Marshall Avenue North Lititz Avenue and
Lancaster City line
Monday 6:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
§ 480-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-73
1:491
Street Side Between Days Hours
Pleasure Road
[Added
1-11-1993 by
Ord. No.
1993-02]
North A point 20 feet west
of existing
crosswalk at
McGrann Boulevard
and a point 460 feet
west to western
edge of Schaeffer
School property
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Pleasure Road North Entrance driveway
of Nathan Schaeffer
School
School days 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
§ 480-74. Schedule II-C: Time Limit Parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked in the
locations, on the days and between the hours set forth below for a period of
time longer than the period of time set forth below:
Street Side Portion Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Cameron
Avenue
[Amended
5-23-1983 by
Ord. No.
1983-07;
repealed
4-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-04]
Coyle Avenue
[Repealed
4-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-04]
Haverhill Road
[Added
5-8-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-10]
East and
West
Between
Ashford Drive
and Southwick
Drive
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m.
3 hours
Jackson Street Both Between Prince
Street and
Water Street
Everyday,
except
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
§ 480-73 MANHEIM CODE § 480-74
1:492
Street Side Portion Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Lincoln Street North Between Prince
Street and
Water Street
Everyday,
except
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Lincoln Street South Between Prince
Street and
Charlotte
Street
Everyday,
except
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Louise Avenue
[Repealed
4-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-04
Martha
Avenue
[Repealed
4-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-04]
Martha
Avenue
[Added
5-23-1983 by
Ord. No.
1983-07;
repealed
4-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-04]
McGovern
Avenue
[Added
5-23-1983 by
Ord. No.
1983-07]
South Between North
Duke Street
and a point 92
feet east of
North Queen
Street
Everyday At all
times
2 hours
McGrann
Boulevard
[Repealed
4-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-04
§ 480-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-74
1:493
Street Side Portion Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
New Holland
Avenue
[Repealed
4-12-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-04]
North
Charlotte
East 100 Block Everyday,
except
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
North
Christian
Street [Added
5-6-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-07]
East Southern
boundary of
1039 North
Christian
Street and a
point 120 feet
south
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
30
minutes
North Duke
Street [Added
8-12-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-14;
amended
1-14-2013 by
Ord. No.
2013-01]
West A point 50 feet
north of East
Liberty Street
to a point 200
feet to the
north
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
4 hours
North Prince
Street [Added
5-8-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-10]
East The southern
boundary of
909 North
Prince Street
and extending
68 feet to the
north
Everyday 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
2 hours
Old Manheim
Avenue
South 1st and 2nd
Blocks
Everyday,
except
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
§ 480-74 MANHEIM CODE § 480-74
1:494
Street Side Portion Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Queen Street,
North [Added
5-23-1983 by
Ord. No.
1983-07;
amended
6-22-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-09]
East 929 North
Queen Street
to a point 20
feet south of
the entrance to
Station Square
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
4 hours
Queen Street,
North [Added
12-13-2004
by Ord. No.
2004-21;
repealed
6-22-2015 by
Ord. No.
2015-09]
Stevens Street Both 200 Block Everyday,
except
Sunday
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
§ 480-75. Schedule II-D: Special Purpose Parking Zones.
Special purpose parking zones are hereby established in the following
locations, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to
allow a vehicle to remain parked in any such zone, except as specifically
provided for that zone:
§ 480-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-75
1:495
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Belmont Avenue
[Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No.
1995-08]
South 20-foot space on
Belmont Avenue, located
to the west of the
intersection with Lititz
Pike, and centered on
the location of an
existing mailbox on
Belmont Avenue and
extending 11 feet to the
east and west of that
center point
Handicapped
parking
Brentwood Drive
[Added 3-24-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-03]
709 Brentwood Drive Handicapped
parking
Cameron Avenue North From New Holland
Avenue northwest 50
feet
Bus stop
Charlotte Street,
North [Added
8-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-14]
North 1023 North Charlotte
Street
Handicapped
parking
Edgemoor Court
[Repealed 5-6-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-07]
Edgemoore Court
[Added 1-25-2016
by Ord. No.
2016-03]
1013 Edgemoore Court Handicapped
parking
Fountain Avenue
[Added 10-9-2017
by Ord. No.
2017-12]
South In front of 861 Fountain
Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Fountain Avenue
[Added 5-11-2020
by Ord. No.
2020-07]
Driveway between 835
and 837 Fountain
Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Fountain Avenue
[Added 1-28-2008
by Ord. No.
2008-04]
1017 Fountain Avenue Handicapped
parking
§ 480-75 MANHEIM CODE § 480-75
1:496
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Frances Avenue
[Added 2-8-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993-03;
repealed 7-13-2020
by Ord. No.
2020-14]
Glen Moore Circle
[Added 5-23-1983
by Ord. No.
1983-07]
North In front of 1347 Glen
Moore Circle
Handicapped
parking
Green Terrace
[Added 11-14-1994
by Ord. No.
1994-23]
North 20-foot space in front of
961 Green Terrace, the
zone to begin at the
property line of 959
Green Terrace and to
extend 20 feet to the
east
Handicapped
parking
Helen Avenue [Added
11-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-09]
South In front of 822 Helen
Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Jackson Street
[Repealed 2-9-2004
by Ord. No.
2004-02]
Jackson Street
[Added 1-14-2008
by Ord. No.
2008-02; repealed
6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-09]
Jackson Street
[Added 2-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-02;
repealed 2-27-2006
by Ord. No.
2006-02]
Jackson Street
[Added 4-10-2006
by Ord. No.
2006-14; repealed
11-24-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-25]
§ 480-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-75
1:497
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Jackson Street
[Added 11-12-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-09]
North In front of 205 Jackson
Street
Handicapped
parking
Jackson Street
[Added 11-28-2016
by Ord. No.
2016-20]
218 Jackson Street Handicapped
parking
Jackson Street
[Added 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 480]
227 Jackson Street Handicapped
parking
Jackson Street
[Added 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-04]
235 Jackson Street Handicapped
parking
Janet Avenue
[Repealed
8-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-14]
Janet Avenue [Added
4-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-05;
amended 6-13-2011
by Ord. No.
2011-09]
605 Janet Avenue Handicapped
parking
Janet Avenue [Added
9-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-12;
repealed 4-14-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-04]
Janet Avenue [Added
6-9-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-09]
627 Janet Avenue Handicapped
parking
Janet Avenue [Added
9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-13]
630 Janet Avenue Handicapped
parking
Juliette Avenue
[Repealed
8-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-14]
§ 480-75 MANHEIM CODE § 480-75
1:498
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Knollwood Drive
[Added 2-27-2012
by Ord. No.
2012-06]
8 Knollwood Drive Handicapped
parking
Knollwood Drive
[Added 11-28-2011
by Ord. No.
2011-20]
51 Knollwood Drive Handicapped
parking
Knollwood Drive
[Added 8-12-2013
by Ord. No.
2013-13; repealed
1-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-02]
Lincoln Street
[Added 4-11-2016
by Ord. No.
2016-07; repealed
11-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-09]
Lincoln Street
[Added 9-23-2019
by Ord. No.
2019-12]
North In front of 125 Lincoln
Street
Handicapped
parking
Lincoln Street
[Added 1-13-2020
by Ord. No.
2020-02]
South In front of 208 Lincoln
Street
Handicapped
parking
Lititz Avenue [Added
5-29-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-09]
1045 Lititz Avenue Handicapped
parking
Louise Avenue
[Added 8-27-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-09]
949 Louise Avenue Handicapped
parking
Louise Avenue
[Added 1-9-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-01]
North 20-foot space in front of
1017 Louise Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Manheim Avenue
[Added 8-27-2007
by Ord. No.
2007-16]
112 Manheim Avenue Handicapped
parking
§ 480-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-75
1:499
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Manheim Avenue
[Added 1-23-2017
by Ord. No.
2017-01]
Across from 136
Manheim Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Manheim Avenue
[Added 2-27-2017
by Ord. No.
2017-02; repealed
1-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-03]
Marshall Avenue
[Repealed
8-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-14]
Marshall Avenue
[Added 7-14-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-16; repealed
1-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-03]
Marshall Avenue
[Added 10-9-1995
by Ord. No.
1995-12]
South 14-foot space in front of
1006 Marshall Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Marshall Avenue
[Added 8-14-2000
by Ord. No.
2000-11]
South 20-foot space in front of
1025 Marshall Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Marshall Avenue
[Added 6-12-1995
by Ord. No.
1995-08]
South 22-foot space in front of
1128 Marshall Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Martha Avenue
[Added 10-10-2011
by Ord. No.
2011-16]
640 Martha Avenue Loading zone
McGovern Avenue
[Repealed
3-11-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996-02]
§ 480-75 MANHEIM CODE § 480-75
1:500
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
McGrann Boulevard West 30-foot space in 1100
Block of McGrann
Boulevard
Handicapped
parking
Municipal Drive
[Added 2-11-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-03]
1825 Municipal Drive Handicapped
parking
New Holland Avenue North From McGrann
Boulevard west 65 feet
to western edge of a
private driveway
Bus stop
New Holland Avenue North At Widder Bros. Silk Mill Bus stop
North Duke Street
[Added 12-15-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-27]
1014 North Duke Street Handicapped
parking
North Lime Street
[Added 1-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-03;
repealed 4-10-2006
by Ord. No.
2006-14]
North Lime Street
[Added 1-13-2020
by Ord. No.
2020-02]
West In front of 1016 North
Lime Street
Handicapped
parking
North President
Avenue [Repealed
5-29-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-09]
North Water Street
[Added 11-12-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-09]
East 50 feet south of Lincoln
Street
Handicapped
parking
Orchard Street
[Added 10-14-1991
by Ord. No.
1991-16]
North A point approximately
106 feet east of
intersection with
Fruitville Pike and
Fruitville Pike
Fire emergency
parking
Paxton Place [Added
10-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-16]
620 Paxton Place Handicapped
parking
§ 480-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-75
1:501
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Petersburg Road
[Added 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-09]
156 Petersburg Road Handicapped
parking
Pleasure Road
[Added 4-14-1986
by Ord. No.
1986-06]
North In front of 888 Pleasure
Road
Handicapped
parking
Princess Avenue
[Added 9-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-11]
North In front of 107 Princess
Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Princess Avenue
[Added 9-13-2004
by Ord. No.
2004-12]
North 217 Princess Avenue Handicapped
parking
Prince Street, North
[Added 7-8-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-13]
East A point approximately
28 feet north of the
intersection with Liberty
Street and a point
approximately 68 feet to
the north
Loading zone
Queen Street, North
[Added 1-11-1988
by Res. No.
1988-19; amended
2-8-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-04]
East The northeast corner of
the intersection of North
Queen Street and
Liberty Street
Bus stop
Rose Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-02]
West 20-foot space in front of
1314 Rose Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Ross Street [Added
9-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-12;
repealed 2-12-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-01]
Ross Street, West
[Added 12-10-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-18]
West 1023 West Ross Street Handicapped
parking
§ 480-75 MANHEIM CODE § 480-75
1:502
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Skyline Drive
[Repealed
2-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-03]
Skyline Drive [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-08]
In front of 730 Skyline
Drive
Handicapped
parking
Skyline Drive [Added
10-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-24]
731 Skyline Drive Handicapped
parking
Skyline Drive [Added
1-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-04;
repealed 1-25-2010
by Ord. No.
2010-01]
State Street [Added
5-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-12]
816 State Street Handicapped
parking
State Street [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-03]
822 State Street Handicapped
parking
State Street [Added
10-28-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-17;
repealed
11-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-19]
State Street [Added
8-27-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-16;
repealed
10-14-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-15]
Stevens Street
[Added 5-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-17]
Approximately 30 feet
southwest of Manheim
Avenue
Handicapped
parking
§ 480-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-75
1:503
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Wallingford Road
[Added 12-14-2015
by Ord. No.
2015-20; repealed
8-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-10]
West Ross Street
[Added 7-10-2006
by Ord. No.
2006-20]
To the south of 904
North President Avenue
Handicapped
parking
Windsor Avenue
[Added 5-11-2020
by Ord. No.
2020-07]
Starting at property line
between 1729 and 1733
Windsor Avenue and
extending 20 feet north
Handicapped
parking
§ 480-76. Schedule II-E: No-Stopping Zones.
The following locations are hereby established as no-stopping zones, and it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop a vehicle in any
such no-stopping zone, except in an emergency or in compliance with the
directions of any police officer:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Commerce
Drive [Added
1-9-1995 by
Ord. No.
1995-01]
North Flory Mill Road and
Manheim Pike
Commerce
Drive [Added
1-9-1995 by
Ord. No.
1995-01]
South Flory Mill Road and a
point approximately
400 feet south/
southeast
Commerce
Drive [Added
1-9-1995 by
Ord. No.
1995-01]
South Manheim Pike and a
point, approximately
500 feet west/
northwest, located
approximately 70 feet
northwest of the
entrance/exit drive of
1520 Commerce Drive
§ 480-75 MANHEIM CODE § 480-76
1:504
Street Side Between Days Hours
Flory Mill
Road [Added
1-9-1995 by
Ord. No.
1995-01]
North
and
South
Manheim Pike and the
boundary line of East
Hempfield Township
McGovern
Avenue
North Lititz Pike and a point
505 feet west at the
east drive leading to
the Penn Central
Station
McGovern
Avenue
South Lititz Pike and North
Duke Street
New Holland
Pike
North Coyle Avenue and a
point 70 feet east
Nitrauer
Elementary
School
driveway
[Added
11-12-2007
by Ord. No.
2007-21]
North The intersection with
Ashbourne Avenue
and the entrance to
Nitrauer Elementary
School, a distance of
approximately 300
feet
Oregon Pike
[Added
2-13-1989
by Ord. No.
1989-02]
Both Bushong Road cutoff
and a point 700 feet
south
Pleasure
Road, North
[Added
1-11-1993
by Ord. No.
1993-02]
North A point 60 feet east of
the existing crosswalk
at McGrann
Boulevard and a point
20 feet west of that
crosswalk
Pleasure
Road [Added
10-13-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-19]
North A point 20 feet west of
existing crosswalk at
McGrann Boulevard
and a point 460 feet
west to western edge
of Schaeffer School
property
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Pleasure
Road [Added
10-13-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-19]
North Entrance driveway of
Nathan Schaeffer
School
School days 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
§ 480-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-76
1:505
Street Side Between Days Hours
Queen Street,
North
[Added
11-9-1987
by Ord. No.
1987-29]
West A point south of
McGovern Avenue and
McGovern Avenue
§ 480-77. Schedule II-F: Parking of Certain Large Vehicles Limited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
any semitrailer, any truck with a gross chassis weight in excess of 15,000
pounds, any truck tractor, any construction truck, or any motor-carrier
vehicle for longer than the time indicated in any of the following locations:
Street Side Between
Parking Time
Limit
Anne Avenue Both East Roseville Road and
Murry Hill Drive
2 hours
Belair Drive Both Fruitville Pike and Sherwal
Avenue
2 hours
Carlton Place Both Glen Ridge Drive and Rhoda
Drive
2 hours
East Roseville
Road
Both Oregon Pike and Eden Road 2 hours
Primrose Avenue Both Carlton Place and Harclay
Place
2 hours
§ 480-78. Schedule II-G: Fire Lanes.
The following locations are hereby established as fire lanes:
Location Fire Lane
Lancaster Shopping
Center, Lititz Pike,
Lancaster
Traffic lane immediately adjacent to the curb
of the sidewalk of the storefronts, beginning
at the southeast corner of the curb at the Rea
& Derick Store, and continuing westward to
the southwest corner of the curb at the Pantry
Pride Store, 1601 Lititz Pike
§ 480-78.1. Schedule II-H: Angle Parking. [Added 5-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-70]
The following locations are hereby restricted to angle parking:
Name of Street Side Location
North Lime Street West Portion as set forth in
traffic study
§ 480-76 MANHEIM CODE § 480-79
1:506
§ 480-79. Schedule III-A: Metered On-Street Parking Zones.
The following locations are hereby established as metered on-street parking
zones:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 480-80. Schedule III-B: Metered Off-Street Parking Zones.
The following locations are hereby established as metered off-street parking
zones:
Name of Lot Location
(Reserved)
§ 480-81. Schedule III-C: Unmetered Off-Street Parking Zones.
The following locations are hereby established as unmetered off-street
parking zones:
Name of Lot Location
Neffsville Park parking lot East Petersburg lot
Stauffer Park parking lot 1241 Lititz Pike
§ 480-82. Schedule IV-A: Riding and Parking of Pedalcycles
Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following streets or portions of streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 480-83. Schedule IV-B: Pedestrian Control Signal Locations.
Pedestrian control signals shall be erected (or are ratified if previously
erected) at the following locations:
(Reserved)
§ 480-84. Schedule IV-C: Pedestrian Crossing Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian, except where authorized by a police
officer or other person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, to
cross the roadway at any of the following locations:
§ 480-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-84
1:507
Street Location
Type of
Restriction
Ashbourne Avenue [Added
7-13-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-06]
Nitrauer Elementary
School
Pedestrian
crosswalk
Duke Street [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-03]
North and south of
Valley Road
Pedestrian
crosswalk
Valley Road [Added
2-8-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-03]
East of Duke Street Pedestrian
crosswalk
§ 480-84 MANHEIM CODE § 480-84
1:508
Chapter 493
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 399.
§ 480-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 480-84
1:509

ARTICLE I
Connection to Water System
[Adopted 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-20 (Part 11, Ch. 3, Art. A, of
the 1976 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 493-1. Findings; statutory authority.
The Manheim Township Board of Commissioners has adopted a three-phase
plan for the extension of waterlines in certain areas of the Township not
presently served with a public water supply system over periods of five, 10
and 15 years. In furtherance of the first phase of that plan, the General
Municipal Authority of Manheim Township, as assignee of the Township, has
undertaken the construction of a water main on Fruitville Pike and Koser
Road to Airport Road which, upon completion and pursuant to the terms
of a municipal connector's agreement made between the City of Lancaster
and the Authority, as assignee of the Township, dated December 18, 1984,
shall be connected to the water system of the city, shall be leased to the
city for a stated period and shall be operated and maintained by the city,
as lessee, during the term of the lease. To complete the first phase of the
plan and to provide public water to those remaining areas included in that
phase, the Authority has entered into an additional municipal connector's
agreement with the city, dated September 30, 1985, upon similar terms
and shall construct or acquire additional waterlines in those areas. It is
expected that the Authority shall, in the future, proceed with the second and
third phases of the plan. This article is enacted pursuant to Section 2708 of
the First Class Township Code, Act of June 24, 1931 (P.L. 1955, No. 569),
as amended,175 to compel connection with the water supply system being
constructed or to be constructed by the Authority under all phases of the
plan.
§ 493-2. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
terms, words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AUTHORITY — The General Municipal Authority of the Township of
Manheim, organized and existing under the Municipality Authorities Act,
Act of June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., as amended and
supplemented.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of Manheim Township.
CITY — The City of Lancaster, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or any portion thereof
intended to be used wholly or in part for the purpose of carrying on a trade,
business or profession or for social, amusement, charitable or public uses.
175. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 57708.
§ 493-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-2
1:511
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning,
laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or article.
OWNER — With respect to any property located in the Township and
connected or to be connected to the water system, any person vested
with an ownership interest, legal or equitable, sole or partial, in any such
property; or in open, peaceable and notorious possession of any such
property, as apparent owner thereof; or the reputed owner thereof in the
neighborhood of such property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or other group or entity.
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING GROUP — Any structure or dwelling or
part thereof intended to be occupied as a whole by one family, an apartment
intended to be occupied as a whole by one family, or any other one-family
living unit, provided that hospitals, hotels, boardinghouses, rooming and
lodging houses, motels, recreational campgrounds (excluding mobile home
parks) and the like, offering overnight or transient accommodations for
patients or guests, shall not be considered to be private dwelling or living
units but shall be considered to be commercial establishments within the
meaning of this article.
PROPERTY — The tract or tracts of ground owned by an owner and upon
which is located a private dwelling or living unit or units and/or a
commercial establishment or establishments and/or an industrial
establishment or establishments.
TOWNSHIP — Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
WATER SYSTEM — All water mains, extensions, and distribution pipelines,
from the main to the point of service connections, and all appurtenances
thereto which are constructed or acquired and owned by the Authority.
§ 493-3. Connection requirements.
A. Whenever the water system or any usable portion thereof is completed
and ready for public use, the Township shall cause written notice to be
served, either by personal service or registered mail, upon all owners of
property abutting such completed water system or portion thereof,
which notice shall state that the water system or portion thereof is
complete and ready for public use and that all owners shall make
connection with the water system, at their own expense, within 90 days
of the date of service of the notice.
B. All owners of tracts of ground abutting the water system upon which no
private dwelling or living unit and/or commercial establishment and/or
an industrial establishment is erected shall, upon erection of any such
unit or establishment, make connection with the water system at their
own expense.
§ 493-2 MANHEIM CODE § 493-3
1:512
§ 493-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-28176]
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, for every such
violation, be subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor more than
$1,000, and costs, provided that each day on which a violation takes place
shall constitute a separate violation.
C. All connections to the water system shall be made in compliance with
the applicable ordinances, resolutions and regulations as may from
time to time be enacted, adopted or promulgated by the city and/or the
Authority.
D. In case any owner of property so required to make connection to the
water system, other than those owners excepted in Subsections E and F
of this section, shall neglect or refuse to make connection within 90
days of the date of service of notice to do so:
(1) The Township or its agents may enter upon such property and
construct such connections; and
(2) The Township shall, upon completion of the work, send an itemized
bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to the owner
of the property to which connection has been made, which bill shall
be due and payable in full within 30 days; and
(3) Upon failure of the owner of such property to pay the itemized bill,
the Township shall cause a municipal lien and/or claim to be filed in
the full amount of the bill within six months of the date of
completion of construction of such connection, which lien and/or
claim shall be filed and collected, together with the maximum
lawful rate of interest, as is then provided by law.
E. Owners of properties abutting the water system used solely for
industrial or farm purposes and which have their own supply of water
for uses other than human consumption shall not be required to
connect such properties to the water system.
F. Owners of properties abutting the water system shall not be required to
connect any structure or building located on any such property and
used for private dwelling or living unit and/or commercial
establishment and/or industrial establishment purposes, if such
structure or building is more than 150 feet from the service connection
with the water system, as measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest point of such building or
structure to the closest point of such service connection.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 493-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-4
1:513
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1976 Code of Ordinances to 2012 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 1, Introduction
Ch. 1, Use and Construction of the Code
Sections 1-1001, 1-1003 through 1-1007,
1-1009
NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
Sections 1-1002 and 1-1008 Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 2, Special Definitions NCM
Part 2, Administration and Government
Ch. 1, Elected Officials
Article A, Board of Commissioners
Sections 2-1001 and 2-1002, Meetings Ch. 30, Art. II
Section 2-1003, Compensation of
Commissioners
REP
Section 2-1004, Future automatic
increases of compensation of
Commissioners
Ch. 30, Art. I
Section 2-1005, Insurance Programs Ch. 30, Art. IV
Article B, Treasurer Ch. 99, Art. III
Ch. 2, Appointed Officials and Employees
Article A, Independent Auditor Ch. 99, Art. II
Article B, Manager Ch. 99, Art. I
Ch. 3, Departments, Offices and Agencies Repealed by Ord. No.
2010-02
Ch. 4, Boards, Commissions and Authorities
Article A, Parks and Recreation Board Ch. 105
Article B, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 30, Art. III
Article C, Planning Commission Ch. 120
§ 493-4 MANHEIM CODE § DT-1
1:514
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
Article D, Provisions Applicable to Various
Boards and Commissions
NCM
Article E, Municipal Authorities
1) Manheim Township Municipal
Authority
Ch. 11, Art. I
2) General Municipal Authority Ch. 11, Art. II
Ch. 5, Pensions, Retirement and Social
Security
Article A, Police Pension Fund Ch. 109, Art. I
Article B, Non-Police Employees Pensions Ch. 109, Art. II
Article C, Disability Compensation Plan REP
Article D, Firemen's Relief Ch. 61
Article E, Social Security for Officers and
Employees
REP
Article F, Department Head Pension Plan Ch. 109, Art. III
Article G, Deferred Compensation
Program
NCM
Ch. 6, Special Administrative Provisions
Article A, Bids and Contracts
§ 2-6001, Escalator Clause Authorized on
Certain Bids
NCM
§ 2-6002, Participation in County
Purchase Contracts Authorized
Ch. 17, Art. I
Article B, Equipment and Property
1. Portable Electronic Stake-Out
Equipment
NCM
2. Disposal of Unclaimed Property Ch. 133, Art. I
Article C, Energy Conservation NCM
Article D, Flood Insurance REP
Article E, Personnel
§ 2-6071, Organization Chart NCM
§ 2-6072, Adoption of Equal Opportunity
Police
Ch. 114, Art. I
§ 2-6073, Unemployment Compensation
Benefits
NCM
§ 2-6074, Implementation of Ethics Act Ch. 114, Art. II
§ 2-6075, Adoption of Personnel Policy
Manual
REP
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:515
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
§ 2-6076, Purpose of Personnel Policy
Manual
REP
§ 2-6077, Family Medical Leave of
Absence Policy
REP
Article F, Grievance Procedures Ch. 75, Art. I
Article G, Specifications NCM
Article H, Indemnity Obligation Policy Ch. 82
Article I, Records and Documents Ch. 66, Art. I
Article J, Worker's Compensation
Administration
Ch. 87, Art. I
Article K, Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy REP
Ch. 7, Intermunicipal Organizations
Article A, Lancaster Inter-Municipal
Committee
Ch. 87, Art. II
Article B, Other Inter-Municipal
Organizations (Reserved)
Omitted
Part 3, Financial Administration
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Article A, Depositories for Township Funds NCM
Article B, Cooperative Procurement
Program
Ch. 17, Art. II
Ch. 2, Taxation
Article A, Real Estate Tax; Tax Discounts
and Penalties
Ch. 455, Art. II
Article B, Real Estate Transfer Tax Ch. 455, Art. I
Article C, Resident Earned Income and
Net Profits Tax
Ch. 455, Art. III
Article D, Local Services Tax Ch. 455, Art. IV
Ch. 3, Other Revenues, Fees and Charges NCM
A. Fees Pertaining to Specific
Administrative and Enforcement
Procedures
NCM
B. Security for Certain Costs Pertaining to
Fire-Damaged Structures
Ch. 253
Ch. 4, Special Funds Ch. 23
Part 4, Franchises
Ch. 1, Sewers Repealed by Ord. No.
1986-19
Ch. 2, Television
§ DT-1 MANHEIM CODE § DT-1
1:516
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
A. Television Community Services, Inc. REP
B. Peoples Broadcasting Company REP
C. Cable Associates, Inc. REP
D. Cable System Ch. 190
Part 5, Health and Safety
Ch. 1, Solid Waste
Article A, Solid Waste and Recyclables
Management
Ch. 421, Art. II
Article B, Recycling Plan REP
Article C, Municipal Solid Waste Disposal
and Joint Cooperation
Ch. 421, Art. I
Ch. 2, Grass and Weeds Ch. 277
Ch. 3, Swimming Pools REP
Ch. 4, Animals Ch. 167
Ch. 5, Individual and Community Sewage
Disposal Systems
Article A, Sewage Enforcement Officer Ch. 399, Art. II
Article B, Holding Tanks Ch. 399, Art. III
Part 6, Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations
Ch. 1, Code Enforcement and Building
Regulations
Article A, Floodplain Management NI
Article B, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home
Parks
Ch. 329
Article C, Building Codes
1. Uniform Construction Code Ch. 202, Art. I
2. International Codes Ch. 202, Art. II
3. International Property Maintenance
Code
Ch. 367
Ch. 2, Business Licensing and Regulations
Article A, Lessors of Rental Housing Ch. 382, Art. I
Article B, Solicitors and Peddlers Ch. 352
Article C, Automatic Protections Devices
1. Ordinance Provisions on Automatic
Protection Devices
Ch. 160, Art. I
2. Administrative and Enforcement
Regulations
Ch. 160, Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:517
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
Article D, Dealers in Second-Hand or Used
Goods and Materials
Ch. 390
Article E, Massage Establishments REP
Article F, Vehicle Towing Services Ch. 462
Article G, Refuse Haulers
1. Refuse Hauler's License NCM
2. Refuse Hauling Regulations REP
Part 7, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 480
Part 8, Offenses and Nuisances
Ch. 1, Offenses
Article A, Disorderly Practices Ch. 216
Article B, Tampering with Property REP
Article C, Curfew for Minors
1. Curfew Ordinance Ch. 208, Art. III
2. Curfew Enforcement Regulations Ch. 208, Art. I
Article D, Trick or Treat Night Ch. 208, Art. II
Ch. 2, Nuisances Ch. 474
Part 9, Parks, Recreations and Shade Trees
Ch. 1, Parks and Other Recreation Facilities
§ 9-1001, Rules and Regulations
Authorized
Ch. 346, Art. I
§ 9-1002, Penalty for Violation of Rules
and Regulations
Ch. 346, Art. I
§ 9-1003, Motor Vehicles Banned from
Community Park From November to
March
Ch. 346, Art. II
§ 9-1004, Penalty for Driving or Parking
Motor Vehicles in Community Park When
Banned
Ch. 346, Art. II
§ 9-1005, Boettcher House Museum NCM
Ch. 2, Shade Trees Ch. 469, Art. I
Part 10, Public Safety
Ch. 1, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Article A, Fire Prevention REP
Article B, Fire Protection Ch. 259, Art. I
Article C, Control and Protective Measures Ch. 259, Art. II
Article D, Fire Alarm Ch. 160, Art. III
§ DT-1 MANHEIM CODE § DT-1
1:518
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 2, Police Protection
A. Organization of Department
§§ 10-2001 through 10-2006 Ch. 125, Art. I
§§ 10-2007 through 10-2010 (Reserved) Omitted
B. General Regulations
§§ 10-2011 through 10-2015 Ch. 125, Art. I
§ 10-2016, Police-Related Services by
Off-Duty Police
Ch. 125, Art. II
§ 10-2017, Warrantless Arrests Ch. 125, Art. IV
C. Special School Police Unit Ch. 125, Art. III
Ch. 3, Emergency Management Ch. 48
Ch. 4, Ambulance Service Ch. 6
Part 11, Public Services and Improvements
Ch. 1, Sanitary Sewers
A. Sewer Connections Superseded by Ord. No.
1985-5; see Ch. 399, Art.
IV
B. Sewer Rentals, Charges and
Regulations, Sewer Districts No. 1 and No.
2
Superseded by Ord. No.
1985-5; see Ch. 399, Art.
IV
C. Sewer Rentals and Charges: Properties
Served by Lancaster Area Sewer Authority
Ch. 399, Art. I
D. Sewer Systems Regulations Ch. 399, Art. IV
E. Industrial Waste Discharge Program REP
Ch. 2, Stormwater Management NI
Ch. 3, Water Systems
A. Connection to Water System of
Municipal Authority
Ch. 493, Art. I
B. (Reserved) Omitted
Part 12, Streets and Sidewalks
Ch. 1, Streets
Article A, Street Acceptance Ch. 435, Art. I
Article B, Street Excavation or Opening Ch. 435, Art. III
Article C, Obstructions in Streets and
Easements
Ch. 435, Art. IV
Ch. 2, Sidewalks Ch. 435, Art. II
Part 13, Subdivision and Land Development NI
Part 14, Zoning NI
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:519
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
Appendices
I-A, Maximum Speed Limits on Streets Ch. 480
I-B, Traffic Signal Locations Ch. 480
I-C, Intersections Where Turns Prohibited on
Red Signal
Ch. 480
I-D, One-Way Streets Ch. 480
I-E, Intersections Where Turns Prohibited or
Restricted
Ch. 480
I-F, No-Passing Zones Ch. 480
I-G, Through Highways Ch. 480
I-I, Yield-Right-of-Way Intersections Ch. 480
I-J, Streets Where Vehicle Weight limits in
Effect
Ch. 480
I-K, Streets Where Truck Traffic is
Restricted
Ch. 480
I-L, Snow and Ice Emergency Routes Ch. 480
I-M, Streets Where Certain Types of
Obstructions are to be Removed
Ch. 480
II-A, Streets Where Parking is Prohibited at
All Times
Ch. 480
II-B, Streets Where Parking is Prohibited
Certain Days and Hours
Ch. 480
II-C, Streets Where Parking is Time is
Limited Certain Days and Hours
Ch. 480
II-D, Special Purpose Parking Zones Ch. 480
II-E, No-Stopping Zones Ch. 480
II-F, Streets Where Truck Parking Time for
Certain Larger Vehicles is Limited
Ch. 480
II-G, Fire Lanes Ch. 480
III-A, Metered On-Street Parking Zones Ch. 480
III-B, Metered Off-Street Parking Zones Ch. 480
III-C, Unmetered Off-Street Parking Zones Ch. 480
IV-A, Sidewalks Where Riding and Parking of
Pedalcycles Prohibited
Ch. 480
IV-B, Pedestrian Control Signal Locations Ch. 480
IV-C, Pedestrian Crossing Restrictions Ch. 480
V, Agreement and Contracts Omitted
VI, Annexation or Detachment of Territory Omitted
§ DT-1 MANHEIM CODE § DT-1
1:520
Part/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2012 Code
VII, Fiscal Affairs Omitted
VIII, Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affairs
Omitted
IX, Public Property Omitted
X, Sewers and Sewage Disposal Omitted
XI, Streets and Sidewalks Omitted
XII, Water Omitted
XIII, Zoning Map Changes Omitted
XIV to XX (Reserved) Omitted
XXI, Ordinances and Resolutions Specifically
Repealed or Rescinded by Code-Adopting
Ordinance
Omitted
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-11 9-10-2012 Street vacation NCM
2012-12 8-13-2012 Posting of sign on Euclid
Drive
NCM
2012-13 9-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2012-14 9-10-2012 Sewer system regulations
amendment
Ch. 399, Art. IV
2012-15 11-12-2012 Towing amendment Ch. 462
2012-16 Not adopted
2012-17 11-26-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
NCM
2012-18 11-26-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2013-01 1-14-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2013-02 1-28-2013 Street acceptance NCM
2013-03 2-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:521
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-04 2-11-2013 Officers and employees: Tax
Collector
Ch. 99, Art. III
2013-05 2-11-2013 Officers and employees:
Treasurer
Ch. 99, Art. IV
2013-06 2-25-2013 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2013-07 3-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2013-08 4-8-2013 Intergovernmental
agreements: Police Services
Agreement
Ch. 87, Art. III
2013-09 4-22-2013 Zoning amendment NCM
2013-10 5-13-2013 General Municipal Authority
amendment
See Ch. 11, Art.
II
2013-11 7-8-2013 Zoning amendment NCM
2013-12 7-8-2013 Budget amendment: capital
reserve fund
NCM
2013-13 8-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2013-14 10-14-2013 Zoning amendment NCM
2013-15 10-14-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2013-16 10-28-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-17 10-28-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2013-18 11-25-2013 Street acceptance NCM
2013-19 11-25-2013 Official Map Ch. 325
2013-20 11-25-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-01 2-10-2014 Zoning amendment NCM
2014-02 1-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-03 3-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-04 4-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-05 4-14-2014 Street acceptance NCM
2014-06 4-28-2014 Zoning amendment NCM
2014-07 4-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
§ DL-1 MANHEIM CODE § DL-1
1:522
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-08 5-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-09 5-12-2014 Bond NCM
2014-10 5-27-2014 Zoning amendment NCM
2014-11 5-27-2014 Stormwater management
amendment
NCM
2014-12 5-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-13 Withdrawn
2014-14 Withdrawn
2014-15 8-25-2014 Fire alarms Ch. 160, Art. III
2014-16 7-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-17 7-28-2014 Sewers and sewage disposal Ch. 399
2014-18 10-13-2014 Intergovernmental
agreements: Central
Lancaster County Council of
Governments
Ch. 87, Art. IV
2014-19 10-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-20 11-10-2014 Decodification of zoning,
subdivision and land
development and
stormwater management
ordinances
NCM
2014-21 11-10-2014 Zoning amendment NCM
2014-22 11-10-2014 Subdivision and land
development amendment
NCM
2014-23 11-10-2014 Stormwater management
amendment
NCM
2014-24 10-27-2014 Cooperative maintenance
agreement for multijurisdictional
signal system
Ch. 87, Art. V
2014-25 11-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-26 11-24-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2014-27 12-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2014-28 12-15-2014 2015 budget NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:523
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-01 1-12-2015 Street acceptance NCM
2015-02 1-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2015-03 1-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2015-04 2-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2015-05 2-23-2015 Posting of signs on Granite
Run Drive
NCM
2015-06 Not yet adopted
2015-07 3-23-2015 Posting of signs on Butter
Road and Pleasure Road;
removal of sign from
Pleasure Road
NCM
2015-08 Zoning amendment NCM
2015-09 6-22-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2015-10 7-13-2015 Grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 277
2015-11 7-13-2015 Posting of signs on
Schreiner Station Road
NCM
2015-12 11-9-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
2018-04
2015-13 8-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2015-14 9-28-2015 Decodification of floodplain
management ordinance
NCM
2015-15 9-28-2015 Floodplain management
amendment
NCM
2015-16 10-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2015-17 11-23-2015 Grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 277
2015-18 11-23-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2015-19 11-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2015-20 12-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-01 1-11-2016 Street acceptances NCM
§ DL-1 MANHEIM CODE § DL-1
1:524
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-02 1-25-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-03 1-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-04 2-8-2016 Street acceptances NCM
2016-05 3-28-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-06 3-28-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-07 4-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-08 4-27-2016 Street acceptance NCM
2016-09 5-23-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-10 5-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-11 6-27-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-12 6-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-13 7-25-2016 Street acceptances NCM
2016-14 7-25-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-15 7-25-2016 Bond NCM
2016-16 9-12-2016 Posting of signs on Erbs
Quarry Road
NCM
2016-17 Not introduced
2016-18 9-26-2016 Zoning amendment NCM
2016-19 11-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-20 11-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-21 12-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2016-22 12-12-2016 2017 budget NCM
2016-23 12-12-2016 Zoning amendment NCM
2017-01 1-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2017-02 2-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2017-03 3-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2017-04 4-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:525
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-05 5-22-2017 Delegation of authority to
acquire rights-of-way for the
multi-bridge project
NCM
2017-06 6-12-2017 Relocation and posting of
sign on Olde Saybrook Road
NCM
2017-07 6-26-2017 Zoning reclassification NCM
2017-08 8-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 480
2017-09 9-11-2017 Zoning Amendment NCM
2017-10 9-11-2017 Posting of Sign on Shreiner
Avenue
NCM
2017-11 9-25-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480
2017-12 10-9-2017 Relocation of Signs on
Juliette Avenue; Vehicles
and Traffic Amendment
NCM; Ch. 480
2017-13 10-23-2017 Posting of Signs on
Hamilton Road
NCM
2017-14 11-28-2017 Police Retirement Plan
Amendment
NCM
2017-15 12-11-2017 2018 Tax Rate NCM
2017-16 11-28-2017 Acceptance of Highways NCM
2017-17 12-11-2017 2018 Budget NCM
2018-01 2-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480
2018-02 3-12-2018 Zoning Amendment NCM
2018-03 4-23-2018 Fireworks Ch. 261
2018-04 4-23-2018 Property Maintenance Ch. 367
2018-05 5-29-2018 Disorderly Conduct
Amendment
Ch. 216
2018-06 5-29-2018 Towing Amendment Ch. 462
2018-07 8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480
2018-08 8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480
§ DL-1 MANHEIM CODE § DL-1
1:526
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2018-09 11-12-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 8
2018-12 12-10-2018 Budget NCM 8
2019-01 3-25-2019 Construction
Codes
Amendment
Ch. 202 8
2019-03 1-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 8
2019-05 5-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 8
2019-06 6-10-2019 Agreement NCM 8
2019-07 7-8-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Dumpster and
Portable Storage
Devices
Ch. 435, Art.
VI
8
2019-08 7-8-2019 Alarm Devices:
Alarm Systems
Amendment;
Rules and
Regulations
Repealer
Ch. 160, Art.
I; Ch. 160,
Art II,
Reference
Only
8
2019-09 7-8-2019 Secondhand
Dealers
Amendment
Ch. 390 8
2019-10 8-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 8
2019-11 9-9-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 8
2019-12 9-23-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2019-13 10-14-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2019-14 9-23-2019 Bond NCM 9
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:527
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-15 11-25-2019 Street Acceptance NCM 9
2019-16 12-9-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2019-17 12-9-2019 Budget NCM 9
2019-18 12-9-2019 Street Vacation NCM 9
2020-01 1-13-2020 Street Acceptance NCM 9
2020-02 1-13-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2020-03 1-13-2020 Zoning
Amendment
NCM 9
2020-04 3-9-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2020-05 Feb 2020 Citizen Advisory
Committees
Ch. 3 9
2020-06 7-13-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2020-07 5-11-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2020-08 4-16-2020 Emergency
Operations Plan
Amendment
Ch. 48 9
2020-09 6-8-2020 Alarm Devices:
Fire Alarms
Amendment
Ch. 160, Art.
III
9
2020-10 5-11-2020 Cable Franchise
Agreement
Renewal
NCM 9
2020-11 Not adopted 9
2020-12 Pending
2020-13 6-8-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2020-14 7-13-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
§ DL-1 MANHEIM CODE § DL-1
1:528
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2020-15 7-27-2020 Zoning
Amendment
NCM 9
2020-16 8-10-2020 Dedication of
Highways
NCM 9
2020-17 8-10-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2020-18 8-10-2020 Planning
Commission
Amendment
Ch. 120 9
2020-19 8-24-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 480 9
2020-20 8-10-2020 Citizen Advisory
Committees
Amendment
Ch. 3 9
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:529

Zoning Ordinance
Manheim Township, Lancaster County, PA
Adopted: February 10, 2014,
as amended
ZONINGORDINANCE
OF MANHEIM TOWNSHIP 2014
Revised 4/28/2014 by Ordinance 2014-06
Revised 5/27/2014 by Ordinance 2014-10
Revised 11/10/2014 by Ordinance 2014-21
Revised 3/28/2016 by Ordinance 2016-05
Revised 3/28/2016 by Ordinance 2016-06
Revised 9/26/2016 by Ordinance 2016-18
Revised 12/12/2016 by Ordinance 2016-23
Revised 01/13/2020 by Ordinance 2020-03
Revised 07/27/2020 by Ordinance 2020-15
FEBRUARY10, 2014, as amended
- i -
ZONING ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS ...................................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 101. TITLE ......................................................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 102. PURPOSE ................................................................................................... 1-1
ARTICLE II. INTERPRETATION .............................................................................................. 2-1
SECTION 201. CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS ...................................................... 2-1
ARTICLE III. APPLICATION ..................................................................................................... 3-1
SECTION 301. CONFORMITY WITH APPLICABLE PROVISIONS ........................... 3-1
SECTION 302. NON-SPECIFIED USES ........................................................................... 3-4
ARTICLE IV. ZONING DISTRICTS .......................................................................................... 4-1
SECTION 401. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS ....................................................... 4-1
SECTION 402. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ....................................................................... 4-1
SECTION 403. ZONING MAP ........................................................................................... 4-2
ARTICLE V. TERMINOLOGY ................................................................................................... 5-1
SECTION 501. WORD USAGE .......................................................................................... 5-1
SECTION 502. INTERPRETATION .................................................................................. 5-1
SECTION 503. DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................... 5-1
ARTICLE VI. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT A ....................................................................... 6-1
SECTION 601. PURPOSE; INTENT .................................................................................. 6-1
SECTION 602. USES BY RIGHT ....................................................................................... 6-1
SECTION 603. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES .................................................................. 6-2
SECTION 604. CONDITIONAL USES .............................................................................. 6-2
SECTION 605. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND PERMITTED USES BY RIGHT ............................. 6-2
SECTION 606. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND PERMITTED USES BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION . 6-7
SECTION 607. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND PERMITTED USES BY CONDITION ................... 6-7
SECTION 608. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ....................................................... 6-8
- ii -
ARTICLE VII. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-1 ........................................................................ 7-1
SECTION 701. PURPOSE ................................................................................................... 7-2
SECTION 702. USES BY RIGHT ....................................................................................... 7-2
SECTION 703. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES .................................................................. 7-2
SECTION 704. CONDITIONAL USES .............................................................................. 7-3
SECTION 705. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ............................. 7-3
SECTION 706. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION ............................................................................................. 7-7
SECTION 707. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGSAND USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION .................... 7-9
SECTION 708. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ....................................................... 7-9
ARTICLE VIII. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-2 ...................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 801. PURPOSE ................................................................................................... 8-2
SECTION 802. USES BY RIGHT ....................................................................................... 8-2
SECTION 803. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES .................................................................. 8-2
SECTION 804. CONDITIONAL USES .............................................................................. 8-3
SECTION 805. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ............................. 8-3
SECTION 806. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION ............................................................................................. 8-7
SECTION 807. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION ................... 8-9
SECTION 808. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ..................................................... 8-10
ARTICLE IX. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-3 ......................................................................... 9-1
SECTION 901. PURPOSE ................................................................................................... 9-2
SECTION 902. USES BY RIGHT ....................................................................................... 9-2
SECTION 903. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES .................................................................. 9-2
SECTION 904. CONDITIONAL USES .............................................................................. 9-3
SECTION 905. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ............................. 9-3
SECTION 906. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION ............................................................................................. 9-9
SECTION 907. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION ................. 9-11
SECTION 908. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ..................................................... 9-12
- iii -
ARTICLE XX. INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT ......................................................................... 10-1
SECTION 1001. PURPOSE ............................................................................................... 10-1
SECTION 1002. USES BY RIGHT ................................................................................... 10-1
SECTION 1003. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.............................................................. 10-1
SECTION 1004. CONDITIONAL USES .......................................................................... 10-2
SECTION 1005. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ........................ 10-2
SECTION 1006. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION ........................................................................................ 10-6
SECTION 1007. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION .............. 10-8
SECTION 1008. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ................................................... 10-8
ARTICLE XI. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-1 ................................................................................ 11-1
SECTION 1101. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 11-3
SECTION 1102. USES BY RIGHT .................................................................................... 11-3
SECTION 1103. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES............................................................... 11-3
SECTION 1104. CONDITIONAL USES ........................................................................... 11-4
SECTION 1105. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ......................... 11-4
SECTION 1106. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION .......................................................................................... 11-8
SECTION 1107. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION ............ 11-10
SECTION 1108. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 11-10
ARTICLE XII. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-2 .............................................................................. 12-1
SECTION 1201. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 12-3
SECTION 1202. USES BY RIGHT .................................................................................... 12-3
SECTION 1203. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES............................................................... 12-4
SECTION 1204. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ......................... 12-4
SECTION 1205. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION .......................................................................................... 12-8
SECTION 1206. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 12-11
ARTICLE XIII. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-3 ............................................................................. 13-1
SECTION 1301. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 13-3
SECTION 1302. USES BY RIGHT .................................................................................... 13-3
- iv -
SECTION 1303. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES............................................................... 13-4
SECTION 1304. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ......................... 13-4
SECTION 1305. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION .......................................................................................... 13-9
SECTION 1306. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 13-14
ARTICLE XIV. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-4 ............................................................................. 14-1
SECTION 1401. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 14-3
SECTION 1402. USES BY RIGHT .................................................................................... 14-3
SECTION 1403. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES............................................................... 14-4
SECTION 1404. CONDITIONAL USES ........................................................................... 14-4
SECTION 1405. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ......................... 14-4
SECTION 1406. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION .......................................................................................... 14-9
SECTION 1407. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION ............. 14-12
SECTION 1408. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 14-13
ARTICLE XV. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT I-1 .......................................................................... 15-1
SECTION 1501. PURPOSE; INTENT ............................................................................... 15-3
SECTION 1502. USES BY RIGHT .................................................................................... 15-3
SECTION 1503. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES............................................................... 15-4
SECTION 1504. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ......................... 15-4
SECTION 1505. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION .......................................................................................... 15-8
SECTION 1506. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 15-10
ARTICLE XVI. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT I-2 ........................................................................ 16-1
SECTION 1601. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 16-3
SECTION 1602. USES BY RIGHT .................................................................................... 16-3
SECTION 1603. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES............................................................... 16-4
SECTION 1604. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ......................... 16-4
SECTION 1605. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION .......................................................................................... 16-7
SECTION 1606. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 16-10
- v -
ARTICLE XVII. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT I-3 ....................................................................... 17-1
SECTION 1701. SPECIFIC INTENT ................................................................................. 17-3
SECTION 1702. USES BY RIGHT .................................................................................... 17-3
SECTION 1703. USES BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION ........................................................ 17-4
SECTION 1704. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT ......................... 17-4
SECTION 1705. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION .......................................................................................... 17-9
SECTION 1706. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 17-11
ARTICLE XVIII. SIGNS ............................................................................................................. 18-1
SECTION 1801. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 18-1
SECTION 1802. DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................ 18-1
SECTION 1803. SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT .................................................................. 18-4
SECTION 1804. GENERAL REGULATIONS ................................................................. 18-4
SECTION 1805. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS ................................................................... 18-7
SECTION 1806. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................... 18-8
SECTION 1807. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS ................................................................ 18-11
SECTION 1808. NONCONFORMING SIGNS ............................................................... 18-11
ARTICLE XIX. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT .......................................... 19-1
SECTION 1901. INTENT ................................................................................................... 19-1
SECTION 1902. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE ........................................................... 19-9
SECTION 1903. BASIS FOR CONSIDERATION ......................................................... 19-10
SECTION 1904. ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................ 19-10
SECTION 1905. MODIFICATIONS ............................................................................... 19-10
SECTION 1906. APPLICABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
AND GUIDELINES ............................................................................ 19-11
SECTION 1907. DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................... 19-12
SECTION 1908. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES ........................................................ 19-15
SECTION 1909. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES ..................................................... 19-17
SECTION 1910. MINIMUM AREA ................................................................................ 19-17
SECTION 1911. UTILITY SERVICES ........................................................................... 19-17
SECTION 1912. COMMON OPEN SPACE ................................................................... 19-17
SECTION 1913. BLOCKS AND LOTS........................................................................... 19-24
SECTION 1914. STREETS .............................................................................................. 19-26
SECTION 1915. RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ...................................................... 19-35
SECTION 1916. COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT ..................................................... 19-42
SECTION1917. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC USES, COMMUNITY
CLUBS AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES........................................ 19-49
SECTION 1918. SIDEWALKS AND NONMOTORIZED PATHS .............................. 19-51
- vi -
SECTION 1919. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS ................................................. 19-52
SECTION 1920. REQUIRED PARKING ........................................................................ 19-59
SECTION 1921. REQUIRED LOADING AND SERVICE AREAS ............................. 19-62
SECTION 1922. FLOODPLAIN CONTROL .................................................................. 19-63
SECTION 1923. SIGNS .................................................................................................... 19-63
SECTION 1924. NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN STANDARDS AND
GUIDELINES ...................................................................................... 19-71
SECTION 1925. LANDSCAPING ................................................................................... 19-78
SECTION 1926. STREET TREES ................................................................................... 19-79
SECTION 1927. LIGHTING ............................................................................................ 19-80
SECTION 1928. STREET FURNITURE ......................................................................... 19-81
SECTION 1929. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS AND
GUIDELINES ...................................................................................... 19-81
SECTION 1930. SUBMISSION OF SKETCH PLAN .................................................... 19-93
SECTION 1931. APPLICATION FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL .............................. 19-93
SECTION 1932. APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL ........................................ 19-96
SECTION 1933. RECORDING OF PLAN; ABANDONMENT OF PLAN;
FAILURE TO COMPLYWITH TIME RESTRICTIONS ................... 19-97
SECTION 1934. CONSTRUCTION, DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE
OF IMPROVEMENTS ........................................................................ 19-98
SECTION 1935. SKETCH PLAN REQUIREMENTS .................................................... 19-98
SECTION 1936. REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION FOR
TENTATIVE APPROVAL ................................................................. 19-99
SECTION 1937. REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION FOR FINAL
APPROVAL .......................................................................................19-107
ARTICLE XX. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING ................................................... 20-1
SECTION 2001. COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENT ......................................................... 20-1
SECTION 2002. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS .................. 20-1
SECTION 2003. PARKING DEMAND NEEDS ASSESSMENT (PNDA) .................... 20-3
SECTION 2004. PARKING SPACE COMPUTATION ................................................... 20-3
SECTION 2005. PARKING AREA ACCESS AND LOCATION ................................... 20-3
SECTION 2006. PARKING AREA SCREENING ........................................................... 20-4
SECTION 2007. PARKING AREA SURFACE ................................................................ 20-4
SECTION 2008. PARKING AREA DIMENSIONS ......................................................... 20-4
SECTION 2009. PARKING AREA RESERVATION ...................................................... 20-5
SECTION 2010. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE ..................... 20-5
SECTION 2011. HANDICAP PARKING ......................................................................... 20-6
SECTION 2012. RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS .............................................................. 20-6
SECTION 2013. BICYCLE RACKS .................................................................................. 20-6
ARTICLE XXI. ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS .......................................................... 21-1
SECTION 2101. ANIMALS AND ANIMAL SHELTERS ............................................... 21-1
SECTION 2102. DETACHED PRIVATE GARAGES ..................................................... 21-1
- vii -
SECTION 2103. OTHER OUTBUILDINGS/STRUCTURES ......................................... 21-2
SECTION 2104. SWIMMING POOLS .............................................................................. 21-2
SECTION 2105. TENNIS COURTS .................................................................................. 21-2
SECTION 2106. PATIOS AND PAVED TERRACES ..................................................... 21-3
SECTION 2107. PUBLIC NUISANCES ........................................................................... 21-3
SECTION 2108. FENCES AND FREESTANDING WALLS .......................................... 21-3
SECTION 2109. SATELLITE ANTENNAS ..................................................................... 21-3
SECTION 2110. HOME OCCUPATIONS ........................................................................ 21-4
SECTION 2111. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS ............................................................... 21-9
SECTION 2112. GARDEN PONDS .................................................................................. 21-9
SECTION 2113. FARMERS MARKET .......................................................................... 21-10
SECTION 2114. BEEKEEPING....................................................................................... 21-10
ARTICLE XXII. GENERAL REGULATIONS ....................................................................... 22-1
SECTION 2201. UNSAFE DWELLINGS, STRUCTURES OR LAND .......................... 22-1
SECTION 2202. VISIBILITY AT STREET INTERSECTIONS ...................................... 22-1
SECTION 2203. REMOVAL OF NATURAL RESOURCES .......................................... 22-1
SECTION 2204. PUBLIC UTILITIES AND MUNICIPAL USES................................... 22-1
SECTION 2205. CORNER LOTS ...................................................................................... 22-2
SECTION 2206. REQUIRED YARDS .............................................................................. 22-2
SECTION 2207. LOT WIDTH, DEPTH, AND AREA EXCEPTIONS FOR LOT
OF RECORD.......................................................................................... 22-2
SECTION 2208. BUILDING HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS .................................................... 22-2
SECTION 2209. ARTERIAL AND MAJOR COLLECTOR ROADS ............................. 22-3
SECTION 2210. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS .......................................................... 22-3
SECTION 2211. DRIVEWAYS ......................................................................................... 22-3
SECTION 2212. VEHICULAR ACCESS; FLAG LOTS .................................................. 22-3
SECTION 2213. SPECIAL BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS ........................ 22-3
SECTION 2214. AIRPORT SAFETY ZONES .................................................................. 22-4
SECTION 2215. OBSCENITY ........................................................................................... 22-6
SECTION 2216. OWNERSHIP, ADMINISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF
COMMON OPEN SPACE ..................................................................... 22-7
SECTION 2217. REGIONAL STORMWATER FACILITY ............................................ 22-9
ARTICLE XXIII. HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT ........................................................... 23-1
SECTION 2301. PURPOSE; INTENT .............................................................................. 23-1
SECTION 2302. APPLICABLITY; EXPLANATION OF PROVISIONS ...................... 23-1
SECTION 2303. HISTORIC RESOURCES ..................................................................... 23-1
SECTION 2304. THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION TRUST ..................................... 23-2
SECTION 2305. MODIFICATION TO LOT AREA REGULATIONS .......................... 23-2
SECTION 2306. STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION ............................................ 23-3
SECTION 2307. PERMITS ............................................................................................... 23-4
SECTION 2308. DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES .................................... 23-4
SECTION 2309. ADAPTIVE REUSE .............................................................................. 23-5
- viii -
ARTICLE XXIV. T-ZONE OVERLAY AREAS
SECTION 2401. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 24-1
SECTION 2402. APPLICABILITY; EXPLANATION OF PROVISIONS;
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS .................................................... 24-1
SECTION 2403. T-1 NATURAL RESOURCES OVERLAY AREA .............................. 24-2
SECTION 2404. T-4 URBAN TRANSITION OVERLAY AREA .................................. 24-6
SECTION 2405. T-5 NEFFSVILLE VILLAGE OVERLAY AREA ............................... 24-7
SECTION 2406. T-5 OREGON VILLAGE OVERLAY AREA ...................................... 24-8
SECTION 2407. T-6 URBAN TRANSITION OVERLAY AREA ................................ 24-22
SECTION 2408. D-R RETROFIT OVERLAY AREA .................................................... 24-28
SECTION 2409. D-A AIRPORT OVERLAY AREA ..................................................... 24-30
SECTION 2410. D-C CORRIDOR OVERLAY AREA .................................................. 24-37
ARTICLE XXV. PERFORMANCE REGULATIONS ............................................................ 25-1
SECTION 2501. APPLICABILITY ................................................................................... 25-1
SECTION 2502. ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS ............................................................... 25-1
SECTION 2503. AGRICULTURAL USES ....................................................................... 25-2
SECTION 2504. BANKS, FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, AND RESTAURANTS
IN THE B-1 DISTRICT ......................................................................... 25-5
SECTION 2505. BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS .................................. 25-5
SECTION 2506. BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS……………………………… ....... 25-6
SECTION 2307. BUSINESS USES ................................................................................... 25-7
SECTION 2508. DAY CARE CENTERS, COMMERCIAL ............................................ 25-7
SECTION 2509. GROUP HOMES .................................................................................... 25-8
SECTION 2510. HORTICULTURAL USES .................................................................... 25-8
SECTION 2511. INDUSTRIAL USES .............................................................................. 25-9
SECTION 2512. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING ................................................... 25-9
SECTION 2513. SCREENING OF SPECIFIC USES ..................................................... 25-13
SECTION 2514. OFFICE PARKS ................................................................................... 25-14
SECTION 2515. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS .................................................... 25-17
SECTION 2516. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ......................................... 25-19
SECTION 2517. TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES.......................................................... 25-28
SECTION 2518. HOLIDAY TREE SALES .................................................................... 25-28
SECTION 2519. THEATER CHURCHES ...................................................................... 25-29
SECTION 2520. COMMUNITY CLUBS ........................................................................ 25-30
SECTION 2521. AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING ACTIVITIES ............................. 25-30
SECTION 2522. WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS ................................................................ 25-33
SECTION 2523. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS ............................................................. 25-39
SECTION 2524. GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS ............................................... 25-41
SECTION 2525. DWELLING UNITS IN COMBINATION WITH
OFFICES OR COMMERCIAL USES ................................................ 25-41
SECTION 2526. OUTDOOR DINING ............................................................................ 25-42
SECTION 2527. SIDEWALK DISPLAYS ...................................................................... 25-42
- ix -
SECTION 2528. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT .............................................................. 25-43
SECTION 2529. SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES AND FACILITIES . 25-43
SECTION 2530. CONVERSION OF LARGE NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING ....... 25-44
ARTICLE XXVI. TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR)............................... 26-1
SECTION 2601. PURPOSE ................................................................................................ 26-1
SECTION 2602. CONCEPT ............................................................................................... 26-1
SECTION 2603. RECOGNITION OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT
RIGHTS .................................................................................................. 26-2
SECTION 2604. APPORTIONMENT OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS .......................... 26-2
SECTION 2605. TRANSFER AND USE OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT
RIGHTS .................................................................................................. 26-3
SECTION 2606. USE OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
IN RECEIVING AREAS ..................................................................... 26-3
SECTION 2607. PLAN SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW PROCESS ................................. 26-5
SECTION 2608. PUBLIC ACQUISITION ........................................................................ 26-8
ARTICLE XXVII. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ........................................ 27-1
SECTION 2701. ZONING OFFICER ................................................................................ 27-1
SECTION 2702. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ZONING OFFICER ............ 27-1
SECTION 2703. PERMITS ................................................................................................ 27-2
SECTION 2704. CONDITIONS OF PERMIT ................................................................... 27-3
SECTION 2705. CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY ..................................... 27-3
SECTION 2706. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES ........................ 27-4
ARTICLE XXVIII. ZONING HEARING BOARD; ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEEDINGS ................................................................................................................ 28-1
SECTION 2801. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING HEARING BOARD;
MEMBERSHIP TERMS; VARIANCES ............................................... 28-1
SECTION 2802. ORGANIZATION OF ZONING HEARING BOARD ......................... 28-1
SECTION 2803. HEARINGS ............................................................................................. 28-1
SECTION 2804. JURISDICTION OF ZONING HEARING BOARD............................. 28-3
SECTION 2805. VARIANCES; SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS .............................................. 28-4
SECTION 2806. PARTIES APPELLANT BEFORE THE BOARD ................................ 28-6
SECTION 2807. TIME LIMITATIONS ............................................................................ 28-6
SECTION 2808. EFFECT OF BOARD'S DECISION ...................................................... 28-6
SECTION 2809. STAY OF PROCEEDINGS .................................................................... 28-7
SECTION 2810. JURISDICTION OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ............... 28-8
SECTION 2811. CHALLENGES TO VALIDITY OF ORDINANCE ............................. 28-9
SECTION 2812. PROCEDURE TO OBTAIN PRELIMINARY OPINION .................. 28-12
SECTION 2813. APPEAL TO THE COURT .................................................................. 28-12
SECTION 2814. AMENDMENTS ................................................................................... 28-12
- x -
ARTICLE XXIX. VALIDITY AND SEVERANCE ................................................................. 29-1
ARTICLE XXX. REPEALER ..................................................................................................... 29-1
ARTICLE XXXI. EFFECTIVE DATE ...................................................................................... 29-1
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. FORM-BASED CODE DESIGN STANDARDS
APPENDIX B. TRANSFORMATION CONCEPTS
APPENDIX C. PRD DESIGN STANDARDS
APPENDIX D. BEST PRACTICE EXAMPLES
APPENDIX E. T-ZONE OVERLAY MAP
1-1
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101. TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of Manheim
Township 2014, as amended."
SECTION 102. PURPOSE
This ordinance is enacted to reflect the policy goals of Manheim Township, as set forth in the
Manheim Township Comprehensive Plan and Growing Together: A Comprehensive Plan for
Central Lancaster County, with consideration for the character of the Township, its various parts,
and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses. This ordinance is enacted for the
following purposes:
1. To promote, protect, and facilitate the public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare;
coordinated and practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations; the provision of adequate light and air;
access to incident solar energy; police protection; vehicle parking and loading space;
transportation; water; sewerage; schools; recreational facilities; public grounds; the provision
of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural, or
industrial use; and other public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural, scenic,
and historic values in the environment and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers, and
floodplains.
2. To prevent overcrowding of land; blight; overburdening of public improvements and
facilities; and loss of health, life, or property from fire, flood, panic, or other dangers.
3. To promote safe and adequate travel and transportation facilities and controls.
4. To preserve prime agriculture and farmland, considering topography, soil type and
classification, and present use.
5. To provide for the use of land within the Township for residential housing of various
dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing.
6. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and
employment growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling
types and nonresidential uses.
3-1
ARTICLE III. APPLICABILITY
SECTION 301. CONFORMITY WITH APPLICABLE PROVISIONS
The provisions, regulations, limitations, and restrictions of this ordinance shall apply to all
structures, buildings, and/or land and their appurtenant and accessory structures and buildings
and accessory additions and shall apply with equal force to municipal, county, state, and private
buildings, structures, and/or land which are otherwise specifically provided for by statute.
Nonconforming signs shall be in accordance with Section 1808.
1. Conformity of existing structures, buildings, and/or land. From and after the effective date
of this ordinance, any existing structure, building, land, and/or premises shall not be
reconstructed, altered, repaired, extended, replaced, restored, or converted, except in
conformity with the regulations hereto specified for the zoning district in which it is located
or intended to be located.
2. Conformity of proposed structures, buildings, and/or land. From and after the effective date
of this ordinance, any proposed structure, building, or portion thereof shall not be erected,
constructed, or placed and any proposed structure, building, land, and/or premises shall not
be used or occupied so as to produce greater heights, smaller yards, or less unoccupied area
or greater occupancy than prescribed for such structure, building, land, and/or premises in
the zoning district in which it is located or intended to be located or except in conformity
with the regulations herein specified in the zoning district, as shown on the Zoning Map, in
which it is located or intended to be located.
3. Conformity of open spaces. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, any yard or
open space, or part thereof, shall not be included as a part of the yard or open space
similarly required for any other building or structure under this ordinance.
4. Existing nonconformity. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, any existing
structure, building, and/or land or any existing use of a structure, building, and/or land not
in conformity with the regulations, limitations, restrictions, and provisions herein
prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming, but may be continued in such
nonconformity subject to the following limitations:
A. Continuation. Any lawful use of buildings, structures, or lands existing at the
effective date of this ordinance, or authorized by a building permit issued prior
thereto, may be continued in its existing condition, although such use does not
conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Expansion. No expansion of a nonconforming structure, building or use shall
hereafter be made unless written application has been filed with the Zoning Hearing
Board, and such expansion has been approved as a special exception subject to the
following standards and criteria and those contained in Section 2805.2 of this
ordinance:
3-2
(1) The expansion of the nonconforming use shall be limited to an area equal to
25% of the floor area of buildings devoted to the nonconforming use as they
existed on the date on which such use first became nonconforming.
(2) Any expansion of a nonconforming use or structure shall be limited to the
lot of record upon which the nonconforming use or structure existed on the
date the use of the structure became nonconforming.
(3) The expansion of nonconforming uses shall comply with the provisions for
building height, yard setback, and lot coverage required for permitted uses
in the district in which the nonconformity in question is located.
(4) The expansion shall not create new dimensional nonconformities or further
increase existing dimensional nonconformities.
C. Damage or destruction. A nonconforming structure or building which is damaged
or destroyed may be rebuilt and occupied for the same use as before the damage
after obtaining appropriate permits pursuant to Section 2703 of this ordinance and
provided that:
(1) The damage or destruction is unintentional or, if intentional, with the
appropriate permit from the Township and all other applicable agencies.
(2) The previous foundation is to be used for restoration.
(3) The reconstructed structure or building shall not be larger than the damaged
structure.
(4) The reconstruction shall start within one year from the time of damage to
the structure or building.
(5) The repair of a nonconforming structure or building shall not cause the
structure to create further expansion in a nonconforming dimension or
aspect.
D. Discontinuance and abandonment. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a
period of more than one year, then this shall be deemed to be an intent to abandon
such use. No nonconforming use may be reestablished after it has been determined
to have been discontinued and abandoned. Any subsequent use shall conform to the
regulations of this ordinance.
E. Change of nonconforming use. Upon written application, the Zoning Hearing
Board, by special exception, may permit the substitution of another nonconforming
use in accordance with the following criteria and limitations:
(1) The proposed use to be substituted shall be:
[a] Permitted by right, by special exception, or by conditional use in a
district in which the existing nonconforming use would be a
permitted use; or
3-3
[b] Permitted by right, special exception or conditional use in a more
restrictive zoning district than the existing nonconforming use
would be permitted.
(2) The proposed use shall not generate more traffic than the existing
nonconforming use.
(3) The proposed use, if commercial or industrial in nature, shall not have
longer hours of operation than the existing nonconforming use.
(4) The proposed use shall not generate higher levels of noise, smoke, or glare
off the property than the existing nonconforming use.
(5) The proposed use shall not be more detrimental to the neighboring
properties and uses than the existing nonconforming use.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions.
F. Previously expanded nonconforming uses, buildings and structures. If a building,
structure, or land was expanded to the limits of expansion for a nonconforming
building, structure, or use of land as authorized by a prior zoning regulation or
ordinance, no further expansion of said building, structure, or land shall be
authorized. In the event a nonconforming building, structure, or use of land was
expanded to a portion of the limits of expansion authorized by a prior zoning
regulation or ordinance, additional expansion, if permitted by this, shall only be
authorized to the amount of expansion not previously utilized pursuant to said
prior zoning regulation or ordinance.
G. Dimensional nonconformity.
(1) Applicability. A structure which is nonconforming as to setbacks or lot
area may be expanded in accordance with the requirements of Section
301.4.G.(2) herein. Only structures which are used for a permitted use in
the district in which the structure is located shall be permitted to expand in
accordance with this section.
(2) Expansion limitations. Structures or buildings which are dimensionally
nonconforming may be expanded in accordance with the following
regulations:
[a] A structure or building which is located within the required front
yard area of the district in which it is located is permitted to
expand, provided that the expanded part of the structure will not
extend nearer to the street than the part of the existing structure
which is nearest to the street and that the minimum side yard and
rear yard areas of the district are met.
3-4
[b] A structure or building which is located within the required rear
yard area of the district in which it is located is permitted to
expand, provided that the expanded part of the structure will not
extend nearer to the rear property line than that part of the existing
structure which is nearest to the property line and that the
minimum side yard and front yard areas of the district are met.
[c] A structure or building which is located within a required side yard
area of the district in which it is located is permitted to expand,
provided that the expanded part of the structure will not extend
nearer to the side property line than that part of the existing
structure which is nearest to the side property line and that the
minimum front yard, rear yard and other side yard areas of the
district are met.
(3) Restoration of a dimensionally nonconforming structure or building. A
dimensionally nonconforming structure which is unintentionally destroyed
or damaged may be rebuilt and occupied in accordance with the
regulations set forth in Section 301.4.C. herein.
H. Substitution of a conforming use. Any use which complies with the regulations
for the district in which the nonconforming use is located may be substituted for
the nonconforming use. Once a conforming use is established, no nonconforming
use shall be permitted in the future. If a nonconforming use is proposed to be
eliminated and a conforming use substituted but certain regulations cannot be met
(such as area, yard, etc.), the Zoning Hearing Board, upon written application,
may grant a special exception to permit such conforming use, with such
appropriate conditions and safeguards as the Board may see fit.
SECTION 302. NON-SPECIFIED USES
Where a use is not specifically permitted, it shall be assumed to be prohibited, unless, in the
opinion of the Zoning Officer, upon review and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, it shall
be considered to be of the same general character as the uses permitted in the specific zoning
district.
4-1
ARTICLE IV. ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION 401. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
1. The Township is hereby divided into the following 12 districts:
Agricultural District A
Residential District R-1
Residential District R-2
Residential District R-3
Institutional District IN
Business District B-1
Business District B-2
Business District B-3
Business District B-4
Industrial District I-1
Industrial District I-2
Industrial District I-3
2. In addition, the following nine overlay areas shall apply:
T-1 Natural Resource Overlay
T-4 Urban Neighborhoods Overlay
T-5 Neffsville Village Overlay
T-5 Oregon Village Overlay
T-6 Urban Transition Overlay
D-R Retrofit Overlay
D-A Airport Overlay
D-C Corridor Overlay
Historic Overlay
SECTION 402. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the Manheim
Township Zoning Map, which is made a part hereof by reference.
1. Interpretation of district boundary lines. The district boundary lines shall be as shown on
the Zoning Map. Such lines are intended to coincide with property lines, center lines of
streets, utility rights-of-way, bodies of water, or the corporate boundary of the Township,
unless the contrary is indicated on the Zoning Map. In case of dispute, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall determine the exact location of the district boundaries.
2. District regulations apply to school, parks, and other public uses. Public parks,
playgrounds, cemeteries, public utilities, street rights-of-way, or other public uses shall be
subject to the zoning regulations of the zoning district in which they are located. In case of
doubt, the zoning regulations of the most restricted adjoining zoning district shall govern.
4-2
3. Vacation of public ways. Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated in the
manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or
public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area
included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the
extended zoning districts.
SECTION 403. ZONING MAP
The official Manheim Township Zoning Map shall be filed in the Township office. This map
shall be the final determination of all questions relative to the boundaries of the zoning districts.
As evidence of the authenticity of the map, it shall be duly certified by the Township Manager-
Secretary. Whenever said Zoning Map is amended, the same form of authentication shall be duly
followed.
5-1
ARTICLE V. TERMINOLOGY (Amended by Ordinance 2016-06, dated 3/28/2016; Ordinance
2016-18, dated 9/26/2016), Ordinance 2020-03, dated 01/13/2020.
SECTION 501. WORD USAGE
Words not herein defined shall take on the meanings as defined in the latest edition of the Merriam-
Webster Collegiate Dictionary. Words and phrases shall be presumed to be used in their ordinary
context, unless such word or phrase is defined differently within this article.
SECTION 502. INTERPRETATION
In this ordinance, when not inconsistent with the context:
1. Words in the present tense imply also the future tense.
2. The singular includes the plural.
3. The male gender includes the female gender.
4. The word "person" includes an individual, incorporator's association, member(s) of a
partnership or the officers of a corporation, as well as any similar entity.
5. The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory.
6. References to codes, ordinances, resolutions, plans, maps, governmental bodies,
commissions or agencies or officials are to codes, ordinances, resolutions, plans, maps,
governmental bodies, commissions or agencies or officials of the Township or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as in effect or office from time to time, including
amendments thereto or revisions or successors thereof, unless the text indicates another
reference is intended.
SECTION 503. DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases shall have the particular meanings assigned by this section in the
appropriate sections of this ordinance:
ACCESS - A way or means of approach for vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic from a street, rightof-
way, public area or community facility to a lot.
ACCESS DRIVE - A private access providing pedestrian and vehicular access between a public
or private street and a parking area(s) within a nonresidential land development, and any driveway
servicing three or more units of occupancy on a single lot or contiguous lots. The access drive is
not intended to include any portion of the travel lane abutting parking areas.
ADAPTIVE REUSE - The rehabilitation of an historic building for residential and nonresidential
uses in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIII.
ADULT BOOKSTORE - An establishment having, as a substantial and significant portion of its
stock-in-trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such publications.
5-2
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT - An adult bookstore, adult mini motion-picture theater, adult
motion-picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, or a massage establishment.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER - An enclosed building with a capacity of less
than 50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER - An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more
persons used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE - An establishment having, as a substantial and significant portion
of its stock-in-trade, sexually oriented devices, or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such devices.
ADULT THEATER - An establishment featuring live performances on a regular basis which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
AGRIBUSINESS STRUCTURE - Structures for housing more than 25 head of livestock, poultry
houses for housing more than 500 birds, and structures for growing mushrooms.
AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING - A process by which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed under a controlled anaerobic or aerobic environment to yield a soil-like product.
Agricultural composting uses primarily manure, but may use yard waste and food scraps, as well
as newspaper or corrugated paper or cardboard, as well as the materials permitted by the DEP for
composting material. The composted material from an agricultural composting operation may be
sold or otherwise distributed as a soil supplement, fertilizer, mulch or similar product.
AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING FACILITY - The portion of any property dedicated to
agricultural composting.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION - An enterprise that is actively engaged in the commercial
production and preparation for market of crops, livestock and livestock products and in the
production, harvesting and preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that
implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock
products or commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that are normally
engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological development within the agricultural
industry.
AGRICULTURE - The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry, horticulture and gardening,
including the keeping and raising of livestock and the sale of crops and agricultural, dairy and
horticultural farm products incidental to the operation of a farm.
AGRITOURISM - The practice of visiting a working farm or any agricultural, horticultural or
agribusiness operation for the purpose of enjoyment, education or active participation and
involvement in the activities of the farm or enterprise.
5-3
AGRITOURISM ENTERPRISE - Activities conducted on and accessory to a working farm and
offered to the public or to invited groups for the purpose of recreation, education, or active
involvement in the farm operation. These activities must be directly related to agricultural or
natural resources and incidental to the primary operation of the farm.
AIRPORT - Any landing area, runway or other facility designated or used or intended to be used,
either publicly or by any person or persons, for the landing and taking off of aircraft, including all
necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings,
and open spaces within the airport boundaries.
ALLEY - A minor right-of-way, privately owned, primarily for secondary means of access to the
rear or sides of properties.
ALTERATION - A change or rearrangement in the parts of a building or in the existing facilities,
or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from
one location or position to another which would change its use classification, other than an
addition.
AMENDMENT - Any revision to a regulation or ordinance that is formally adopted by the
governing body charged with the keeping of such regulations, which includes revisions to an
ordinance and/or map. Amendments to this ordinance lie solely with the Manheim Township
Board of Commissioners.
ANAEROBIC DIGESTER - A facility that recovers and/or recycles nutrients from biomass
materials, primarily in the form of livestock and poultry manure. The recovery and/or recycling
process generally involves the burning of such materials to produce electricity, heat and water, but
may produce products on a commercial scale for resale, including, but not limited to, electricity,
various gasses, fuels, fertilizer, animal feed and bulk materials.
ANTENNA - Any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic
waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. These uses include, without
limitation, such apparatus for cellular or other wireless telephones, pagers and beepers.
APPLICANT — A landowner, as herein defined, or agent of the landowner, who has filed an
application for a zoning, building or driveway permit and/or an application for development,
including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT - Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or
final, required to be filed and approved prior to the start of construction or development, including
but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan. Every application for development must include
the form designated by the Township and all other plans and information required by this
ordinance.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY - The Board of Commissioners.
APPROVED - Approved by the recognized authoritative agency or official as specified in the
respective regulations.
AREA - The extent of surface contained within the boundaries or extremities of land or a building.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY - A facility licensed as a personal care home by the
5-4
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare in which supervised around-theclock
services and nursing care are provided for four or more individuals who require only
intermittent care to maintain the basic needs of daily living.
ATTIC - That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof
framing. Within a dwelling unit, an attic shall not be counted as floor area unless it is constructed
as or modified into a habitable room by the inclusion of dormer windows, an average ceiling height
of five feet or more, and a permanent stationary interior-access stairway to a lower building story.
AWNING - A structure attached to a building, typically consisting of a frame and covered with
fabric or any other material.
BASEMENT - That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.
BEEKEEPING - Raising or keeping of bees.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT - An owner-occupied single-family detached
dwelling in which bed-and-breakfast units are provided for compensation on a nightly basis. Meals
may be offered only to registered overnight guests.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST UNIT - A room within a bed-and-breakfast establishment used as
lodging for no more than four persons.
BIKE PATH - A pathway that is exclusively used by bicyclists, where a separate, parallel path is
provided for pedestrians and other wheeled users. Most pathways are shared between bicyclists
and other users. See "nonmotorized path."
BILLBOARD - See definition in Article XVIII.
BIOMASS - Organic materials derived from living or recently living organisms, such as livestock
waste, agricultural crops and residue, wood and wood waste, and organic components of municipal
and industrial wastes, that may be used as a source of fuel or energy. The term excludes fossil
fuels, which have been transformed by geological processes into substances such as coal or
petroleum.
BLOCK - A tract of land bounded by three or more streets.
BOARDINGHOUSE - A building arranged or used for lodging, with or without meals, for
compensation, of more than five and not more than 10 individuals that do not constitute a family.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT - Any business or portion thereof where tattooing or body
piercing is practiced or provided to customers.
BUFFER/BUFFER AREA - An area within a site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the
property lines or off-street parking lots, which consists of either existing and preserved vegetation
or is created with trees, shrubs, berms and/or fences and is intended to be used as a means of
limiting the potentially adverse effects created by a use on adjoining properties, streets and uses.
5-5
BUFFER, PERIMETER - The minimum area along the outermost boundaries of a development
tract, except along a street yard setback, where a buffer/planting strip may be required. This area
is intended to be a greenbelt around the development and free from all impervious surfaces, except
for approved driveways, access drives and sidewalks, nonmotorized paths, and fences or
freestanding walls.
BUILDING - Any structure used for a resident, business, industry, or other public or private
purpose, or accessory thereto, and including covered porches, greenhouses, stables, garages,
roadside stands, mobile homes and similar structures, whether stationary or movable, but
excluding fences and walls which are part of the landscaping, signs, steps and awnings.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY - A detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building, and which is located on the same lot
as that occupied by the principal building.
BUILDING ADDITION - Any exterior structural enlargement to a building or structure.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT - The total areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of
the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, awnings, steps
and patios.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF - The vertical distance from grade to the top of the highest roof beams
of a flat roof or the top of the eave of a hip or gable roof.
BUILDING LENGTH - The horizontal measurement of any continuous building wall, regardless
of offsets.
BUILDING LINE - A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane and a vertical plane
that coincides with the exterior surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered or
projected section of a building, except overhanging eaves, gutters and cornices, the vertical plane
will coincide with the most projected surface.
BUILDING, MIXED-USE - A building with two or more principal uses, where the uses are
typically located one over the other, and may include apartments over commercial.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which
the building is located, including any attached structures, such as garages, decks, patios, etc.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE - A line defining the minimum required distance within a lot from
and parallel to a street right-of-way line and side and rear lot lines which designates the minimum
location of future buildings and structures.
BUILD-TO LINE - See "line, build-to."
CAFE - A public eating place, primarily offering indoor counter service, that has a maximum of
1,000 square feet of gross floor area and maximum of 20 seats, if any.
CALIPER - The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches above ground level for
trees up to four inches in diameter and measured 12 inches above ground level for trees over four
inches in diameter.
5-6
CARPORT - An unenclosed structure, which is open on at least two sides, with a permanent floor
and roof supported by columns or posts, that is primarily used for the storage of one or more
vehicles in the same manner as a private garage. Carports not open on at least two sides shall be
considered a garage.
CARTWAY - The surface of a street, access drive or alley available for vehicular traffic.
CEMETERY - Land used or intended to be used, as an accessory use, for the burial of the deceased,
including columbariums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with the
cemetery and within the boundaries thereof. This definition shall not include crematoria, which
shall be considered to be funeral homes.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY - A certificate issued by the Township upon
completion of the construction of a new building or upon a change or conversion of the structure
or use of a building, which certifies that all requirements and regulations as provided herein and
within all other applicable requirements have been complied with.
CO-LOCATION - The use of a common telecommunications tower or common site by two or
more wireless communications services.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY - An activity operated as a business, open to the
public for the purpose of recreation or entertainment, including but not limited to bowling alleys,
drive-in motion-picture facilities, swimming pools, health clubs, movie theaters, miniature golf
courses, etc. This does not include adult-related uses, as defined herein.
COMMISSIONERS - The Board of Commissioners of Manheim Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
COMMON OPEN SPACE - A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of
land and water, within a development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of
residents of a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for
public facilities.
COMMUNITY CLUB - An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests for
social, educational, cultural, civic, recreational and administrative purposes, provided vending
stands, merchandising or commercial activities are not conducted except as required for the
membership of such club. "Clubs" shall include but not be limited to service and political
organizations and labor unions, as well as social clubs. "Community clubs" shall not include adult
establishments, as defined herein.
COMMUNITY FACILITY - A building or structure owned and operated by a county or state
government agency to provide a governmental service to the public, excluding public parks.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The official Manheim Township public document consisting of
maps, charts and textual material that constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the physical
and social development of Manheim Township, as amended from time to time.
CONDOMINIUM - A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of buildings, each owned by
an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such owners assigned a proportionate interest in the
remainder of the real estate, which is designated for common ownership and which is created under
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980 or Uniform Planned Community Act of
5-7
1996, as amended.
CONFERENCE/EVENT CENTER - A property and/or facility which is utilized to host a variety
of business, educational and social events, including but not limited to conferences, exhibitions,
meetings, seminars, training, parties, receptions and galas. Such use may include the provisions,
sale and/or consumption of food and/or alcoholic beverages incidental to the above-referenced
uses but not as a separate principal use. Additionally, a Conference/Event Center may include any
one or more of the following as a separate, but secondary use of the property and/or facility; a
public restaurant, a café, and/or commercial recreation facility.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) - A type of retirement
community licensed by the commonwealth that provides a continuum of care from independent
living to assisted living to extended care/skilled nursing facilities.
CONTINUOUS VISUAL BUFFER - A visually impenetrable screen created through the
installation of plant materials, fencing, walls and/or earthen berms.
CONVENIENCE STORE - A store or shop, less than 10,000 square feet, that may sell items such
as food products, groceries, toiletries, lottery tickets, tobacco products, newspapers and magazines,
along with a selection of processed food and groceries. Dining areas may be offered and are
included in the total floor area, whether located inside or outside the building. Stores that offer gas
may also sell motor oil, windshield washer fluid, radiator fluid, and maps. The outdoor sales or
dining area shall be a maximum of 600 square feet.
CONVERSION APARTMENT DWELLINGS - Where conversion is made of a building which
existed at the date of enactment of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., into a duplex dwelling
or an apartment dwelling, and where no extension of the existing building, other than as may be
required for access or safety, shall be permitted.
CONVERSION OF LARGE NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING - Where conversion is made of an
existing building with a nonresidential use, which is in excess of 10,000 square feet of net floor
area, but no larger than 45,000 square feet of net floor area into other nonresidential uses, with
expansion permitted pursuant to the performance standards set forth in Article XXV.
COUNTRY CLUB – A privately-owned club, often with a membership quota and admittance by
invitation or sponsorship, that generally offers both a variety of recreational sports and facilities
for dining and entertaining. Typical athletic offerings are golf, tennis, and swimming. A country
club is most commonly distinguished from a community club by having substantial grounds for
outdoor activities and major focus on golf.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION - The Lancaster County Planning Commission.
CROSSWALK
A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines
of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the roadway, measured from the curbs or, in the absence
of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; or
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
5-8
DAY-CARE CENTER - The offering of care or supervision over minors, or adults who require
supervision because of mental or physical condition, in lieu of care or supervision by family
members. This term is not synonymous with the terms "recreation area" or "commercial recreation
facility."
DAY-CARE CENTER, ADULT - A building, or space in a building, and grounds in which, on a
regular basis, for a fee, care is provided to adults who are in need of supervision because of their
mental or physical condition. It does not include any establishment which provides overnight care
or stays of any kind. It does not include establishments which provide overnight stays of any kind.
DAY-CARE CENTER, COMMERCIAL - A day-care facility that is a principal use and is licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the care or supervision of minors or adults. It does not
include any establishment which provides overnight care or stays of any kind.
DAY-CARE CENTER, FAMILY MAJOR - A day-care facility that is operated as an accessory
use to a detached single-family dwelling that is registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and offers care and supervision to no more than six children unrelated to the operator during any
calendar day.
DAY-CARE CENTER, FAMILY MINOR - A day-care facility that is operated as an accessory
use to a detached single-family dwelling that is registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and offers care and supervision to no more than three children unrelated to the operator during any
calendar day.
DECK - A constructed flat surface capable of supporting weight, similar to a floor but constructed
outdoors and usually (though not always) connected to a building. A deck shall not be completely
enclosed, except for any side which may adjoin a structure or for any fences, walls, shrubs, or
hedges. For the purposes of this ordinance, a deck is considered to be an impervious surface and
part of the principal building.
DECLARATION OF RESTRICTION OF DEVELOPMENT - A legal document which places
restrictions on the amount and type of development which can occur on a tract in the sending area
from which transferable development rights have been apportioned and transferred.
DEED OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS - A legal document which grants
transfer of ownership of transferable development rights and provides for the attachment of the
transferable development rights to a specific tract in the receiving area or for transfer of the
transferable development rights in gross to the Township.
DENSITY, BASE - The density achieved when a property is developed in accordance with the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and the zoning district requirements without
purchase of transferable development rights.
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL GROSS - The number of dwelling units in relation to the total land
area proposed to be used for residential purposes, including rights-of-way, interior parking areas,
access drives, private streets, sidewalks, common open space, and public or semipublic parks and
playgrounds.
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL NET - The number of dwelling units in relation to the area of land of
a parcel in use or proposed to be used for residential purposes, exclusive of public rights-of-way.
5-9
DESIGNATED GROWTH AREA - A region within a county or counties described in a municipal
or multi-municipal plan that preferably includes and surrounds a city, borough or village, and
within which residential and mixed-use development is permitted or planned for at densities of
one unit to the acre or more, commercial, industrial and institutional uses are permitted or planned
for and public infrastructure services are provided or planned.
DEVELOPER - Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such
landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development or other
activities covered by this ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings, or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OR IMPACT - Any land development that,
because of its character, magnitude, or location, will have a substantial effect upon the health,
safety, or welfare of citizens in more than one municipality.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The provisions for development, including a planned residential
development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings
and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space, and public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS - The rights to construct a specified amount of development according
to Township land use regulations.
DIMENSIONAL NONCONFORMITY - Any aspect of a land use that does not comply with any
size, height, bulk, setback, distance, landscaping, coverage, screening, or other design or
performance standard specified by this ordinance, where such dimensional nonconformity
lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance or amendment thereto.
DISTRIBUTION FACILITY - A warehouse or other specialized building, often with refrigeration
or air conditioning, which is stocked with products (goods) to be redistributed to retailers, to
wholesalers or directly to consumers.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS - Animals that are normally considered to be kept in conjunction with a
dwelling for the pleasure of the resident family, rather than for economic reasons. This shall
include dogs, cats, small birds, racing pigeons, gerbils, rabbits, lizards and other nonpoisonous
animals commonly sold in retail pet shops.
DORMITORY - A building, especially associated with a school or institution, which provides
living and sleeping accommodations for a number of students attending such school or institution.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE/FACILITY - A restaurant, bank, drug store or other use that
provides service to customers who remain seated in automobiles where customers are served either
through an exterior window in the establishment, or directly to parked automobiles on the
premises.
DRIVEWAY - An improved private cartway designed and constructed to provide vehicular and
pedestrian movement between a public road and a tract of land serving one single-family dwelling
unit or a farm.
5-10
DRUG STORE, RETAIL - A store in which a licensed on-site pharmacist oversees the sale and
dispensing of drugs within the store and/or via drive-through area and also sells over-the-counter
drugs, health/beauty aids and/or limited household products and/or food products. The majority of
the floor area will be dedicated to the sale and dispensing of drugs and other related pharmaceutical
items.
DWELLING - Any building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including those listed below, but not including hospitals, hotels, boardinghouses,
rooming and lodging houses, institutional houses, tourists courts, and the like, offering overnight
accommodations for guests or patients. All dwellings must be permanently affixed to a completely
enclosed foundation constructed of currently accepted materials that shall be an entire perimeter
wall and extend from below the frost line to the first floor of the building. Such foundation shall
be constructed to provide sufficient structural integrity to prevent the building from heaving,
shifting, or settling unevenly due to frost action. In addition, all dwellings shall be properly
connected to approved and permanently designed sewer, water, electrical and other utility systems.
DWELLING, APARTMENT - A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units which may be
separated horizontally and/or vertically. This may include but is not limited to apartments and
quadruplexes. The individual dwelling units may or may not be in separate ownership; however,
the land shall be in single ownership or in common ownership.
DWELLING, ATTACHED DUPLEX - A building containing a minimum of two and a maximum
of five duplex dwellings arranged in a side-by-side configuration with one or more vertical party
walls.
DWELLING, CARRIAGE HOUSE - A single dwelling located on the second floor above a
detached garage and having a maximum of 1000 square feet.
DWELLING, DUPLEX - A dwelling containing two dwelling units, one of which is located above
the other.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY - A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units which
may be separated horizontally and/or vertically. This may include but is not limited to apartments
and quadruplexes. The individual dwelling units may or may not be in separate ownership;
however, the land shall be in single ownership or in common ownership.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED - A freestanding building containing one dwelling
unit for one family and having two side yards, one front yard, and one rear yard; in cases where
such dwelling is located on a corner lot, the dwelling shall have two front yards, one side yard, and
one rear yard. Mobile homes may be considered single-family detached dwellings if, in addition
to the requirements listed for all dwellings, the mobile home is securely anchored to the permanent
foundation, and all of the apparatus used to transport the unit are removed, including the towing
hitch. Recreational vehicles shall not be construed as dwellings. Modular homes may be
considered single-family detached dwellings so long as they comply with the general requirements
of a dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED - A dwelling containing two dwelling units
which are attached side by side by the use of a common wall.
5-11
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE - A building containing at least three dwelling units but not more
than eight dwelling units arranged in a side-by-side configuration with two or more common party
walls and arranged on fee simple lots.
DWELLING UNIT - A single habitable living unit occupied by only one family. See definition
of "family." Each dwelling unit shall have its own toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and
cooking facilities and separate access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony that
connects to outside access at ground level.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY - An independent, self-sufficient dwelling unit, with complete
kitchen and bath facilities, which is either entirely contained within a single-family dwelling unit
and has direct access to the outdoors or which has a common hall with a single-family detached
dwelling for occupancy by either an elderly, handicapped, or disabled person related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the occupants of the principal dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT, ZERO LOT LINE - A dwelling type consisting of a single-family detached
residence on an individual lot, where such unit, or a portion of such unit, is located along a side lot
line, so that the unit has only one side yard. The zero lot line may be achieved by placing the house,
or, in the case of an irregularly shaped lot, a portion of the dwelling unit, on a side lot line and
providing a maintenance easement six feet wide on the adjoining lot.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY - Any construction or other activity which disturbs the surface of
the land, including, but not limited to, excavations, embankments, land development, subdivision
development, mineral extraction and the moving, depositing or storing of soil, rock or earth,
excluding the tilling of the soil.
EASEMENT - A right-of-way granted for limited use of private land for a public, quasi-public or
private purpose, and within which the owner of the property shall not have the right to make use
of the land in a manner that violates the right of the grantee.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS - An educational program that offers a program of trade,
business, technical or artistic instruction. For the purposes of this definition, "trade, technical or
artistic instruction" shall be subjects which are not customarily offered in a secondary public
school curriculum. This definition shall include trade, business or vocational schools, as well as
colleges and universities.
EMPLOYEES - Whenever "employees" or the expression "number of employees" is herein
referred to, it shall mean the greatest number of persons to be employed in the building in question
during any season of the year and at any time of the day or night.
ENGINEER - A professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EPA - The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN - A plan which is designed to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WETLAND - Any wetland that meets the definition of "exceptional
value wetland" found in 25 Pa. Code § 105.17(1).
5-12
EXTENDED CARE FACILITY - A long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed
or approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Health and under federal regulations as a nursing
home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged, or a governmental medical institution.
FAA - The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACADE - A building face or wall.
FACADE, PRIMARY - The entire vertical area of the main structure usually fronting or facing
the primary public right-of-way.
FACILITY - A structure that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose.
FAMILY - An individual or individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption that maintain one
common household and live within one dwelling unit. Additionally, up to three unrelated
individuals who maintain a common household and live within one dwelling unit may be
considered a family, excluding group homes.
FARM - Any parcel of land containing 10 or more acres which is used for gain in the raising of
agricultural products, livestock, poultry or dairy products. It may include necessary farm structures
within the limits prescribed herein, and the storage of equipment used for agricultural purposes.
FARM DWELLING - The principal dwelling on a working farm and/or formerly working farm
where such dwelling existed as of the date of the enactment of this ordinance.
FARMERS MARKET - A periodic market held in an open area, parking lot, or structure as an
accessory use to an institutional use, public or semipublic use, or municipal use or supermarket at
which fruits, vegetables, breads, eggs, milk, cheese, meat, flowers, and the like are sold to the
public by persons who typically grow, harvest, or process such items from their farm or agricultural
operation. Value added products such as jam, beeswax candles or other handmade food products such as
baked goods may be sold but sellers of these goods may not comprise the majority of vendors. Flea markets,
yard sales and auctions are not considered farmers market. (Added by Ordinance 2016-06, dated 3/28/2016)
FARM OCCUPATION - An accessory use to the primary agricultural use of a property in which
residents engage in a secondary occupation conducted on an active farm.
FCC - The Federal Communications Commission.
FEEDLOT - An outside confined area designated and used for feeding or holding of more than 25
head of livestock, not including general pasture areas.
FENCE - A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation, an enclosure, or a visual
barrier that is constructed of wood, chain-link metal, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. This
definition does not include man-made barriers or walls constructed principally of masonry,
concrete, cinder block or similar materials.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION - A bank, savings-and-loan association, credit union, finance or loan
company, etc.
FLOOD - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overland flow of watercourses or other body of surface water, or from the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
5-13
FLOOD-FRINGE - The portion of the floodplain beyond the limits of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN - An area of land adjacent to the channel of a watercourse which has been or is
likely to be flooded, or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source by designation in accordance with the Floodplain Ordinance.
FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE -The Official Manheim Township Floodplain Ordinance.
FLOODWAY - The channel and adjacent overbank areas through which the primary floodwaters
are discharged. This portion of the floodplain is where the highest flood velocities and greatest
flood depths usually occur.
FLOOR AREA - The maximum amount of usable space within a building.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS - The sum of the floor areas of usable space within a building as measured
from the interior face of walls and including all areas intended and designed for the conduct of a
business or use.
FLOOR AREA, NET - The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator
shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading.
FOOD SCRAPS - The waste food products taken from supermarkets, grocery stores, food banks,
food distribution centers, school cafeterias and similar institutions. Food scraps do not include any
wastes of any kind generated by individual residents.
FORESTRY - The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with
accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and
selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FUNERAL HOME - A building devoted to the care, embalming, and holding of services for the
dead, including the sale of funeral equipment as an incidental part of the business. Funeral homes
shall not include cemeteries, columbariums, mausoleums or entombments, but do include
mortuaries and crematoriums as accessory uses.
GARAGE, PRIVATE - An accessory structure for the storage of one or more vehicles and/or other
vehicles accessory and incidental to the primary use of the premises; provided, however, that one
commercial vehicle of not more than three-quarter ton capacity may be stored therein where the
use of such vehicle is not incidental to the use of the premises. No business, occupation or service
shall be conducted therein.
GARAGE, PUBLIC - A structure or any portion thereof used for the parking and storage of
vehicles owned by the general public.
GARDEN POND - An artificially enclosed body of water or receptacle for water having a depth
of less than two feet that may be used or intended to be used as an ornamental feature constructed,
installed or maintained in or above the ground. It may include a fountain display, water plants or
fish.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM (GEOTHERMAL HEAT PUMPS) - An energy-generating
system that uses a heat pump in conjunction with the earth's thermal properties to heat and cool
buildings. Such systems may be categorized as or include:
5-14
A. BOREHOLES - A hole drilled or bored into the earth into which piping is inserted for use in
a closed-vertical-loop geothermal system.
B. CLOSED-LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM - A type of geothermal heating and/or cooling
system that utilizes a pressurized heat exchanger consisting of pipe, a circulating pump and
a water source heat pump in which the heat transfer fluid is not exposed to the atmosphere.
The heat transfer fluid is potable or beneficial reuse water and may have approved antifreeze
added.
C. OPEN-LOOP GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM - A type of geothermal heating and/or cooling
system that utilizes a water pump to deliver water from a well or other source to a heat
exchanger. The discharge water from the heat exchanger may be returned to the subsurface
through an injection or recharge well or infiltration bed or may be discharged into a pond,
lake or stream.
GOLF COURSE - A recreational area primarily used for playing golf and which has a minimum
of 5,000 yards of play in 18 holes or 2,500 yards in nine holes and which may include accessory
facilities such as a driving range, pro shop and/or restaurant.
GOODS - A finished product.
GOVERNING BODY - The Board of Commissioners.
GRADE PLANE - A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining
the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior
walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the
building and the lot line or, when the lot line is more than six feet (1,829 mm) from the building,
between the building and a point six feet (1,829 mm) from the building.
GREEN - A form of common open space which measures 3,000 square feet or larger in area and
may include features such as gazebos, sitting walls, pergolas, fountains, benches, landscaping,
lighting, sculptures and the like, and in which public seating, gathering, informal recreation and
the like takes place.
GREENWAYS - Linear corridors of open space and generally correspond to or link major river
or stream corridors (including adjoining floodplain, riparian buffers, and steep slope areas), old
railways or ridge tops, and are intended to function as part of an integrated system or network for
a variety of purposes, including protecting natural, cultural and scenic resources, providing
recreational benefits, enhancing the quality of life in neighborhoods, and stimulating economic
development opportunities. A base greenway system for Manheim Township is shown on the Trail
& Greenway System Map, Recreation, Park, Greenways, and Open Space Plan (2012-2022) as
amended as part of the Manheim Township Comprehensive Parks and Recreation Plan.
GROSS ACRES - The extent of surface area contained within the boundary of a property,
including existing public street rights-of-way.
5-15
GROUP HOME - A group of handicapped persons, as defined by the Fair Housing Act and the
Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as amended, living and cooking together in a singlefamily
detached dwelling operated by a responsible individual, family, or organization with a
program to provide a supportive living arrangement for individuals where special care is needed.
Group homes must be licensed where required by any appropriate government agencies, and a
copy of any such licenses must be delivered to the Township prior to beginning the use. Group
homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations by the Township as single-family
detached dwellings and in accordance with Section 2509.
HISTORIC BUILDING - A building which constitutes an historic resource and which is identified
on the Historic Resources Map.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION TRUST - The Historic Preservation Trust of Lancaster County.
HISTORIC RESOURCE - A building, structure, site, district or object which possesses historical
significance based on its architecture or its association with one or more historical events or
persons.
HOLIDAY TREE SALES - The offering of holiday trees for sale to the public from a temporary
structure or from a location out of doors where goods are not normally displayed as part of a
permanent, ongoing retail establishment.
HOME OCCUPATION - A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for financial gain
or profit and located entirely within a residential dwelling or within a detached private garage
located on a residential lot and in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, which use is
accessory, incidental, and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does
not change the residential character or appearance of the dwelling or detached garage.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION - An organization created by a real estate developer for the
purpose of controlling the appearance and managing any common area assets.
HOSPICE CARE FACILITY - A facility that is primarily engaged in providing care, including
inpatient care, to terminally ill individuals, is not structurally part of another health care or services
facility or hospital, and operates in accordance with 42 Code of Federal Regulations Part 418.
HOSPITAL - A facility, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a hospital, which
renders inpatient and outpatient medical care on a twenty-four-hours-per-day basis and provides
primary health services and medical/surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions. A hospital use can also include
attached and detached accessory uses, provided that all accessory uses are contained upon the
hospital property.
HOSPITAL, VETERINARY - Any establishment offering veterinary services. Animal hospitals
can treat all types of animals and can include overnight boarding of animals for medical or surgical
treatment.
HOTEL, FULL-SERVICE - A building or buildings containing rooms designated to be rented
temporarily for sleeping purposes by guests, which such facilities may include a full-service
kitchen and restaurant facility and meeting and conference facilities for use by the general public.
5-16
HOTEL, LIMITED-SERVICE - A building or buildings containing rooms designated to be rented
temporarily for sleeping purposes by guests, which such facilities shall not include a full-service
kitchen and restaurant facility or meeting and conference facilities for use by the general public,
but may include incidental kitchen and dining facilities and meeting facilities for use by hotel
guests.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP - A building, structure or group of buildings or structures, including
accessory uses, designed or intended for worship. This definition shall include a church, chapel,
cathedral, synagogue, temple, mosque or other facility that is principally used for prayer by
persons of similar beliefs; or a special purpose building that is architecturally designed and
particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting formal religious services on a regular
basis, and shall include cemeteries as an accessory use.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUSE WASTE - A portion of solid waste that would be considered hazardous
under the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. but for the fact that it is
produced in quantities smaller than those regulated as hazardous waste under the Solid Waste Management
Act and is generated by persons not otherwise covered as hazardous waste generators by the Solid Waste
Management Act.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - Any material that covers the land which inhibits the percolation of
stormwater directly into the soil, including, but not limited to, buildings, pavement, stone areas
and stormwater facilities that discharge stormwater off the site.
IMPROVEMENTS - Physical changes to the land, including, but not limited to,
buildings/structures, grading, paving, curbs, gutters, storm sewers and drains, stormwater
management facilities, improvements to existing watercourses, sidewalks, streets, signs,
monuments, water supply facilities and sewage disposal facilities.
INSTITUTE OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS - The Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) is an international educational and scientific association of transportation professionals who
are responsible for meeting mobility and safety needs. ITE facilitates the application of technology
and scientific principles to research, planning, functional design, implementation, operation,
policy development and management for any mode of ground transportation. Through its products
and services, ITE promotes professional development of its members, supports and encourages
education, stimulates research, develops public awareness programs and serves as a conduit for
the exchange of professional information.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY - A facility which provides, on a regular basis, health-related
care and services to individuals who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a
hospital or skilled nursing facility is designated to provide, but who, because of their mental or
physical condition, require care and services (above the level of room and board) which can be
made available to them only through institutional facilities such as these.
INVASIVE SPECIES - Plant species that are not native to an area and can cause harm to the
environment, to the economy and to human health as identified by the Pennsylvania Department
of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR).
ITE - See "Institution of Transportation Engineers."
5-17
JUNK - Any worn, cast off, discarded or stored material, including unlicensed vehicles,
machinery, and equipment, ready for destruction or which has been collected for salvage or
conversion to some use.
JUNKYARD - The land or structure, or part thereof, located on more than 200 square feet of lot
area, used primarily for the collecting, storage or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or
discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage or salvaging of machinery or
vehicles not in running condition and of parts thereof.
KENNEL - Any lot on which more than five animals as specified in Section 2101 that are older
than six months (except related to a farm) are kept, boarded, raised, bred, treated or trained for a
fee, including, but not limited to, dog or cat kennels. Operations of kennels shall comply with the
Dog Law, Act of December 7, 1982, P.L. 784, No. 225, as amended, 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., and
all applicable regulations of the Department of Agriculture.
LANCASTER INTERMUNICIPAL COMMITTEE - The Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee
(LIMC) is a council of governments established to address intermunicipal challenges and concerns
in central Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. It encourages and facilitates intermunicipal
cooperation, undertakes projects that will benefit its member municipalities, and provides a forum
for municipal officials to discuss issues of mutual interest.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless
of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(2) The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
B. A subdivision of land.
C. Development in accordance with the following shall be excluded from land development
procedures:
(1) The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such units are
intended to be a condominium;
(2) The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot or lots
subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(3) The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an enterprise
which would be considered an amusement park. For purposes of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly
acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
5-18
been approved by proper authorities.
LANDOWNER - The legal, beneficial or equitable owner or owners of land, including the holder
of an option or contact to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
conditions), a lessee, if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other persons having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT - A landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPE SCREEN - A completely planted visual barrier composed of a combination of
shrubs, trees or earthen berms arranged to form both a low-level and a high-level screen.
LANDSCAPING - Includes, but is not limited to, grass or ground cover, and other plantings such
as trees and shrubs, and may also include mulch and/or decorative stone.
LANDSCAPING STONES - Decorative stones 1/2 inch or larger in diameter placed on a property
for landscaping purposes, not including driveways, sidewalks, patios, and/or walkways. Surface
area covered by landscaping stones would be considered pervious.
LIMC - See "Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee."
LINEAR TRAIL - A nonmotorized pathway, separated from the road, designed for recreational
activities like walking, biking and horseback riding. (See also "nonmotorized paths.")
LINE, BUILDING SETBACK - See "building setback line."
LINE, BUILD-TO - A setback line which dictates the placement of principal buildings and
structures, as measured from a front lot line, private street, or public right-of-way. The build-to
line does not apply to building projections or recesses.
LINE, FRONT LOT - The line separating such lot from any street or other public right-of-way.
LINE, INTERIOR LOT - Any lot line other than one adjoining a street.
LINE, LOT/PROPERTY - A recorded boundary of a lot forming the front, rear and sides of lots.
Any property line which abuts a street or other public right-of-way shall be measured from the
right-of-way.
LINE, REAR LOT - That lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front line. But, in
the case of corner lots, the owner shall, for the purpose of this ordinance, have the privilege of
selecting any lot line other than one of the front lot lines to be the rear lot line, provided that such
choice, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, will not be injurious to the existing or to the desirable
future development of adjacent property. The rear lot line of any irregular or triangular lot shall,
for the purpose of this ordinance, be a line entirely within the lot, 10 feet long.
LINE, SIDE LOT - Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LIVESTOCK - Any living creature maintained for commercial use or profit, but not maintained
as a pet.
LIVE-WORK UNIT - A commercial use, such as a shop, studio, office, or other place of business,
in combination with dwelling units located above such place of business. A person or persons other
5-19
than the proprietor of the business may occupy a live-work unit.
LOADING SPACE - A paved, off-street space logically and conveniently located for the
temporary loading or unloading of goods and having direct usable access to a street, access drive
or alley. Off-street loading spaces do not count towards off-street parking requirements and shall
not infringe on any required buffer planting strip.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY - An institution or a distinct part of an institution which is
licensed or approved under the Commonwealth Department of Health and Federal Regulations to
provide health care and medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more
patients. A long-term care facility may be either an extended care facility or an intermediate care
facility.
LOT - A parcel of land held in single and separate ownership, occupied or capable of being
occupied by buildings, structures, accessory buildings or structures, signs, and uses customarily
incidental to it, including such open spaces as required, and which is described by reference on a
recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
LOT AREA - The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels of land.
LOT AREA, GROSS - The total area of a lot that is the subject of an application for land
development.
LOT AREA, NET - The area of a lot, excluding any area within a street right-of-way, but including
the area of any easements or floodplain.
LOT, CORNER - A parcel of land at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting
streets. Such lot shall be considered as having as many front yards as there are streets to which it
abuts.
LOT COVERAGE - A percentage of the lot area covered by an impervious surface, including
buildings, driveways, parking areas, and sidewalks.
LOT DEPTH - The horizontal distance measured between the street right-of-way line and the
average rear property line. On reverse frontage lots, the depth shall be measured from the street
right-of-way line of the street of address to the directly opposite property line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE - A lot with front and rear street frontage with possible vehicular
access to both streets. Double frontage lots shall have two front yards and two side yards.
LOT, FLAG - A lot not fronting on or abutting a public road and where access to the public road
is by a narrow, private right-of-way.
LOT, FRONTAGE OF - Distance measured along the front lot line. When a lot fronts on a curved
street, the frontage shall be determined by utilizing the arc distance.
LOT, INTERIOR - A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street.
LOT, NONCONFORMING - A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the
adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
5-20
LOT OF RECORD - A lot identified on a subdivision plan or on a deed or other instrument of
conveyance recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
LOT, PERCENTAGE OF - The maximum impervious area of any building, structure or use,
expressed as a percentage of a lot area.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE - A lot that abuts public rights-of-way to the front and rear of the
property, where vehicular access is prohibited to and from the higher classified street. The yard
abutting the higher classified street shall be considered a rear yard.
LOT SIZE - The required area of a lot.
LOT WIDTH - The horizontal distance measured between side property lines. Unless otherwise
noted, lot width shall be measured at the building setback line and the street line.
MAILBOX CENTER - An accessory structure used as a joint mailbox for the residents of a
condominium community, in lieu of individual mailboxes.
MAIN STREET COMMERCIAL AREA - An area of a development characterized by a mix of
nonresidential and residential uses in buildings that have ground-floor storefronts, are a minimum
of two stories or 20 feet in height, and located close to a right-of-way. The streetscape of a Main
Street area is pedestrian friendly in that it includes on-street parking, sidewalks, crosswalks, street
trees, pedestrian-scale lighting, and amenities oriented to the pedestrian.
MANUFACTURE - A process whereby substances, raw materials, and/or semifinished materials
are chemically, mechanically, or otherwise transformed to goods and products that have some
economic value.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A fully prefabricated, transportable, single-family detached
dwelling unit intended for household occupancy contained in one or more units designed to be
joined into one integral unit, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and household furnishings. It is
constructed as required by the Township Building Code and shall be placed on a permanent
foundation with the same, or equivalent, electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities as for a
conventional stick-built single-family detached dwelling. A manufactured home may include any
addition or accessory structure, such as porches, sheds, or decks, which is attached to it.
MANURE - The fecal and urinary excrement of livestock and poultry, often containing some
spilled feed, bedding or litter.
MANURE STORAGE FACILITIES - A detached structure or other improvement built to store
manure for future use or disposal. Types of storage facilities are as follows: underground storage,
in-ground storage, earthen bank, stacking area, and aboveground storage.
MASSAGE - The manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping
by hand, mechanical device, or other means.
5-21
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT - An establishment which provides the services of massage,
except where operated by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical therapist
licensed by the commonwealth or a qualified massage therapist. This definition does not include
an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment
where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory
service. "Massage establishment" shall not include adult establishments as defined herein.
MASTER SITE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT - A development option permitted in accordance
with Article XXIV, Section 2406, in the T-5 Oregon Village Overlay.
MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY - The maximum density of residential development
permitted with the acquisition of transferable development rights.
MINI WAREHOUSE - A building and/or series of buildings divided into separate storage units
for personal property and/or property associated with some business or other organization. These
units shall be used solely for dead storage, and no processing, manufacturing, sales, research and
development testing, service and repair or other nonstorage activities shall be permitted.
MOBILE HOME - A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy,
contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. Mobile homes do not include recreational
vehicles.
MOBILE HOME LOT - A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary
utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home, which is sold or leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on
the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated
and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile
homes.
MODEL HOME - A dwelling unit in a new residential subdivision, typically built first and used
as a sales office for the development.
MONOPOLE TOWER - A telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole constructed
without guy wires .
MORTUARY - See "funeral home."
MOTEL (MOTOR LODGE) - See "hotel, full-service" or "hotel, limited-service," as applicable.
MOTOR VEHICLE - A self-propelled device, except that which uses human power only, used for
the transporting of persons or goods. This would include automobiles, trucks, boats, trailers, farm
equipment, all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies, and snowmobiles.
5-22
MOTOR VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL - A licensed, motorized vehicle designed for transportation
of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight, animals or passengers and operated in conjunction
with a business, occupation, or home occupation. This term shall include, but is not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, tractor-trailers, and vans.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AREA - An open area, other than a public or private street, right-ofway
or driveway, used for the display or sale or lease of new and used motor vehicles, boats,
trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, farm equipment, construction equipment, and accessories
and where no repair work is done.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES BUILDING - Any premises or structure used for the sale, lease or
renting of motor vehicles, boats, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, farm equipment,
construction equipment, and accessories.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION OR GARAGE - Any premises used for supplying
gasoline, oil, motor vehicle accessories, motor vehicle services or motor vehicle repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION OR GARAGE, NEIGHBORHOOD - A motor vehicle
service station or garage that is limited in the intensity of use to serve primarily the immediately
surrounding neighborhood. Such facilities shall be limited to five fuel dispensers serving no greater
than 10 motor vehicles at any one time and/or two indoor service bays servicing no greater than
two motor vehicles at any one time.
MOTOR VEHICLE WASHING FACILITY - Any premises used for the washing and/or cleaning
of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, and accessories.
MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING - The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles, trucks,
trailers, farm equipment, or construction equipment, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles and equipment or their parts.
MPC - See "Municipalities Planning Code."
MULTIMUNICIPAL PLAN - A plan developed and adopted by any number of contiguous
municipalities, including a joint municipal plan as authorized by this ordinance, except that all of
the municipalities participating in the plan need not be contiguous.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER - A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the Township of Manheim.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE - The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY - Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
NEOTRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD - A pedestrian-oriented neighborhood developed using
traditional town planning principles and characterized by a hierarchical network of well-connected
streets and alleys, a variety of public and civic spaces, including a central green or square, a mix
of dwelling unit types, on-street parking, and nonresidential uses generally located within a
discernible center or Main Street area that is within walking distance of the residences.
5-23
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS - A business or commercial activity administered or
conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and
which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup,
delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated with
residential use.
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling of inventory.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business.
E. The business or activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television
reception.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge which is not
normally associated with residential use.
G. The business activity conducted may not occupy more than 25% of the floor area.
H. The business activity may not involve any illegal activity.
NONMOTORIZED PATH - A path intended for use by pedestrian and bicyclists, but not by any
motorized vehicles. It is a path that runs parallel to the street, but is separated from it. (See also
"linear trail.")
NORMAL FARMING OPERATIONS - The customary and generally accepted activities,
practices and procedures that farms and dairies adopt, use or engage in year after year in the
production and preparation for market of poultry, livestock and their products and in the
production, harvesting and preparation for market of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities, if the operations are conducted in
compliance with applicable laws, and if the use or disposal of these materials will not pollute the
air, water or other natural resources of this commonwealth. The term includes the storage and
utilization of agricultural and food-processing wastes on land where the materials will improve the
condition of soil, the growth of crops or in the restoration of the land for the same purposes.
OFFICE, MEDICAL OR DENTAL - A facility for human ailments operated by a group of statelicensed
physicians, dentists, chiropractors, or other licensed practitioners for the treatment and
examination of outpatients, provided that no patients shall be kept overnight on the premises. As
an accessory use, this use may involve the testing of tissue, blood or other human materials for
medical or dental purposes.
OFFICE PARK - A large tract of land that has been planned, developed, and operated as an
integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings and supporting ancillary uses, with
special attention given to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL - A facility where the primary use is conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service, or government, including administration, recordkeeping, clerical
work, and similar business functions. An office shall not involve manufacturing, fabrication,
5-24
production, processing, assembling, cleaning, testing, repair, or storage of materials, goods or
products or the sale or delivery of any materials, goods, or products which are physically located
on the premises. Office supplies used in the office may be stored as an incidental use. "Professional
office use" shall not include medical or dental offices.
OFFICIAL MAP - An Official Map prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended.
OPEN AREA - The required ground surface which must remain uncovered by building and/or
paved surfaces, the extent of which is expressed as a percentage of the lot size.
OPEN SPACE - Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside,
dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and
enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON - See "common open space."
OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER - A fuel-burning appliance or device, also known as an
"outdoor wood boiler," "outdoor wood-burning boiler," or "outdoor wood heater," that burns less
than 350,000 BTUs per hour and:
A. Is designed to burn clean wood or clean wood pellets, home heating oil, natural gas, propane,
or other DEP-approved fuel;
B. Is specified by the manufacturer for outdoor installation or installation within a structure not
normally intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals; and
C. Produces heat or hot water for a structure or building through the distribution, typically
through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a mixture of water and
antifreeze.
PA DCNR - The Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
PA DEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PA UCC – The Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
PARK - A tract of land designated and used for active or passive recreation.
PARK-AND-RIDE LOT - A parking lot intended primarily for use by persons riding mass transit
or carpooling.
PARKING GARAGE/DECK/COMPOUND - A covered or enclosed space used exclusively for
the parking of passenger vehicles for short-term, daily, or overnight off-street parking and
connected to a street by an access drive. This shall include parking garages, decks, and compounds.
Vehicles shall be limited to currently registered and inspected vehicles.
PARKING LOT - An accessory use provided on a lot for the use of the general public designated
for short-term parking of vehicles. Vehicles shall be limited to currently registered and inspected
vehicles.
PARKING, PRIVATE - An off-street parking area or structure owned and operated by an entity
for the sole use of its residents, customers, employees, or other visitors and not open to the general
5-25
public.
PARKING, PUBLIC - An off-street parking area or structure owned and operated for use by the
general public.
PARKING SPACE - An impervious space available for the parking of one motor vehicle and
having usable impervious access to a street, access drive or alley.
PARK, MINI - A form of common open space measuring between 10,000 square feet and two
acres that is intended for a mix of active and passive recreation and may include play equipment
or play court areas.
PARK, NEIGHBORHOOD - A form of common open space that is a minimum of two acres in
size and provides a mix of active and passive recreation.
PARK, PUBLIC - See "public park."
PATIO - An unroofed area or courtyard which shall not be completely enclosed, except for any
side which may adjoin a structure or be lined by fences, walls, shrubs, or hedges. Outdoor areas
covered by a roof, trellis, or fixed awning shall be considered to be a structure and not a patio. For
the purposes of this ordinance, a patio is considered to be an impervious surface and part of the
principal building.
PAVED AREA - Any impervious paving or other durable surface for, including but not limited
to, driveways, sidewalks and parking facilities, exclusive of the building footprint, the permitted
extent of which is expressed as a percentage of the lot size.
PENNDOT - Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERMIT - A license issued by the recognized official or authoritative agency, as specified in the
respective regulations, which permits the applicant to proceed with the work certified by said
official or authoritative agency in the permit application.
PERMIT AREA - The area of land and water within the boundaries of the permit that is designated
on the permit application maps as approved by the DEP. The term includes areas that are or will
be used or affected by the residual waste processing or disposal facility.
PERSON - The term shall be construed to include an individual, firm, copartner, or corporation,
partnership, association or any other similar entity.
PERSONAL CARE HOME - Residential facilities inspected and licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare that offer personal care services, assistance and supervision to four
or more persons. Personal care homes include assisted living facilities and some retirement homes
or communities and are not considered medical facilities.
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS - Shops, including but not limited to a barber, beauty shop,
nail salon, tailor, dressmaking, shoe repair, photographer, travel agency or similar service uses,
including a dry-cleaning storefront for pickup and drop-off, but excluding a dry-cleaning
establishment. This definition includes incidental uses and additional related cosmetic and/or
beauty services such as facials, waxing and the minor retail sale of cosmetic products. Personal
Service Businesses do not include adult establishments as defined herein.
5-26
PESTICIDE - Any substance or mixture of substances intended for use in preventing, destroying,
repelling, sterilizing, or mitigating any insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory animals, fungi,
weeds, or other forms of plant or animal life.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT - Oil petroleum of any kind and in any form, including crude oil and
derivatives of crude oil. It may be alone, as a sludge, as oil refuse, or mixed with other wastes.
PLAN - A drawing which shows the location, character and dimensions of the proposed occupancy
and related roadway features, including layouts, profiles, cross sections, drainage and other details
as specified in this ordinance.
PLAN, FINAL - A complete and exact subdivision or land development plan prepared for official
recording as required by statute; a final plan/plat.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT - An area of land, controlled by a landowner, to
be developed as a single entity for a variety of dwelling units or a combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, or type
of dwelling or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations
established in any one residential district created, from time to time, under the provisions of this
ordinance.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The Manheim Township Planning Commission, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF - The technical staff of the Manheim Township Planning
Commission.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY - A subdivision or land development plan indicating the approximate
proposed layout of a subdivision or land development as a basis for consideration prior to
preparation of the final plan(s); a preliminary plan/plat.
PLAN, SKETCH - A plan of a subdivision or land development showing the tentative street and
lot layout, to be used for informal discussion with the Planning Commission/staff prior to
preparation of the preliminary and/or final plan(s).
PLAN, TENTATIVE - A subdivision or land development plan indicating the approximate
proposed layout of a subdivision or land development as a basis for consideration prior to
preparation of the final plan(s); a tentative plan/plat.
PLANTING STRIP - A strip of required yard space adjacent to a property line or right-of-way
planted in grass, shrubs, trees or other plant material.
PLAT - The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final.
PLAY AREA - A form of common open space that is intended for active recreation and may
include play equipment or play court areas and measures a minimum of 10,000 square feet in area.
PLAZA - A form of common open space which typically ranges from 1,000 to 3,000 square feet
in size and characterized as a predominantly paved space, designed and maintained with pavers,
benches, plantings and other landscape features.
5-27
POCKET PARK - A small gathering place, typically less than 1,000 square feet, that is designed
and maintained with features such as benches, plantings, and other landscape features.
PORCH - A roofed-over structure projecting from the front, side, or rear wall of a building. For
the purpose of this ordinance, a porch is considered a part of the principal building and is not
permitted to extend into any required yards.
PRD - Planned residential development in accordance with Article XIX.
PREFERRED LOCATION SITES - Locations for the siting of telecommunications facilities that
meet one or more of the criteria contained in Section 2516.3 of this ordinance.
PREMISES - Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building constructed thereon.
PREPARED FOODS - Foodstuffs and/or beverages which have been cooked, changed, cleaned,
or otherwise altered for public consumption.
PRESERVATION - When used in connection with natural and historic resources, shall include
means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be
interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful uses of
natural resources.
PRIMARY FACADE - The facade(s) of a building located along a public right-of-way. On a
corner lot, there shall be two primary facades, one of which shall be designed with a front entrance
door.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND/SOILS - Land used for agricultural purposes that contains soils
of the first, second or third class as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural
Resources Conservation Service County Soil Survey.
PRIVATE RECREATION AREA - See "recreation area."
PROCESSING - A function involved in the manufacturing of goods or products in which the
material used is not physically changed except for packaging or sizing.
PRODUCT - Any article whose appearance or composition has been changed or altered but not in
a complete form for ultimate disposition.
PRODUCTION - A function involved in the manufacturing and/or packaging of materials, goods,
or products, in which they are physically changed.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANT - Persons who provide expert or professional advice,
including, but not limited to, architects, attorneys, certified public accountants, engineers,
geologists, land surveyors, landscape architects or planners.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR - A surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC GROUNDS - Includes:
A. Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, and other recreation and public areas;
B. Sites for public schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal, and other publicly owned or
operated facilities; and
5-28
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING - A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Board of
Commissioners, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in
accordance with the Township provisions.
PUBLIC NOTICE - A notice of a public hearing and/or meeting published in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
PUBLIC PARK/RECREATION - A park or other recreation facility which is established by an
entity, the members of the governing body of which are all:
A. Elected public officials within the meaning of the "Ethics Act," 65 P.S. § 401 et seq., as now
or hereafter amended and supplemented; or
B. Appointed by persons who are elected public officials as described in Subsection A above.
PUBLIC SEWER - A municipal sanitary sewer or a comparable common or package sanitary
facility approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Such systems are capable of serving multiple users.
PUBLIC SPACE - A lot or area of land outside the building, dedicated or devoted to public use.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SHELTER - A small structure with a roof used by passengers
awaiting the arrival of public transportation that provides cover or protection, as from weather.
Any associated advertisements shall comply with the appropriate sign regulations for public use.
PUBLIC USES - Public and nonprofit semipublic use of a welfare and educational nature, such as
schools, parks, houses of worship, cemeteries, historical landmarks, nonprofit recreational
facilities. For the purposes of this definition, fire stations and public utilities shall be considered
municipal uses.
PUBLIC UTILITY - A use which is operated, owned or maintained by a public utility corporation
and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission in accordance with the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Code, 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., or which is operated, owned
or maintained by a municipality or a municipal authority organized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to provide public water service, public sewer service or similar
services. A public utility shall not include cellular telephone transmission facilities and similar
facilities or entities which are not governmentally owned and operated or not regulated by the
Public Utility Commission.
PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATION - Any facility, equipment, or structure necessary to conduct
a service by a government or public utility, including telephone, electric, and cable television lines,
poles, equipment and structures; water or gas pipes, mains, valves, or structures; sewer pipes,
valves, or structures; pumping stations; telephone exchanges and repeater stations; and microwave
antenna and related structures. This definition does not include line replacement installations.
PUBLIC WATER - A municipal water supply system or a comparable common water facility
approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Such
systems are capable of serving multiple users.
5-29
QUALIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST - An individual who:
A. Has graduated from a massage school that is accredited and licensed as a private school by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by any state within the United States of America and
which requires the successful completion of a program of at least 500 hours of supervised
instruction; and
B. Holds and maintains a current certification by the National Certification Board of
Therapeutic Massage and Body Work or its successor or a national certification program
maintaining similar standards.
RECEIVING AREA - A zoning district in which transferable development rights from a sending
area are intended to be used. Manheim Township has designated all parcels of five (5) acres or
greater within the T-4, T-5, T-6, D-R, D-C, and D-A Overlays, Residential District R-1, the
Residential District R-2, the Residential District R-3 and the Planned Residential Development
District (PRD), under the PRD provisions, as receiving areas.
RECREATION - Activities, whether structured or not, in which individuals customarily engage
during their leisure for play, relaxation or athletic purposes, such as sporting activities, hobbies,
reading or walking.
RECREATION, ACTIVE - Recreation activities, including the facilities used for such activities,
that are usually rigorously athletic and have the potential for a noticeable impact on the
surrounding neighborhood and environment. Active recreation may include, but is not limited to,
individual or team sports, playgrounds/tot lots, ball courts, play fields, trails, nonmotorized paths,
and swimming pools.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicular-type portable structure without permanent
foundation, which can be towed, hauled, or driven and is designed primarily as temporary living
accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use and includes but is not limited to travel
trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
RECREATION AREA - A private or public space, including essential buildings and structures,
used for play and/or recreation by individuals.
REDEVELOPMENT - Any external alteration, enlargement or extension of a building or use by
30% or more of the floor area of the building or 30% or more of the lot area, including the
cumulative total of any external demolition, new construction, alteration, enlargement or extension
of a building approved from the date of adoption of this ordinance.
REGIONAL STORMWATER FACILITY - A stormwater management facility designed to
manage stormwater runoff from an area larger than a single project site. A regional stormwater
facility could capture stormwater runoff from two adjacent parcels, an entire watershed, or some
defined area in between. A regional stormwater facility can be designed as part of new
development or as a retrofit to manage runoff from already developed areas.
REHABILITATION - The process of returning an historic resource to a useful state for either its
original use or an appropriate new use.
5-30
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE - Any method, process or substance whose supply is
rejuvenated through natural processes and, subject to those natural processes, remains relatively
constant, including, but not limited to, biomass conversion, geothermal energy, solar and wind
energy and hydroelectric energy, and excluding those sources of energy used in the fission and
fusion processes.
REPAIR - The replacement of damaged or defective existing construction, not including
alterations or additions.
RESTAURANT - A public eating place primarily offering indoor or outdoor counter or table
service seating and custom-prepared foods for on-premises consumption.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-THROUGH - An establishment that serves prepared food
generally packaged in paper wrappers and/or disposable plates and containers. Such food can be
consumed in automobiles parked on the premises, whether brought to said automobiles by the
customers or by the employees of the restaurant, or for consumption at some location other than
inside the restaurant building itself.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD - An establishment whose principal business is the sale of prepared
or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption
either within the restaurant building or off premises. Such establishments do not provide waiter or
waitress service. It is not to include the sale of alcoholic beverages. It often includes drive-through
or carry-out facilities.
RESTORATION - The process of returning an historic resource to its appearance at a particular
point in history.
RETAIL - Those businesses whose primary activities involve the display and sales of goods and
products to the general public. This term shall not include adult establishments or body art
establishments as defined herein.
RETAIL SALES - Business establishments whose principal activities involve the display and sale
of goods and products to the general public. This term shall not include adult establishments or
body art establishments as defined herein.
RETAIL SERVICES - Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to goods
or merchandise, to the general public. This term shall include personal service businesses, but not
include adult establishments or body art establishments as defined herein.
RETIREMENT HOME OR COMMUNITY - An integrated development that provides a variety
of living arrangements for the elderly or physically handicapped. Retirement communities may
also provide for on-site medical care, accessory commercial and social uses, so long as those uses
are scaled to primarily serve the inhabitants of the site.
RIGHT-OF-WAY - The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street, alley,
pedestrianway, or for other public or private use.
5-31
RIPARIAN BUFFER - Undisturbed riparian land adjacent to a natural watercourse and other
bodies of water for the purpose of stabilizing banks, filtering pollutants from runoff and for
providing habitat for a variety of wildlife. This is not intended to include man-made swales or
detention facilities utilized solely for stormwater management from the project site.
ROOMING HOUSE - See "boardinghouse."
SATELLITE ANTENNA - A parabolic reflector, together with its pedestal and any other
attachments and parts thereof, commonly referred to as a "dish-shaped antenna," used or intended
to receive radio or electromagnetic waves from an overhead satellite.
SCHOOL, BUSINESS - A secondary or higher education facility teaching primarily usable skills
that prepares students for jobs in business.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY - Any school licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Education
and which meets the requirements for elementary education for grades K through 6.
SCHOOL, SECONDARY - Any school licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Education
and which is authorized to award diplomas for secondary education for grades 7 through 12.
SEATS - Whenever the word "seats" is referred to, it shall mean the seating capacity of a particular
building as determined by the plans filed with the Zoning Officer; in the event individual seats are
not provided, each 20 inches of benches or similar accommodations shall be considered as one
seat for the purpose of this ordinance.
SENDING AREA - A zoning district containing the land-based resource which the transferable
development rights program is designed to protect and from which transferable development rights
will be sent. Manheim Township has designated the Agricultural District as the sending area.
SERVICES - An act by which skills of one person are utilized for the benefit of another, provided
no function involves the manufacture, cleaning, repair, storage, or distribution of products or
goods, except for the cleaning and repairing of clothing and personal accessories.
SETBACK - The required horizontal distance between a setback line and a property or street rightof-
way line.
SETBACK, FRONT YARD - The required minimum yard area contained between the street rightof-
way line, private street, or common open space (when such principal structure is oriented
towards the common open space) and the principal structure. On corner lots, there shall be two
front yards, being the area contained between the street right-of-way lines and the principal
structure.
SETBACK LINE - A line within a property and parallel to a property or street line which delineates
the required minimum distance between a structure and that property or street line.
SETBACK, REAR YARD - The required minimum yard area contained between the rear property
line and the principal structure. On corner and reverse frontage lots, the rear yard shall be
considered that area between the principal structure and the property line directly opposite the
street of address.
5-32
SETBACK, SIDE YARD - The required minimum yard area between a principal structure and the
adjacent side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED DEVICES - Without limitation, any artificial or stimulated specified
anatomical area or other devices or paraphernalia that are designed in whole or part for specified
sexual activities.
SHOPPING CENTER - A group of at least five retail, office and other uses permitted within the
respective zoning district that are planned, designed, constructed, and managed as a unit where
each establishment has a separate customer entrance from the parking lot or street and where offstreet
parking is shared and provided on site.
SIDEWALK - A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the
vehicular travel way, that is an integral part of the right-of-way and used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIDEWALK DISPLAY - The outdoor display of merchandise for sale by a commercial
establishment. The displayed merchandise shall only be merchandise sold by the establishment
and must be similar to the merchandise sold within the establishment.
SIGHT DISTANCE - The length of road visible to the driver of a passenger vehicle at any given
point in the road when viewing is unobstructed.
SIGHT TRIANGLE - A triangle-shaped portion of land established at a street intersection on
which nothing above 30 inches shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to limit or obstruct the clear sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the
intersection.
SIGN - A device for visual communication that is used to bring the subject to the attention of the
public. Signs include lettering, logos, trademarks, or other symbols which are an integral part of
the architectural design of a building, which are applied to a building, or which are located
elsewhere on the premises; flags and insignia of civic, charitable, religious, fraternal, patriotic, or
similar organizations; insignia or flags of governments or government agencies; banners,
streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, and similar materials; and inflatable
objects. Signs do not include architectural features which may be identified with a particular
business; backlit awnings that include no lettering, logos, or other symbols; signs within a building
which are obviously intended to be seen primarily from within the building; outdoor signs intended
for use within a property, such as menu signs by fast-food restaurant drive-through lanes, signs
with regulations within a park; decorative seasonal and holiday banners on residential properties;
and displays of merchandise either behind store windows or outdoors. Refer to Article XVIII for
individual sign definitions.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM - An energy conversion system, including appurtenances, which
converts solar energy to a usable form of energy to meet all or part of the energy requirements of
the on-site residential user.
SOLID WASTE - Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including, but not limited to,
solid, semisolid, contained gaseous and liquid waste materials resulting from municipal, industrial,
commercial, agricultural, institutional, public and residential activities. Such wastes shall not
include biological excrement nor hazardous waste materials as defined in the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 40, Chapter 1, Part 261, dated July 1, 1984, or as amended, provided, however,
5-33
that the exclusion of hazardous waste shall not include household hazardous waste.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES AND FACILITIES - A solid waste management
and ancillary service use provided by a corporate or political body organized under the Municipal
Authorities Act of 1945 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or such similar or successor statute
as may be enacted, for the systematic control of generation, collection, storage, transport, source
separation, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery and disposal of solid waste, including
facilities for the incineration of solid waste, transfer stations and compressed natural gas (“CNG”)
service stations used primarily to fuel vehicles used in connection with solid waste management
services, however, use of the fast-fill CNG service station may include selected outside fleets,
including private fleets and municipal- and government-owned vehicles. The general public and
individually owned vehicles shall not be permitted to use the CNG fast-fill service station.
SPECIAL EVENT - A temporary event held indoors or outdoors on private or public property
such as an auction, flea market, festival, carnival, meal, holiday event or fund-raising event, but
not including any recurring event, such as sporting or social events.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION - A use to be permitted or denied by the Manheim Township Zoning
Hearing Board in a particular zoning district pursuant to expressed standards and criteria.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
areolae, and/or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - For the purposes of this ordinance, this term shall include
any of the following:
A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture
in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty,
pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or
D. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
E. Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
SQUARE - A form of common open space, typically ranging from 3,000 to 10,000 square feet in
area, that is designed and maintained with pavers, benches, plantings and other landscape features.
STABLE - A structure that is used for the shelter or care of horses, cattle, or other large animals.
STEEP SLOPE - A natural geographical area, whether on one or more lots, which has a ratio of
5-34
vertical distance to horizontal distance of greater than 15%, based on two-foot contour intervals
and measured over a minimum of three contours (six feet) and 500 square feet of area.
STEEP SLOPE, MODERATE - Any area defined as a "steep slope," where the slope measures
from 15% to less than 25%.
STEEP SLOPE, SEVERE - Any area defined as a "steep slope," where the slope measures 25%
or greater.
STORAGE - A function involving the depositing of materials, goods or products for safekeeping.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE - The Official Manheim Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
STORY - That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above it and including basements used for the principal use.
STORY, HEIGHT OF - The vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or
finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the
ceiling joists or, when there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
STREET - A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, serving
primarily as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, and furnishing access to abutting
properties, which may also be used to provide space for sewers, public utilities, street trees, and
sidewalks.
STREET, ARTERIAL - A street whose primary function is to serve comparatively high volumes
of through traffic at speeds higher than desirable on collector and local streets.
STREET, COLLECTOR (MAJOR) - A street which provides access to abutting properties and for
intercommunity travel, connecting borough and unincorporated population centers, and carrying
large volumes of traffic to the arterial street system.
STREET, COLLECTOR (MINOR) - A street which provides access to abutting properties and
routes to local community facilities, serves as the main entrance or circulation street in residential
subdivisions, and serves small rural settlements.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC - A local street intersecting another street at one end and terminating at
the other in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET, LIMITED-ACCESS HIGHWAY - A special type of arterial street on which access is
provided only from another street and not from abutting properties.
STREET LINE - A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and separating the street from
abutting property or lots. The street line shall be the same as the right-of-way line.
STREET, LOCAL - A street used primarily to provide access to abutting properties.
STREET, MARGINAL-ACCESS - A local street parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector
street, providing access to abutting properties and control of intersections with collector or arterial
streets.
5-35
STREET, PRIVATE - A street not offered for dedication or whose dedication was not accepted
by the Township.
STREETSCAPE - The physical elements within and along the street right-of-way that define its
appearance, character and function, including adjacent buildings and land uses, street lighting and
furniture, landscaping, street trees, sidewalks, and on-street parking. Physically, the streetscape is
bound by the space between building facades and/or street walls on either side of a street right-ofway.
STREET WALL - The physical wall that is formed when building facades and other approved
architectural or landscaping elements are located uniformly along a build-to line at the edge of the
street right-of-way. The street wall defines the outer boundaries of the streetscape and may be
comprised of elements such as walls, fences, or hedges, when an existing building is already set
back from the street.
STRUCTURE - Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or
water, whether or not affixed to the land, including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds, cabins,
mobile homes, trailers, dams, culverts, roads, railroads, bridges, storage tanks, solar energy
systems, wind energy systems, signs and transmission or receiving towers or dishes.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY - A detached subordinate structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to that of the principal structure or building and which is located on the
same lot as that occupied by the principal building or structure.
STRUCTURE, EXISTING - Any structure, building, silo, smokestack, water tower, utility or
power pole, church steeple, or a support structure other than an existing antenna tower or
telecommunications tower.
STRUCTURE, HEIGHT OF - The vertical distance from the average grade to the top of the highest
point of structures, other than principal or accessory buildings, such as, but not limited to,
telecommunications towers, light poles, flagpoles, silos, and water tanks.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING - A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed
to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in this ordinance, or amendment
heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL - A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on
which the structure is located, including any attached structures, such as garages, decks, patios,
etc.
SUBDIVIDER - See "developer."
5-36
SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two
or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devises, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement or access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempt.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE - The Official Manheim
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
SUPERMARKET - A store of 10,000 square feet or greater used primarily for the retail sale of
food products while also providing for the retail sale of household merchandise typically used in
day-to-day activities.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN - A plan showing all present and proposed grades and facilities
for stormwater drainage.
SURVEYOR - A professional land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE - Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing
that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and onground
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. Farm ponds and/or lakes are not included.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC - Any open or enclosed place open to the public for swimming or
recreational bathing, whether or not a fee is charged for admission or for the use thereof.
TDR - See "transferable development right."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY - A facility containing antennas and towers, either
individually or together, including all incidental structures and fenced areas.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER - A structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or
monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other
permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennas intended for
transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service
or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, commoncarrier
towers, and cellular telephone towers.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER, ATTACHED - An antenna mounted on an existing
structure, building, silo, smokestack, water tower, utility or power pole, or a support structure other
than an existing antenna tower or telecommunications tower.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT - The height of a telecommunications tower shall
be measured from the average grade at the tower base to the highest point of the tower. The average
grade shall be the average grade existing at the time of construction or the average grade existing
prior to construction and prior to any earth disturbance at the site. No person(s) shall artificially
increase the maximum height of a telecommunications tower by altering the grade at the base of
the tower by any means. Overall antenna tower height includes the base pad, mounting structures,
whip antennas and panel antennas, but shall exclude lightning rods.
5-37
TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES - The offering of goods for sale to the public from a temporary
structure or from a location out of doors where goods are not normally displayed as part of a
permanent, ongoing retail establishment. Examples of temporary retail sales include the selling of
flowers before and on holidays such as Mother's Day and the sale of fireworks on Independence
Day.
THEATER CHURCH - A portion of a movie theater used on a limited and secondary basis for
religious and/or spiritual worship and which is operated for nonprofit and noncommercial
purposes.
TOWER - A structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a
freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment on
which a telecommunications tower or an attached telecommunications tower may be located.
TOWNSHIP - The Township of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER - A duly registered professional engineer, licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, employed by the Township or engaged as a consultant thereto.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER-SECRETARY - The Manager-Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners of Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TRAILER - A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis and designed for travel, recreation,
or hauling.
TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS - The attaching of development rights to specified
lands which are desired by the Township to be kept undeveloped, but permitting those rights to be
transferred from these lands so that the development potential which they represent may occur on
other lands within the Township.
TRANSFER CAPACITY - The maximum number of transferable development rights which a
specific tract can accommodate. Transfer capacity is the difference between the maximum
development capacity and the base density.
Maximum development capacity - base density = transfer capacity
TRUCKING TERMINAL - Any property which is the origin and/or destination point of shortand
long-distance hauling and is used for the purpose of storing, transferring, loading, and
unloading, in addition to truck parking. This would include solid waste disposal vehicles, tank
trucks, and livestock trucks.
USE - The specific purpose for which land, a structure, a sign or a building is arranged, designed,
or intended or for which either land, a structure, a sign or a building is or may be used, occupied,
or maintained. The term "permitted use" or "uses by right" or equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY - A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land
or principal building and located on the same lot with such principal use or principal building.
USE, BY RIGHT - A permitted use as distinguished from a use not requiring a special exception
or conditional use.
5-38
USE, CHANGE OF - An alteration of a building, structure or tract of land which changes the use
heretofore existing to a new use classification.
USE, COMMERCIAL - A use of land or improvements thereto for the purpose of engaging in
retail, wholesale or service activities for profit.
USE, CONDITIONAL - A use which may not be appropriate to a particular zoning district as a
whole, but which may be suitable in certain localities within the district only when specific
conditions and criteria prescribed for such uses have been complied with. Conditional uses are
reviewed by the Board of Commissioners after recommendations by the Planning Commission.
USE, MIXED - A development which combines residential and nonresidential uses within the
same building or on the same lot, planned and designed as a complex of related structures and
circulation (vehicular and pedestrian) patterns and designed, constructed, or managed as a total
entity with customer and employee parking provided on site and with provision for delivery of
goods separate from customer access.
USE, MUNICIPAL - Those uses and facilities designed to furnish necessary support for the
general public health, safety and welfare of a municipality that are typically the responsibility of
local governments or local government authorities. Such uses shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Township offices and halls.
B. Police, fire and ambulance stations.
C. Township authority facilities.
D. Uses accessory to the above permitted uses, including parking and loading spaces, signs,
offices, rest rooms, maintenance equipment storage areas and buildings, lights, waste
receptacles and dumpsters, bleachers, and other similar uses.
USE, NONCONFORMING - A use, whether of land or of a structure, which does not comply with
the applicable use provisions of this ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment,
or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
USE, PRINCIPAL - The primary use of a building, structure or lot.
USE, RESIDENTIAL - An existing or proposed dwelling or dwelling unit(s) on a lot, to include a
single-family detached dwelling; single-family semidetached dwelling; duplex dwelling;
quadruplex dwelling; multiple-family dwelling; townhouse dwelling and apartment dwellings.
This definition also includes residential units located on upper floors above commercial uses.
USE, TEMPORARY - Any use not to exceed 180 consecutive days.
VARIANCE - Relief of any provision of this ordinance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
VETERINARY OFFICE - A building used primarily for the treatment, by a veterinarian, of small
domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds or fowl. Boarding of such animals shall be
for medical or surgical treatment. No outdoor boarding of animals is permitted.
WALKWAY - A paved pedestrian path which is not aligned with vehicular circulation patterns,
but which is located on a lot along proposed or existing pedestrian patterns.
5-39
WALL, FREESTANDING - A man-made structure erected for purposes of property delineation,
decoration, or enclosure, that is not part of a building or other structure and is typically constructed
of brick or stone. This definition shall not include retaining walls.
WALL HEIGHT - The vertical distance from the foundation wall or other immediate support of
such wall to the top of the wall.
WALL, RETAINING - A structure that holds back earth or water from a building or other
structure. Retaining walls stabilize soil and/or rock from downslope movement or erosion and
provide support for vertical or near-vertical grade changes. Retaining walls are generally made of
masonry, stone, brick, concrete, vinyl, steel or timber. Retaining wall designs must be certified by
a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WAREHOUSING - A facility for handling goods with or without maintenance facilities.
WATERCOURSE - A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, channel, swale,
pond, lake or other body of surface water carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or
artificial, having defined bed and banks.
WBCA - Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Colloation Act (53 P.S. §11702.1 et.seq.)
WETLAND BUFFER - An area of land immediately adjacent to a wetland that is set aside for
naturally occurring vegetation or the reestablishment of native plant species and as a transition
zone to protect the wetland from impact caused by development of adjacent upland areas.
WETLANDS - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support,
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
WIRELESS -
WHOLESALE - Any distribution procedure involving persons who, in the normal course of
business, do not engage in sales to the general public.
WHOLESALE CLUBS - Establishments which are engaged in selling merchandise at reduced or
wholesale prices to its club members only.
WHOLESALE SALES - Establishments engaged primarily in selling and/or renting merchandise
to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling and/or renting
merchandise to, such individuals or companies, but not excluding related retail sales and/or rentals
which comprise less than half of their business activities.
WIND-ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) - An energy conversion system, which
converts wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy, consisting of a wind turbine, a tower,
blades and associated controls and appurtenances that convert wind energy to a usable form of
energy to meet all or part of the energy requirements of the on-site user and which has a rated
capacity that does not exceed the rated capacity appropriate to the on-site user.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT - The distance measured from the ground surface of the
wind energy system tower base to the highest point of the extended blade tip or highest point of
5-40
the wind energy system.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TURBINE - The parts of a wind energy system, including the blades,
generator and tail.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE - Any personal wireless services as defined in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services, including cellular, personal communication services, specialized
mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, paging, and similar services that currently exist
or that may in the future be developed.
YARD - An open, unoccupied space, other than a courtyard, that lies between the principal
building or buildings and the lot lines.
YARD, MINIMUM AREA - The least distance at any point, measured at grade from and parallel
to a lot line to the building line.
YARD WASTE - All garden residues, shrubbery, tree prunings of less than 1/4 inch, sod and
similar materials, grass clippings and leaves.
ZONING - The designation of specified districts within the Township, reserving them for certain
uses, together with limitations on lot size, heights of structures and other stipulated requirements.
ZONING MAP - The Official Manheim Township Zoning Map.
ZONING OFFICER - The person appointed by the Board of Commissioners who is charged with
the administration and enforcement of this ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE - The Official Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING PERMIT - A written statement issued by the Zoning Officer authorizing buildings,
structures or uses consistent with the terms of this chapter and for the purpose of carrying out and
enforcing its provisions.
6-1
ARTICLE VI. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT A
SECTION 601. PURPOSE; INTENT
1. The purpose of this district is to promote the continuation and preservation of agricultural
activities in those areas most suitable for such activities. The intent of the Board of
Commissioners in establishing this district is also to protect and stabilize the Township's
viable agricultural economy by eliminating uses that are incompatible with farming, but
permitting limited agricultural support businesses.
2. It is the specific intent of the Board of Commissioners to implement the provisions of
Section 604(3) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, which requires that the
provisions of this ordinance shall be designed to preserve prime agriculture and farmland
considering topography, soil type and classification and present use. In order to attain this
goal, the regulations of this district are designed to protect and stabilize agriculture in areas
of productive soils as an ongoing, viable, major component of the economy of the
Township and Lancaster County, to with limited exceptions only those land uses and
activities which are agricultural in nature, to encourage the preservation of the most
productive farmland within the Township as a valuable resource which is lost and not
reclaimable once it is developed for building and other nonagricultural purposes, and to
prevent adverse effects resulting from the encroachment and mixing of residential and
other incompatible development with agricultural uses.
3. Consequently, residential uses are limited, and any future inhabitants in this district must
be willing to accept the impacts associated with normal farming practices. These impacts
include inconvenience, discomfort and the possibility of injury to health and property
arising from normal and accepted agricultural practices and operations, including but not
limited to noise, odors, dust, the operation of machinery of any kind, the storage and
disposal of manure, and the application of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides. Owners,
occupants and users of property within the Agricultural District should be prepared to
accept such inconveniences, discomfort, and the possibility of injury from normal
agricultural operations and are hereby put on official notice that Section 4 of Act 133 of
1982, known as the "Right to Farm Law," may bar them from obtaining a legal judgment
against such normal agricultural operations.
SECTION 602. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings, structures related to
the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses, cattle,
and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm and/or
garden products on a retail basis.
2. Single-family detached dwellings.
3. Horticultural uses, including greenhouses and landscape services, related to the raising,
propagating and selling of trees, shrubs, flowers and other vegetative material.
6-2
4. Forestry.
5. Public utility installations.
6. Telecommunications Tower, attached.
7. Beekeeping on a commercial basis.
8. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 603. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Conversion of a single-family detached farm dwelling which existed at the date of
enactment of this ordinance, into a two-family dwelling or an apartment dwelling;
provided, however, that the lot shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet for each of
the first two dwellings, plus 15,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit. In
addition, adequate off-street parking shall be provided, an approved method of sewage
disposal shall be installed, and there shall be no extension of the building other than as may
be required for access or for safety.
2. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
3. Anaerobic digesters and outdoor hydronic heaters as an accessory use.
4. Telecommunications Tower.
SECTION 604. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Farm occupations.
2. Elementary schools with classes only through grade eight, a total enrollment of no more
than 50 children, and which serve the farming community.
3. Agricultural composting operations.
4. Agritourism enterprises.
5. Wind energy systems as an accessory use.
SECTION 605. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet; however, farm buildings and farm accessory buildings
shall not exceed 85 feet in height measured from grade. All structures are subject to Section
2208 and 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements.
6-3
A. Agricultural/forestry uses. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 15 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Erosion control filter strips. All areas subject to the cultivation of farm crops or
the pasturing of farm animals shall contain erosion control filter strips. Such
strips shall be a minimum of six feet wide, as measured from the bank of any
drainageway (during nonflooding) and/or any street right-of-way line. Erosion
control filter strips shall be maintained with an all-season ground cover
approved by the Board of Commissioners (e.g., grass, ivy, vetch, pachysandra,
etc.). All agricultural activities that could threaten such ground cover shall be
prohibited from such areas to prevent erosion.
(7) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
(8) Anaerobic digesters and outdoor hydronic heaters. Such activities shall comply
with the requirements of 2503.4. and 2503.5.
6-4
B. Single-family detached dwellings. The requirements for single-family detached
dwellings shall be those set forth in Section 605.3.
C. Horticultural uses/Beekeeping: Such horticultural uses/beekeeping uses shall comply
with the requirements of Section 2510 and Section 2114, respectively.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Dwelling: 35 feet. Dwellings shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2213.
[ii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet from all property lines.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Dwelling, each side: 15 feet.
[ii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
D. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213).
[b] Side yard, each side: 15 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 15 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
E. Telecommunications Tower, attached. Such uses shall comply with Section 2516.
3. Limitations on subdivision of land. In order to preserve agricultural tracts, it is the express
6-5
intent of this subsection that the creation of lots for residential purposes shall be limited. In
addition, it is the express intent of this subsection that the maximum size of residential lots
be limited in order to provide for the retention of tracts of sufficient size to be used for
agricultural purposes. It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners to implement the
mandate of Section 604(3) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code to preserve
prime agricultural land through the enactment of these regulations.
A. For each tract of contiguous land in single ownership that is two acres or more but
less than 40 acres as of the effective date of this ordinance, there may be only one lot
sold or utilized for a single-family dwelling.
B. For each additional 20 acres of contiguous land in single ownership as of the effective
date of this ordinance, there may be one lot sold or utilized for a single-family
detached dwelling.
C. A tabular example of the limitation on the subdivision of land set forth in Subsection
3(A) and (B) above is as follows:
Lot Area at Least Acres Less Than Number of Lots which May be Subdivided
2 40 1
40 60 2
60 80 3
80 100 4
100 120 5
120 140 6
D. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all parcels of land legally existing on
the effective date of this ordinance. Regardless of size, no tract of land subsequently
subdivided from its parent tract shall qualify for additional single-family detached
dwellings or lots pursuant to this section. Similarly, any subsequent owner of any
parcel of land legally existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall be bound
by the actions of any previous subdivisions for purposes of additional single-family
dwellings and the number of lots, if any, remaining from the original number
permitted in this section.
E. Any land development, the purpose of which is to permit the erection of a permanent
single-family dwelling on a tract which has been previously improved with a dwelling
which also will remain upon the tract, shall be considered a subdivision for the
purposes of this subsection. It is the purpose and intent of this subsection to limit the
development of agricultural tracts regardless of whether such development is
accomplished by subdivision or land development as those terms are defined in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
F. Any subdivision or land development plan hereafter filed for a tract of land in the
6-6
Agricultural District shall specify which lot or lots shall carry with them the right to
erect or place thereon any unused quota of single-family detached dwellings as
determined by the provisions of this subsection.
G. Single-family detached dwellings permitted by Section 605.3 of this ordinance shall
be grouped so that no more than one additional access to an existing public road will
result. Any subdivision or land development plan hereafter filed for a tract of land in
the Agricultural District shall include a sketch plan, in accordance with the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, indicating all future development
permitted by 605.3 of this ordinance.
H. In the event a tract of land which was not classified as part of the Agricultural District
on the effective date of this ordinance is hereafter classified as part of the Agricultural
District, the size and ownership of such tract of land shall be determined as of the
effective date of the change in the zoning classification.
I. In those areas of the district where public water and public sewer are not provided or
where only public water or public sewer exists, lots which are permitted as stated in
Section 605.3.are subject to the following:
(1) Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet.
(2) Maximum lot area: 65,340 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 15 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 80%.
J. In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are provided,
lots which are permitted as stated in Section 605.3 are subject to the following:
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum lot area: 43,560 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 60 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
6-7
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213).
[b] Side yard, each side: 15 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 80%.
K. No subdivision shall be permitted which shall increase the lot used for residential
purposes in excess of the maximum lot size as set forth in Subsection 3(I) and (J)
above. Any lot which is two or fewer acres in size shall be presumed to be used for
residential purposes, and the size of such lot shall not be increased.
L. A subdivision, the sole purpose of which is to transfer land to increase the size of a
tract being used for agricultural purposes, where both the tract from which the land is
taken and the tract to which the land is added will be 25 acres or greater after such
subdivision, shall not be included when computing the permissible number of lots to
be subdivided from a tract as set forth in Subsection 3(A) and (B) above. However,
any lot add-on, regardless of size, shall affect the allocation of transferable
development rights for purposes of Article XXVI.
M. A subdivision to create a lot which will be transferred to the Township, a municipal
authority created by the Township, or another governmental body shall not be
included when computing the permissible number of lots to be subdivided from a
tract as set forth in Subsection 3(A) and 3(B) and (2) above.
SECTION 606. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and
2214 of this ordinance.
2. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. Such establishments shall comply with the requirements
of Section 2505.
3. Anaerobic digesters and hydronic heaters as an accessory use. Such uses shall comply with
the requirements of Section 2504 and Section 2505.
4. Telecommunications Tower. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2516.
SECTION 607. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY CONDITION
1. Farm occupation. Such establishments shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.2.
2. Elementary schools with classes only through grade eight, a total enrollment of no more
than 50 children, and which serve the farming community.
6-8
A. Maximum building height: 20 feet; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208
and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
B. Lot area:
(1) Minimum: two acres.
(2) Maximum: five acres.
C. Maximum building size: 5,000 gross square feet.
D. Minimum lot width:
(1) At street line: 100 feet.
(2) At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
E. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
F. Minimum yard dimensions:
(1) Front yard: 40 feet. (See Section 2213)
(2) Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
G. Minimum open area: 80%.
3. Agricultural composting operations. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2521.
4. Agritourism enterprises. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of 2503.3.
5. Wind energy systems as an accessory use. Such uses shall comply with the requirements
of Section 2522.
SECTION 608. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
7-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Residential Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay District for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
R-1 R-2 R-3
Accessory dwelling units SE SE SE
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X
Apartment dwellings X
Bed-and-breakfast establishments SE SE
Boardinghouses SE
Houses of worship SE SE SE
Community clubs C C
Conversion of large nonresidential buildings SE
Conversion of single-family detached farm dwelling SE SE
Duplex dwellings X
Elementary and secondary schools SE SE SE
Farm occupations C C
Forestry X X X
Golf courses and Country Clubs SE SE
Group homes X X X
Home occupation, major SE SE SE
Home occupation, minor X X X
Horticultural uses X
Mobile home parks C
Municipal Uses X X X
No-impact home-based business X X X
Planned residential developments C C C
Public parks and recreation areas X X X
Public utility installations C C C
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X
Single-family detached dwellings X X X
Single-family semidetached dwellings X X
Stables and kennels SE
Telecommunications towers, attached C C C
Townhouse dwellings X
7-2
ARTICLE VII. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-1 (AMENDED BY ORDINANCE 2020-03, DATED
01/13/2020)
SECTION 701. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to encourage continued agricultural activities in those parts of the
Township where agriculture is the predominant use and to provide for controlled expansion of
lower-density residential development in those areas where public sewer and water facilities are
available.
SECTION 702. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis.
2. Single-family detached dwellings.
3. Horticultural uses, including greenhouses and landscape services, related to the raising,
propagating and selling of trees, shrubs, flowers, and other vegetative material.
4. Public parks and public recreation areas.
5. Forestry.
6. Home occupation, minor.
7. No-impact home-based business.
8. Municipal Uses.
9. Regional Stormwater Facility.
10. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 703. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting the special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Conversion of a single-family detached farm dwelling which existed at the date of
enactment of this ordinance into a two-family dwelling or an apartment dwelling; provided,
however, that the lot areas shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet for each of the
first two dwellings, plus 15,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit. In addition,
adequate off-street parking shall be provided, an approved method of sewage disposal shall
be installed, and there shall be no extension of the building other than as may be required
for access or for safety.
7-3
2. Stables and kennels for boarding of horses, dogs, and other domestic animals.
3. Houses of worship.
4. Elementary and secondary schools.
5. Golf courses and Country Clubs.
6. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
7. Accessory dwelling units.
8. Home occupation, major.
9. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 704. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Farm occupation.
2. Planned residential development.
3. Public utility installation.
4. Telecommunications tower, attached.
5. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above conditional uses.
SECTION 705. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet; however, farm buildings and farm accessory buildings
shall not exceed 85 feet in height measured from grade. All structures are subject to Section
2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[ii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
7-4
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 15 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property lines
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet from all property lines.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property lines
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such uses shall comply
with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
(1) Permitted lots.
[a] In those areas of the district where public water and public sewer are not
provided, or where only public water or public sewer exists, the owner of
record shall be permitted to sell and/or build on lots according to the
following:
Size of Total Tract No. of Dwelling Units/Lots Permitted
0 to 10 acres 1
11 to 25 acres 2
26 to 45 acres 3
46 to 70 acres 4
71 to 100 acres 5
Over 100 acres 6, plus 1 dwelling unit for every 30 acres over 100 acres
[b] No more than two driveways shall be permitted to have access to a public
road. If more than two driveways are needed to provide access to the
residential lots, a single access drive leading to a cluster of lots should be
considered.
(2) In those areas of the district where public water and public sewer are not
provided, or where only public water or public sewer exists, lots which are
permitted as stated in Section 705.2.B(1)(a) are subject to the following:
7-5
[a] Minimum lot area: 60,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 30 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side. 15 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 35 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 80%.
(3) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 60 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 30 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: 15 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 35 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 50%.
(4) In those area of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided and a proposed development utilizes transferable development rights
in accordance with Article XXVI, Transfer of Development Rights (TDR), of
this ordinance, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 45 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 75 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
7-6
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard: eight feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 40%.
C. Horticultural uses: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2510.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Dwelling, each side: 15 feet.
[ii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet from all property lines.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
D. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
7-7
E. Home occupation, minor. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2110.
SECTION 706. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and
Section 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Stables and kennels:
(1) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Houses of worship:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
7-8
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
C. Elementary and secondary schools:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 65%.
D. Golf courses and Country Clubs:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required for Country
Clubs.
(2) Minimum lot area: 100 acres for an eighteen-hole course or 50 acres for a ninehole
course.
(3) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: none.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 80%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
E. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2505.
F. Accessory dwelling units. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2515.
7-9
G. Home occupation, major. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2110.
SECTION 707. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY CONDITION
1. Farm occupation. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2503.2.
2. Planned residential development. Such uses shall comply with Article XIX.
3. Public utility installations:
A. Minimum lot area: none.
B. Minimum lot width: none.
C. Minimum lot depth: none.
D. Minimum yard dimensions:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
(2) Side yard, each side: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 10 feet.
E. Minimum open area: none.
F. Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
4. Telecommunication tower, attached. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2516.
SECTION 708. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
8-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Residential Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay District for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
R-1 R-2 R-3
Accessory dwelling units SE SE SE
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X
Apartment dwellings X
Bed-and-breakfast establishments SE SE
Boardinghouses SE
Houses of worship SE SE SE
Community clubs C C
Conversion of large nonresidential buildings SE
Conversion of single-family detached farm dwelling SE SE
Duplex dwellings X
Elementary and secondary schools SE SE SE
Farm occupations C C
Forestry X X X
Golf courses and Country Clubs SE SE
Group homes X X X
Home occupation, major SE SE SE
Home occupation, minor X X X
Horticultural uses X
Mobile home parks C
Municipal Uses X X X
No-impact home-based business X X X
Planned residential developments C C C
Public parks and recreation areas X X X
Public utility installations C C C
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X
Single-family detached dwellings X X X
Single-family semidetached dwellings X X
Stables and kennels SE
Telecommunications towers, attached C C C
Townhouse dwellings X
8-2
ARTICLE VIII. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-2 (Amended by Ordinance 2020-03, dated
01/13/2020)
SECTION 801. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to maintain existing residential areas and to allow for
development of those areas which have public water and public sewer facilities.
SECTION 802. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis.
2. Single-family detached dwellings.
3. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
4. Public parks and public recreation areas.
5. Forestry.
6. Home occupation, minor.
7. No-impact home-based business.
8. Municipal Uses.
9. Regional Stormwater Facility.
10. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 803. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Houses of worship.
2. Elementary and secondary schools.
3. Conversion of a single-family detached farm dwelling which existed at the date of
enactment of this ordinance into a two-family dwelling or an apartment dwelling; provided,
however, that the lot area shall contain a minimum of 10,000 square feet for each dwelling
unit. In addition, adequate off-street parking shall be provided, an approved method of
sewage disposal shall be installed, and there shall be no extension of the building other than
as may be required for access or for safety.
4. Golf courses and Country Clubs
8-3
5. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
6. Accessory dwelling unit.
7. Home occupation, major.
8. Conversion of large nonresidential building. (See Section 2530)
9. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 804. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Planned residential developments.
2. Public utility installations.
3. Community clubs.
4. Telecommunications towers, attached.
5. Farm Occupations.
6. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the above conditional uses.
SECTION 805. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
8-4
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet from all property lines.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such uses shall comply
with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
(1) Permitted lots.
[a] In those areas of the district where public water and public sewer are not
provided, or where only public water or public sewer exists, the owner of
record shall be permitted to sell and/or build on lots according to the
following:
Size of Total Tract No. of Dwelling Units Permitted
0 to 10 acres 1
11 to 25 acres 2
26 to 45 acres 3
46 to 70 acres 4
71 to 100 acres 5
Over 100 acres 6, plus 1 dwelling unit for every 30 acres over 100 acres
[b] No more than two driveways shall be permitted to have access to a public
road. If more than two driveways are needed to provide access to the
residential lots, a single access drive leading to a cluster of lots should be
considered.
(2) In those areas of the district where public water and public sewer are not
provided or where only public water or public sewer exists, lots which are
permitted as stated in Section 805.2.B(1)[a] are subject to the following:
[a] Minimum lot area: 60,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
8-5
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 35 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 80%.
(3) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 60 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard, each side: 15 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 35 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 50%.
(4) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided and a proposed development utilizes transferable development rights
in accordance with Article XXVI, Transfer of Development Rights (TDR), of
this ordinance, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 45 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 75 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
8-6
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard: 8 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 40%.
C. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(1) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided, single-family semidetached lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet per unit.
[b] Minimum lot width (per unit):
[i] At street line: 50 feet per unit.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 60 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard: eight feet (one side yard per unit).
[iii] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 35% per unit.
(2) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided and a proposed development utilizes transferable development rights
in accordance with Article XXVI, Transfer of Development Rights (TDR), of
this ordinance, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet per unit.
[b] Minimum lot width (per unit):
[i] At street line: 35 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 35 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard: eight feet (one side yard per unit).
8-7
[iii] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 30% per unit.
D. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
E. Home occupation, minor. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section
2110.
SECTION 806. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Houses of worship:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
8-8
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Elementary and secondary schools:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 65%.
C. Golf courses and Country Clubs:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required for
Country Clubs.
(2) Minimum lot area: 100 acres for an eighteen-hole course or 50 acres for a ninehole
course.
(3) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: none.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 80%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
D. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2505.
E. Accessory dwelling units. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2515.
8-9
F. Home occupation, major. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2110.
G. Conversion of large nonresidential building.
(1) The conversion shall not require compliance with current setback, coverage or
other lot and area requirements of the ordinance, subject to meeting the
following:
[a] Any existing non-conformity shall not be increased without variance
approval.
[b] Subdivision or land development approval is not otherwise required.
(2) Any permitted additions shall comply with the following:
[a] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard: each side: 50 feet; and
[iii] Rear yard: 50 feet
[b] Minimum open area: 50%
[c] Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
SECTION 807. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY CONDITION
1. Planned residential developments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Article
XIX, Planned Residential provisions.
2. Public utility installations:
A. Minimum lot area: none.
B. Minimum lot width: none.
C. Minimum lot depth: none.
D. Minimum yard dimensions:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
(2) Side yard, each side: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 10 feet.
E. Minimum open area: none.
F. Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
8-10
3. Community clubs.
A. Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water are required.
B. Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
C. Minimum lot width:
(1) At street line: 100 feet.
(2) At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
E. Minimum yard dimensions:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay
or Section 2213.
(2) Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
F. Minimum open area: 50%.
G. Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
4. Telecommunications towers, attached. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2516.
5. Farm Occupation. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2503.2.
SECTION 808. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
9-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Residential Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay District for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
R-1 R-2 R-3
Accessory dwelling units SE SE SE
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X
Apartment dwellings X
Bed-and-breakfast establishments SE SE
Boardinghouses SE
Houses of worship SE SE SE
Community clubs C C
Conversion of large nonresidential buildings SE
Conversion of single-family detached farm dwelling SE SE
Duplex dwellings X
Elementary and secondary schools SE SE SE
Farm occupations C C
Forestry X X X
Golf courses SE SE
Group homes X X X
Home occupation, major SE SE SE
Home occupation, minor X X X
Horticultural uses X
Mobile home parks C
Municipal Uses X X X
No-impact home-based business X X X
Planned residential developments C C C
Public parks and recreation areas X X X
Public utility installations C C C
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X
Single-family detached dwellings X X X
Single-family semidetached dwellings X X
Stables and kennels SE
Telecommunications towers, attached C C C
Townhouse dwellings X
9-2
ARTICLE IX. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-3
SECTION 901. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to permit medium- and higher-density residential development by
permitting a variety of dwelling types.
SECTION 902. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis.
2. Single-family detached dwellings.
3. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
4. Duplex dwellings.
5. Townhouse dwellings.
6. Apartment dwellings.
7. Public parks and public recreation areas.
8. Forestry.
9. Home occupation, minor.
10. No-impact home-based business.
11. Municipal Uses.
12. Regional Stormwater Facility.
13. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 903. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this chapter, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Houses of worship.
2. Elementary and secondary schools.
3. Boardinghouses.
4. Accessory dwelling unit.
9-3
5. Home occupation, major.
6. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 904. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Planned residential developments.
2. Public utility installations.
3. Mobile home parks.
4. Community clubs.
5. Telecommunications tower, attached.
6. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above conditional uses.
SECTION 905. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 10 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet from all property lines.
9-4
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
(1) Permitted lots.
[a] In those areas of the district where public water and public sewer are not
provided, or where only public water or public sewer exists, the owner of
record shall be permitted to sell and/or build on lots according to the
following:
Size of Total Tract No. of Dwelling Units/Lots Permitted
0 to 10 acres 1
11 to 25 acres 2
26 to 45 acres 3
46 to 70 acres 4
71 to 100 acres 5
Over 100 acres 6, plus 1 dwelling unit for every 30 acres over 100 acres
[b] No more than two driveways shall be permitted to have access to a public
road. If more than two driveways are needed to provide access to the
residential lots, a single access drive leading to a cluster of lots should be
considered.
(2) In those areas of the district where public water and public sewer are not
provided or where only public water or public sewer exists, lots which are
permitted as stated in Section 905.2.B(1)[a] are subject to the following:
[a] Minimum lot area: 60,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
9-5
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard, each side: 10 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 35 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 80%.
(3) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 7,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 50 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 70 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard, each side: 10 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 35 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: 50%.
C. Single-family semidetached dwellings:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 40 feet per dwelling unit.
[b] At front yard setback line: 50 feet per dwelling unit.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, one side:
[i] With attached garage or carport: 12 feet;
9-6
[ii] Without attached garage or carport: 24 feet.
[c] Interior yard: none; however, any building or structural additions or
revisions to a dwelling unit shall be constructed to a common wall on an
interior lot line or shall be constructed a minimum distance of three feet
from an interior lot line.
[d] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 35%.
D. Duplex dwellings:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 75 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 35%.
E. Apartment dwellings.
(1) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling unit;
provided, however, that the minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
9-7
[ii] Side yard: 30 feet from all property lines.
[iii] Rear yard: 50 feet all property lines.
[iv] Interior yards: open space between buildings on the same lot.
[a] When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel
buildings shall have 35 feet between faces of the building. If
the front or rear faces or obliquely aligned, the above distance
may be decreased by as much as 10 feet at one end if increased
by similar or greater distance at the other end.
[b] A yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls of
buildings. If the buildings are at right angles to each other, the
distance between the corners of the end walls of the building
may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
[c] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls and front
or rear faces of buildings.
[e] Length of building. No building shall exceed 200 feet in length unless
otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay.
[f] Minimum open area: 35%.
(2) In those areas of the district where both public water and public sewer are
provided and a proposed development utilizes transferable development rights
in accordance with Article XXVI, Transfer of Development Rights (TDR), of
this chapter, lots are permitted as follows:
[a] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit; provided, however,
that the minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard: 30 feet from all property lines, except the side yard
setback for an apartment building located adjacent to an existing
residential use where the apartment building exceeds 35 feet in
height shall be 75 feet on the side property line adjacent to the
residential use and shall comply with the landscaping requirements
set forth in Section 2512 of this ordinance. Preservation of existing
vegetation within this setback is encouraged.
9-8
[iii] Rear yard: 50 feet from all property lines, except the rear yard
setback for an apartment building located adjacent to an existing
residential use where the apartment building exceeds 35 feet in
height shall be 75 feet on the rear property line adjacent to the
residential use and shall comply with the landscaping requirements
set forth in Section 2512 of this ordinance. Preservation of existing
vegetation within this setback is encouraged.
[iv] Interior yards: open space between buildings on the same lot.
[a] When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel
buildings shall have 35 feet between faces of the building. If
the front or rear faces or obliquely aligned, the above distance
may be decreased by as much as 10 feet at one end if increased
by similar or greater distance at the other end.
[b] A yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls of
buildings. If the buildings are at right angles to each other, the
distance between the corners of the end walls of the building
may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
[c] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls and front
or rear faces of buildings.
[e] Length of building. No building shall exceed 200 feet in length unless
otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay.
[f] Minimum open area: 35%.
[g] Maximum building height: 35 feet; provided, however, that the maximum
height may be increased to 50 feet with the acquisition of transferable
development rights in accordance with Article XXVI. For each additional
apartment dwelling unit or portion thereof located above 35 feet, one
development right shall be acquired. All structures are subject to Section
2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
F. Townhouse dwellings:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: Three thousand (3,000) square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 16 feet per dwelling unit.
[b] At front yard setback line: 20 feet per dwelling unit.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
9-9
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard: one side on end dwelling unit:
[i] With attached garage or carport: 12 feet;
[ii] Without attached garage or carport: 24 feet.
[c] Interior yard: none; however, any building or structural additions or
revisions to a dwelling unit shall be constructed to a common wall on an
interior lot line or shall be constructed a minimum distance of three feet
from an interior lot line.
[d] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 35%.
G. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
H. Home occupation, minor. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section
2110.
SECTION 906. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Houses of worship:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
9-10
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Elementary and secondary schools:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2513.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 65%.
C. Boardinghouse:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
9-11
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 60%.
D. Accessory dwelling unit. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section
2515.
E. Home occupation, major. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2110.
SECTION 907. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES
PERMITTED BY CONDITION
1. Planned residential developments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Article
XIX, Planned Residential Development provisions.
2. Public utility installations:
A. Minimum lot area: none.
B. Minimum lot width: none.
C. Minimum lot depth: none.
D. Minimum yard dimensions:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
(2) Side yard, each side: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 10 feet.
E. Minimum open area: none.
F. Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
3. Mobilehome parks. Such uses shall comply with Chapter 329, Mobilehome and
Mobilehome Parks.
4. Community clubs:
A. Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
B. Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
C. Minimum lot width:
(1) At street line: 100 feet.
(2) At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
9-12
E. Minimum yard dimensions:
(1) Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay
or Section 2213.
(2) Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet.
F. Minimum open area: 50%.
G. Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
5. Telecommunications tower, attached. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2516.
SECTION 908. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
10-1
ARTICLE X. INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION 1001. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to permit a wide range of institutional, civic and public uses.
SECTION 1002. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farmhouses and structures related to
the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses, cattle,
and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm and/or
garden products on a retail basis.
2. Extended, intermediate, and long-term care facilities.
3. Retirement homes and communities.
4. Educational institutions.
5. Public parks and public recreation areas.
6. Public utility installations.
7. Forestry.
8. Dormitories as an accessory use to educational institutions.
9. Farmers markets.
10. Telecommunications tower.
11. Municipal Uses.
12. Regional Stormwater Facility.
13. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 1003. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Houses of worship.
2. Elementary and secondary schools.
3. Day-care centers.
4. Hospitals.
10-2
5. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 1004. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Community clubs.
2. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above conditional uses.
SECTION 1005. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 45 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/Forestry: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 10 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet from all property lines.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
10-3
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Extended, intermediate, and long-term care facilities and retirement
homes/communities:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Single-family detached and single-family semidetached dwellings,
each side: 25 feet.
[ii] All other dwellings: 50 feet from all property lines.
[c] Rear yards:
[i] Single-family detached and single-family semidetached dwellings:
35 feet.
[ii] All other dwellings: 50 feet from all property lines.
[d] Interior yards: open space between buildings on the same lot:
[i] Single-family detached, single-family semidetached and duplex
dwellings:
[a] Distance from internal roads: 15 feet.
[b] Distance between sides of dwellings: 25 feet.
[c] Distance between front faces and/or rear faces of dwellings: 50
feet.
[d] Distance between sides and front faces or rear faces of
dwellings: 50 feet.
[ii] All other dwellings: (Covered or enclosed connecting walkways
shall not be considered part of the building.)
10-4
[a] Distance from internal roads: 15 feet.
[b] When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel
buildings shall have 50 feet between faces of the building. If
the front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above distance
may be decreased by as much as 10 feet at one end if increased
by similar or greater distance at the other end.
[c] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls of
buildings. If the buildings are at right angles to each other, the
distance between the corners of the end walls of the building
may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
[d] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls and front
or rear faces of buildings.
(6) Length of building. No building shall exceed 300 feet in length; provided,
however, that there must be a visual break in the building facade every 50 feet.
Such break shall consist of, as a minimum, a four-foot projection from the
building running a linear distance of five feet along the facade; or at least a
thirty-degree angle of deflection of the building's center line. Such break shall
extend the entire height of the building. Color and texture variations may
accompany the above facade treatments. Building length shall not include
covered walkways or enclosed walkways whose sole purpose is to connect one
area of the building to another.
(7) Minimum open area: 35%.
(8) The design standards depicted in Appendixes A, B, C and D shall apply.
C. Educational institutions:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side with the
residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
10-5
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side with the
residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building. No building shall exceed 300 feet in length; provided,
however, that there must be a visual break in the building facade every 100 feet.
Such break shall consist of, as a minimum, a ten-foot projection from the
building running a linear distance of 15 feet along the facade; or at least a thirtydegree
angle of deflection of the building's center line. Such break shall extend
the entire height of the building. Color and texture variations may accompany
the above facade treatments. Building length shall not include covered
walkways or enclosed walkways whose sole purpose is to connect one area of
the building to another.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
(8) All pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns shall be located in a manner that
reduces or eliminates potential hazards to people utilizing the institution.
D. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions for structures:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
E. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 10 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 10 feet.
(4) Minimum open area: none.
(5) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
10-6
F. Farmers markets. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2113.
G. Telecommunications tower. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2516.
SECTION 1006. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, but in no event shall any building exceed three full stories above grade. However,
all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Houses of worship:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Elementary and secondary schools:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
10-7
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 65%.
C. Day-care centers: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2508.
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
D. Hospitals:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
10-8
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 30%.
SECTION 1007. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, but in no event shall any building exceed three full stories above grade. However,
all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Community clubs:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 35%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
SECTION 1008. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
11-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Business Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay District for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Adult establishments C
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X X
Banks and financial institutions X X X
Banks and financial institutions in combination with
professional offices
SE X X X
Bed-and-breakfast establishments X X X X
Body art establishments SE
Houses of worship SE SE
Cafes X X
Commercial recreation facilities SE SE
Community facilities X X X X
Convenience stores X X X
Conversion apartments SE
Day-care centers SE SE SE SE
Dwelling units in combination with professional offices
or commercial uses
X X X X
Education institutions SE SE
Forestry X X X X
Funeral homes SE SE
Holiday tree sales X X
Hotels and motels, full-service X X
Hotels and motels, limited-service X X
Motor vehicle sales SE X
Motor vehicle service stations or garages SE X
Motor vehicle washing facilities SE SE
Municipal Uses X X X X
Offices, professional X X X X
Offices, medical or dental X X X X
11-2
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Office park C
Personal service business X X X
Public parks and recreation areas X X X X
Public utility installations X X X X
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X X
Restaurants X X
Restaurants in combination with professional offices SE X X X
Retail sales of alcoholic beverages SE X
Retail sales of goods and services excluding body art
establishments and adult establishments
X
Retail sales of goods and services, excluding restaurants,
motor vehicle service stations and garages, motor vehicle
sales, body art establishments and adult establishments
X X
Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the
outdoor sale of nursery stock
X X
Supermarkets X
Telecommunications tower SE SE X X
Telecommunications tower, attached X X X X
Temporary retail sales X X
Veterinary office SE X X
Veterinary hospital SE SE
Wholesale clubs X
11-3
ARTICLE XI. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-1
SECTION 1101. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to provide for various types of small-scale business and
professional offices that provide services to local neighborhoods.
SECTION 1102. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis.
2. Offices, professional and medical/dental.
3. Public parks and public recreation areas.
4. Community facilities.
5. Public utility installations.
6. Dwelling units in combination with professional offices or other permitted commercial uses
in the same principal structure.
7. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
8. Forestry.
9. Telecommunications tower, attached.
10. Municipal Uses.
11. Regional Stormwater Facility.
12. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 1103. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Houses of worship.
2. Day-care centers.
3. Banks and financial institutions in combination with professional offices.
4. Restaurants in combination with professional offices.
11-4
5. Funeral homes.
6. Telecommunications towers.
7. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses by special exception.
SECTION 1104. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Office parks.
SECTION 1105. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified by the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the
property line and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on
adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the
property line and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on
adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the
11-5
property line and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on
adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Professional offices, medical/dental offices and community facilities:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] Lots fronting on arterial and major collector roads:
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
[b] Lots fronting on other road classifications:
[i] At street line: 60 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the
side contiguous with the residential district.
[i] No minimum side yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on
which two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways,
corridors or common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross
easements for the benefit of the owners of all such
buildings or structures and their respective
employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
11-6
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum
side yard dimensions, shall have a visual break in the
building facade at minimum distances of every 50 feet. Such
visual breaks may consist of projections from the building,
angles of deflection of the building's center line, or variations
in the color or texture of the facade.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to
a residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[i] No minimum side yard shall be required on either side of
the common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining
lots on which two or more buildings are adjoined side by
side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways,
corridors or common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross
easements for the benefit of the owners of all such
buildings or structures and their respective
employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the
adjoining buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and
connected buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified
minimum side yard dimensions, shall have a visual break in
the building facade at minimum distances of every 60 feet.
Such visual breaks may consist of projections from the
building, angles of deflection of the building's center line,
or variations in the color or texture of the facade.
[d] Interior yards: open space between buildings on the same lot.
[i] When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel
buildings shall have 50 feet between faces of the building.
If the front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above
distance may be decreased by as much as 10 feet at one end
if increased by similar or greater distance at the other end.
[ii] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls of
buildings. If the buildings are at right angles to each other,
the distance between the corners of the end walls of the
building may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
[iii] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls and
front or rear faces of buildings.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
11-7
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Maximum square footage. The maximum square footage of a medical/dental
office shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
(8) Minimum open area: 35%.
C. Dwelling units in combination with professional offices or other permitted
commercial uses. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2525.
D. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
E. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 12 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513).
F. Bed-and-breakfast establishments: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2505.
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
11-8
[a] At street line: 50 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet.
G. Telecommunications tower, attached. Such uses shall comply with the
requirements of Section 2516.
SECTION 1106. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Houses of worship:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay District or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard: 25 feet, except, where adjacent to a residential district, the
side yard shall be 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
(7) Landscape and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Day-care centers: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2508.
11-9
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
C. Banks and financial institutions in combination with professional offices. Such uses
shall comply with the requirements of Section 2504.
D. Restaurants in combination with professional offices. Such uses shall comply with
the requirements of Section 2504.
E. Funeral homes:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 40%.
11-10
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
F. Telecommunications tower. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2516.
SECTION 1107. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION
1. Office parks. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2514.
SECTION 1108. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
12-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Business Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay District for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Adult establishments C
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X X
Banks and financial institutions X X X
Banks and financial institutions in combination with
professional offices
SE X X X
Bed-and-breakfast establishments X X X X
Body art establishments SE
Houses of worship SE SE
Cafes X X
Commercial recreation facilities SE SE
Community facilities X X X X
Convenience stores X X X
Conversion apartments SE
Day-care centers SE SE SE SE
Dwelling units in combination with professional offices
or commercial uses
X X X X
Education institutions SE SE
Forestry X X X X
Funeral homes SE SE
Holiday tree sales X X
Hotels and motels, full-service X X
Hotels and motels, limited-service X X
Motor vehicle sales SE X
Motor vehicle service stations or garages SE X
Motor vehicle washing facilities SE SE
Municipal Uses X X X X
Offices, professional X X X X
Offices, medical or dental X X X X
12-2
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Office park C
Personal service business X X X
Public parks and recreation areas X X X X
Public utility installations X X X X
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X X
Restaurants X X
Restaurants in combination with professional offices SE X X X
Retail sales of alcoholic beverages SE X
Retail sales of goods and services excluding body art
establishments and adult establishments
X
Retail sales of goods and services, excluding restaurants,
motor vehicle service stations and garages, motor vehicle
sales, body art establishments and adult establishments
X X
Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the
outdoor sale of nursery stock
X X
Supermarkets X
Telecommunications tower SE SE X X
Telecommunications tower, attached X X X X
Temporary retail sales X X
Veterinary office SE X X
Veterinary hospital SE SE
Wholesale clubs X
12-3
ARTICLE XII. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-2
SECTION 1201. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to provide for neighborhood businesses within existing
neighborhood areas.
SECTION 1202. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis
2. Offices, professional or medical/dental.
3. Banks and financial institutions.
4. Banks and financial institutions in combination with professional offices.
5. Dwelling units in combination with professional offices or commercial uses in the same
principal structure.
6. Retail sales of goods and services, excluding restaurants, motor vehicle service stations and
garages, motor vehicle sales buildings, body art establishments, and adult establishments.
7. Personal service businesses.
8. Convenience stores.
9. Public parks and public recreation areas.
10. Community facilities.
11. Public utility installations.
12. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
13. Cafes/Restaurants with or without outdoor dining.
14. Restaurants in combination with professional offices.
15. Forestry.
16. Telecommunications tower, attached.
17. Municipal Uses.
18. Regional Stormwater Facility.
19. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
12-4
SECTION 1203. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Houses of worship.
2. Funeral homes.
3. Veterinary office.
4. Conversion apartment dwellings, where conversion is made of a building which existed at
the date of enactment of this ordinance into a duplex dwelling or an apartment dwelling,
and where no extension of the existing building, other than as may be required for access or
safety, shall be permitted.
5. Day-care centers.
6. Telecommunications tower.
7. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses by special
exception.
SECTION 1204. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay District; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of
this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet (See Section 2213).
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
12-5
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Offices, professional and medical/dental, banks, cafes, retail sales, retail services,
personal service business, and community facilities:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] Lots fronting on arterial and major collector roads:
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
[b] Lot fronting on other road classifications:
[i] At street line: 60 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
12-6
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 6 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay District, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 25%.
(8) Maximum floor area: 4,000 square feet for each office, bank, retail sale, retail
service, or community facility establishment or use.
C. Convenience stores:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
12-7
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
(7) Maximum floor area: 4,000 square feet.
D. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
E. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 12 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
F. Dwelling units in combination with offices. Such uses shall comply with the
requirements of Section 2525.
G. Restaurants in combination with professional offices. Such uses shall comply with the
requirements of Section 2504.
H. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2110.
12-8
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay or Section
2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: six feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 25%.
I. Telecommunications tower, attached. Such uses shall comply with the requirements
of Section 2516.
SECTION 1205. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless specified in accordance with the applicable TZone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Houses of worship:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet, except, where adjacent to a residential
12-9
district, each side yard shall be 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Funeral homes:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless specified in accordance with the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 40%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
C. Veterinary office:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 50 feet on the side
12-10
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 40%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
D. Conversion apartment dwellings:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit; provided, however, that
if a dwelling unit and a business use are to be located in the same structure, the
minimum lot area shall be equivalent to 4,000 square feet for each dwelling
unit, plus 6,000 square feet for the business unit.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 75%.
E. Day-care centers: Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2508.
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
12-11
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
F. Telecommunications tower. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2516.
SECTION 1206. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
13-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Business Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay District for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Adult establishments C
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X X
Banks and financial institutions X X X
Banks and financial institutions in combination with
professional offices
SE X X X
Bed-and-breakfast establishments X X X X
Body art establishments SE
Houses of worship SE SE
Cafes X X
Commercial recreation facilities SE SE
Community facilities X X X X
Convenience stores X X X
Conversion apartments SE
Day-care centers SE SE SE SE
Dwelling units in combination with professional offices
or commercial uses
X X X X
Education institutions SE SE
Forestry X X X X
Funeral homes SE SE
Holiday tree sales X X
Hotels and motels, full-service X X
Hotels and motels, limited-service X X
Motor vehicle sales SE X
Motor vehicle service stations or garages SE X
Motor vehicle washing facilities SE SE
Municipal Uses X X X X
Offices, professional X X X X
Offices, medical or dental X X X X
13-2
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Office park C
Personal service business X X X
Public parks and recreation areas X X X X
Public utility installations X X X X
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X X
Restaurants X X
Restaurants in combination with professional offices SE X X X
Retail sales of alcoholic beverages SE X
Retail sales of goods and services excluding body art
establishments and adult establishments
X
Retail sales of goods and services, excluding restaurants,
motor vehicle service stations and garages, motor vehicle
sales, body art establishments and adult establishments
X X
Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the
outdoor sale of nursery stock
X X
Supermarkets X
Telecommunications tower SE SE X X
Telecommunications tower, attached X X X X
Temporary retail sales X X
Veterinary office SE X X
Veterinary hospital SE SE
Wholesale clubs X
13-3
ARTICLE XIII. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-3
SECTION 1301. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to provide for various office and commercial uses for servicing
the local area.
SECTION 1302. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis.
2. Offices, professional and medical/dental.
3. Hotels, full-service.
5. Hotels, limited-service.
5. Banks and financial institutions.
6. Banks and financial institutions in combination with professional offices.
7. Retail sales of goods and services, excluding restaurants, motor vehicle service stations and
garages, motor vehicle sales buildings, body art establishments and adult establishments,
where the total square footage of retail sales on a lot is a maximum of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
8. Personal service businesses.
9. Convenience stores.
10. Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the outdoor sale of nursery stock.
11. Public parks and public recreation areas.
12. Community facilities.
13. Public utility installations.
14. Temporary retail sales.
15. Holiday tree sales.
16. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
17. Cafe/restaurants with or without outdoor dining.
18. Dwelling units in combination with professional offices or connected uses in the same
principal structure.
19. Forestry.
13-4
20. Restaurants in combination with professional offices.
21. Veterinary office.
22. Telecommunications tower.
23. Municipal Uses.
24. Regional Stormwater Facility.
25. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 1303. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Motor vehicle washing facilities.
2. Day-care centers.
3. Educational institutions.
4. Retail sales of alcoholic beverages.
5. Motor vehicle service stations or garages.
6. Motor vehicle sales.
7. Veterinary hospital.
8. Commercial recreation facilities.
9. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 1304. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements
A. Agricultural uses/forestry. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
13-5
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such uses shall comply
with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Full-service hotels:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 200,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 300 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 300 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 100 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
13-6
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet.
(6) Length of building: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay.
(7) Minimum open area: 40%.
C. Limited-service hotels:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 200 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet.
(6) Length of building: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
D. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
13-7
(5) Minimum open area: none.
E. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 12 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
F. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2505.
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay or Section
2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 6 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
G. Dwelling units in combination with professional offices or commercial uses in the
same principal structure. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2525.
H. Temporary retail sales. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2517.
13-8
I. Holiday tree sales. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2518.
J. Telecommunication towers. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2516.
K. Other permitted uses by right:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay or
Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
13-9
[e] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
SECTION 1305. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay; however, all
structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Motor vehicle washing facilities:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
(8) All water for washing of automobiles shall be collected and discharged into an
approved public sewerage facility. No water utilized for washing shall be
permitted to sheet flow from the site or drain into a stormwater conveyance
facility.
B. Day-care centers. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2508.
13-10
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 20%.
C. Educational institutions:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] Lots fronting on arterial and major collector roads:
[i] At street line: 100 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
[b] Lots fronting on other road classifications:
[i] At street line: 60 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
13-11
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
[e] Interior yards: open space between buildings on the same lot.
[i] When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel buildings
shall have 50 feet between faces of the building. If the front or rear
faces are obliquely aligned, the above distance may be decreased by
as much as 10 feet at one end if increased by similar or greater
distance at the other end.
[ii] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls of buildings. If
the buildings are at right angles to each other, the distance between
the corners of the end walls of the building may be reduced to a
minimum of 25 feet.
[iii] A yard space of 50 feet is required between end walls and front or
rear faces of buildings.
[f] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 40%.
(8) No exterior on-site training shall be permitted within the site.
D. Retail sales of alcoholic beverages:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
13-12
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 50 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
E. Motor vehicle service stations or garages and motor vehicle sales:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
13-13
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
F. Commercial recreation facilities:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
(8) All pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns shall be located in a manner that
reduces or eliminates potential hazards to the people utilizing the facility.
G. Veterinary hospital:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
13-14
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
(7) Any outdoor runs or exercise areas shall be located to the side or rear of the
principal building, outside of all required yards. Such areas shall be fully
enclosed by an opaque fence a minimum of six feet high.
(8) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
SECTION 1306. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
14-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Business Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay District for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Adult establishments C
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X X
Banks and financial institutions X X X
Banks and financial institutions in combination with
professional offices
SE X X X
Bed-and-breakfast establishments X X X X
Body art establishments SE
Houses of worship SE SE
Cafes X X
Commercial recreation facilities SE SE
Community facilities X X X X
Convenience stores X X X
Conversion apartments SE
Day-care centers SE SE SE SE
Dwelling units in combination with professional offices
or commercial uses
X X X X
Education institutions SE SE
Forestry X X X X
Funeral homes SE SE
Holiday tree sales X X
Hotels and motels, full-service X X
Hotels and motels, limited-service X X
Motor vehicle sales SE X
Motor vehicle service stations or garages SE X
Motor vehicle washing facilities SE SE
Municipal Uses X X X X
Offices, professional X X X X
Offices, medical or dental X X X X
14-2
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Office park C
Personal service business X X X
Public parks and recreation areas X X X X
Public utility installations X X X X
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X X
Restaurants X X
Restaurants in combination with professional offices SE X X X
Retail sales of alcoholic beverages SE X
Retail sales of goods and services excluding body art
establishments and adult establishments
X
Retail sales of goods and services, excluding restaurants,
motor vehicle service stations and garages, motor vehicle
sales, body art establishments and adult establishments
X X
Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the
outdoor sale of nursery stock
X X
Supermarkets X
Telecommunications tower SE SE X X
Telecommunications tower, attached X X X X
Temporary retail sales X X
Veterinary office SE X X
Veterinary hospital SE SE
Wholesale clubs X
14-3
ARTICLE XIV. BUSINESS DISTRICT B-4
SECTION 1401. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to provide for various office and commercial uses for local
residents, as well as the general public. These uses may be independent activities or part of a
coordinated grouping of stores within a single building or center.
SECTION 1402. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis.
2. Offices, professional and medical/dental.
3. Banks and financial institutions.
4. Banks and financial institutions in combination with professional offices.
5. Dwelling units in combination with professional offices or commercial uses.
6. Personal service businesses.
7. Supermarkets.
8. Restaurants with or without outdoor dining.
9. Restaurants in combination with professional offices.
10. Retail sales of goods and services.
11. Retail sales of alcoholic beverages.
12. Convenience stores.
13. Wholesale clubs.
14. Full-service hotels.
15. Limited-service hotels.
16. Motor vehicle service stations or garages.
17. Motor vehicle sales.
18. Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the outdoor sale of nursery stock.
19. Public parks and public recreation areas.
20. Community facilities.
21. Public utility installations.
14-4
22. Veterinarian offices.
23. Temporary retail sales.
24. Holiday tree sales.
25. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
26. Forestry.
27. Telecommunications tower.
28. Municipal Uses.
29. Regional Stormwater Facility.
30. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
SECTION 1403. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the proposed
use would be located.
1. Motor vehicle washing facilities.
2. Commercial recreation facilities.
3. Day-care centers.
4. Educational institutions.
5. Body art establishments.
6. Veterinary hospitals.
7. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 1404. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Adult establishments.
SECTION 1405. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay and Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
14-5
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Full-service hotels:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 200,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 300 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 300 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 100 feet, unless otherwise specified in accordance with the
applicable T-Zone Overlay or Section 2213.
14-6
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet.
(6) Length of building: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay.
(7) Minimum open area: 40%.
C. Limited-service hotels:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 200 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 223.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet.
(6) Length of building: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
D. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
14-7
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
E. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 12 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
F. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2110.
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay or Section
2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 30 feet.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 25%.
G. Temporary retail sales. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section
2517.
14-8
H. Holiday tree sales. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section 2518.
I. Telecommunication tower. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section
2516.
J. Other permitted uses by right:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
14-9
[e] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building: in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
SECTION 1406. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Motor vehicle washing facilities:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
(8) All water for washing of automobiles shall be collected and discharged into an
approved public sewerage facility. No water utilized for washing shall be
permitted to sheet flow from the site or drain into a stormwater conveyance
facility.
B. Commercial recreation facilities:
14-10
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
(8) All pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns shall be located in a manner that
reduces or eliminates potential hazards to the people utilizing the facility.
C. Day-care centers. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section 2508.
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
14-11
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
D. Educational institutions:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(6) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
14-12
(7) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(8) Minimum open area: 20%.
(9) All pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns shall be located in a manner that
reduces or eliminates potential hazards to people utilizing the institution.
E. Body art establishments. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section 2506.
F. Veterinary hospital:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 50%.
(7) Any outdoor runs or exercise areas shall be located to the side or rear of the
principal building, outside of all required yards. Such areas shall be fully
enclosed by an opaque fence a minimum of six feet high.
(8) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
SECTION 1407. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY CONDITION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in accordance with the
applicable T-Zone Overlay; however, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section
2214 of this ordinance.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
14-13
A. Adult establishments. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section 2502.
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Length of building. Unless otherwise specified in the T-Zone Overlay, no
building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
(8) Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
SECTION 1408. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
15-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Industrial Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay Districts for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
I-1 I-2 I-3
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X
Airports X
Banks and financial institutions X
Building materials sales and storage SE SE SE
Commercial recreation facilities X X X
Community clubs SE
Day-care centers SE SE
Day-care centers as an accessory use SE
Distribution facilities X
Educational institutions X X X
Forestry X X X
Golf courses and Country Clubs SE SE
Golf driving ranges SE SE
Hospice care facility SE
Industrial activities involving processing, production,
repair, or testing and conversion, assembly, and nontoxic
chemical operations
X X X
Junkyard SE
Retail sale of lawn and garden care products; outdoor sale
of nursery stock
SE SE SE
Laboratories for research and development X X X
Municipal Uses X X X
Offices, professional X X X
Offices, medical or dental X X X
Public parks and recreational areas X X X
Public utility installations X X X
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X
15-2
I-1 I-2 I-3
Restaurants SE SE SE
Retail sales, excluding supermarkets, motor vehicle
service stations or garages, motor vehicle sales buildings,
body art establishments, and adult establishments
X
Retail sales as an accessory use X
Retail sale of products produced on the property X
Retail sales on airport property SE
Solid Waste Management Services & Facilities (up to 4
fast-fill CNG dispensers)
X
Solid Waste Management Services & Facilities (5 or
more fast-fill CNG dispensers)
SE
Telecommunications towers X X X
Theater churches SE SE SE
Trucking terminals SE
Warehousing and mini warehousing facilities X X X
Wholesale sales X X
15-3
ARTICLE XV. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT I-1 (Amended by Ordinance 2020-03, Dated 01/13/2020)
SECTION 1501. PURPOSE; INTENT
It is the purpose of this district to provide suitable regulations for manufacturing and industrial
uses and operations which are free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, glare, hazards
of fire, and other objectionable and dangerous conditions in order to protect adjacent land uses.
This district is also intended to provide opportunities for the integration of complimentary office,
light industrial and retail development, and promote redevelopment throughout the industrial
areas of the Township.
SECTION 1502. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farmhouses and structures related to
the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses, cattle,
and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm and/or
garden products on a retail basis.
2. Offices, professional and medical/dental.
3. Industrial activities involving processing, production, repair, or testing of materials, goods,
and/or products of those industries performing primarily conversion, assembly, or nontoxic
chemical operations.
4. Laboratories for scientific or industrial research and development.
5. Warehousing and mini warehousing facilities.
6. Retail sales, excluding supermarkets, motor vehicle service stations or garages, motor
vehicle sales buildings, body art establishments, and adult establishments.
7. Wholesale sales.
8. Banks and financial institutions.
9. Public parks and public recreation areas.
10. Commercial recreation facilities.
11. Public utility installations.
12. Educational institutions.
13. Forestry.
14. Telecommunications towers.
15. Municipal Uses.
16. Regional Stormwater Facility.
17. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
15-4
SECTION 1503. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinances, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of this district.
1. Golf driving range.
2. Golf course and Country Clubs.
3. Lawn and garden care products and the outdoor sale of nursery stock.
4. Building materials sales and storage, but with no outside storage of materials.
5. Day-care center.
6. Restaurants, provided there are no drive-through facilities.
7. Hospice care facility.
8. Theater churches.
9. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 1504. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 45 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay and Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinances.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property lines
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
15-5
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property lines
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property lines
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Banks and financial institutions:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[c] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
C. Commercial recreation facilities:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
15-6
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
(6) Length of building. Unless specified in accordance with the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
D. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 12 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
E. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard: 20 feet.
15-7
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
F. Telecommunications Tower. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2516.
G. Other permitted uses by right:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in accordance with the
applicable T-Zone Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet along the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
15-8
facade.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; provided, however, that for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides
contiguous with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
(7) Length of building. Unless specified in the applicable T-Zone Overlay, no
building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
H. Retail sales. In addition to the previous applicable provisions, the following shall
apply:
(1) Separate structures for retail use shall be limited to 5,000 square feet.
(2) Retail sales as part of structures shall be limited to 35% of the total floor area
and shall not exceed 5,000 square feet for each retail use.
SECTION 1505. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay and Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinances.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Golf driving ranges:
(1) Minimum lot area: seven acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 900 feet.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous with the residential
district.
(5) Minimum open area: 80%.
(6) Landscape and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Golf courses and Country Clubs:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required for Country
Clubs.
15-9
(2) Minimum lot area: 100 acres for an eighteen-hole course or 50 acres for a ninehole
course.
(3) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: none.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 80%.
(7) Landscape and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
C. Lawn and garden products/nursery stock and building materials:
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in accordance with the
applicable T-Zone Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential
district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side contiguous with the
residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous with the residential
district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; however, for any lot adjacent to a residential
district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides contiguous
with the residential district.
(5) Minimum open area: 40%.
D. Day-care centers and restaurants. Such use shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2508.
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
15-10
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 50 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
E. Hospice care facility:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 50 feet along the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; provided, however, that for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides
contiguous with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
F. Theatre churches. Such uses shall comply with the regulations of Section 2519.
15-11
SECTION 1506. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
16-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Industrial Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay Districts for additional use regulations.**
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
I-1 I-2 I-3
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X
Airports X
Banks and financial institutions X
Building materials sales and storage SE SE SE
Commercial recreation facilities X X X
Community clubs SE
Day-care centers SE SE
Day-care centers as an accessory use SE
Distribution facilities X
Educational institutions X X X
Forestry X X X
Golf courses SE SE
Golf driving ranges SE SE
Hospice care facility SE
Industrial activities involving processing, production,
repair, or testing and conversion, assembly, and nontoxic
chemical operations
X X X
Junkyard SE
Retail sale of lawn and garden care products; outdoor sale
of nursery stock
SE SE SE
Laboratories for research and development X X X
Municipal Uses X X X
Offices, professional X X X
Offices, medical or dental X X X
Public parks and recreational areas X X X
Public utility installations X X X
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X
Restaurants SE SE SE
16-2
I-1 I-2 I-3
Retail sales, excluding supermarkets, motor vehicle
service stations or garages, motor vehicle sales buildings,
body art establishments, and adult establishments
X
Retail sales as an accessory use X
Retail sale of products produced on the property X
Retail sales on airport property SE
Solid Waste Management Services & Facilities (up to 4
fast-fill CNG dispensers)
X
Solid Waste Management Services & Facilities (5 or
more fast-fill CNG dispensers)
SE
Telecommunications towers X X X
Theater churches SE SE SE
Trucking terminals SE
Warehousing and mini warehousing facilities X X X
Wholesale sales X X
16-3
ARTICLE XVI. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT I-2
SECTION 1601. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to provide for manufacturing and industrial uses and operations
which are free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, glare, hazards of fire, and other
objectionable and dangerous conditions in order to protect adjacent land uses and provide areas
for the development, continuation, or expansion of industrial uses.
SECTION 1602. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farmhouses and structures related to
the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses, cattle,
and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of farm and/or
garden products on a retail basis.
2. Industrial activities involving the processing, production, repair, or testing of materials,
goods, and/or products of those industries which perform primarily conversion, assembly,
or nontoxic chemical operations.
3. Laboratories for scientific or industrial research and development.
4. Warehousing and mini warehousing facilities.
5. Offices, professional or medical/dental.
6. Retail sales of products produced and/or assembled on the premises as an accessory use to
a permitted manufacturing process.
7. Public parks and public recreation areas.
8. Public utility installations.
9. Wholesale sales.
10. Forestry.
11. Telecommunications tower.
12. Commercial recreation facilities.
13. Educational institutions.
14. Municipal Uses.
15. Regional Stormwater Facility.
16. Solid Waste Management Services and Facilities with up to four (4) fast-fill compressed
natural gas (CNG) dispensers.
17. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
16-4
SECTION 1603. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinances, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of this district.
1. Trucking terminals.
2. Restaurants.
3. Day-care centers.
4. Junkyard.
5. Building materials sales and storage, but with no outside storage of materials.
6. Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the outdoor sale of nursery stock.
7. Theatre churches.
8. Solid Waste Management Services and Facilities with five (5) or more fast-fill compressed
natural gas (CNG) dispensers (including existing dispensers).
9. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 1604. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum height:
A. Maximum building height: 85 feet, provided that if the lot is adjacent to a residential
district, the minimum yard dimension along the side contiguous with the residential
district shall be increased by two feet for every foot of building height over 60 feet.
This increase shall be in addition to all other minimum yard dimensions set forth in
this section.
B. Other structures. Chimneys, spires, farm buildings and farm accessory buildings,
towers, elevator penthouses, water tanks, antennas, flagpoles, and mechanical and
electrical equipment shall not exceed eighty-five (85) feet; however, the permitted
height limits are also subject to applicable Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77,
regarding objects affecting navigable airspace.
C. Airport Safety Zones. All structures in this district are subject to Section 2214 of this
ordinances.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
16-5
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the regulations of Section 2503.1.
B. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 12 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
C. Public parks and public recreation areas.
16-6
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard: 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
D. Telecommunications Tower. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2516.
E. Commercial Recreation:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
(6) Length of building. Unless specified in accordance with the applicable T-Zone
Overlay, no building shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(7) Minimum open area: 20%.
F. Other permitted uses by right:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
16-7
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 200 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; provided, however, that for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides
contiguous with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: 15%.
SECTION 1605. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
16-8
Overlay and Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinances.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Trucking terminal:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 200 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; provided, however, that for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides
contiguous with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: 15%.
B. Restaurants and day-care centers. Such use shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2508.
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
16-9
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 50 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 50 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
C. Junkyard:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 200 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 100 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 100 feet along the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; provided, however, that for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 30 feet wide on all sides
contiguous with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: 15%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
D. Theatre churches. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 2519.
E. Lawn and garden products/nursery stock and building materials:
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
16-10
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in accordance with the
applicable T-Zone Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential
district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side contiguous with the
residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous with the residential
district.
[d] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; however, for any lot adjacent to a residential
district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides contiguous
with the residential district.
(5) Minimum open area: 40%.
SECTION 1606. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
17-1
Township of Manheim
Uses Within Industrial Districts
**See also applicable T-Zone Overlay Districts for additional use regulations. **
KEY:
X = Right
SE = Special exception
C = Conditional
I-1 I-2 I-3
Agricultural uses and necessary buildings X X X
Airports X
Banks and financial institutions X
Building materials sales and storage SE SE SE
Commercial recreation facilities X X X
Community clubs SE
Day-care centers SE SE
Day-care centers as an accessory use SE
Distribution facilities X
Educational institutions X X X
Forestry X X X
Golf courses and Country Clubs SE SE
Golf driving ranges SE SE
Hospice care facility SE
Industrial activities involving processing, production,
repair, or testing and conversion, assembly, and nontoxic
chemical operations
X X X
Junkyard SE
Retail sale of lawn and garden care products; outdoor sale
of nursery stock
SE SE SE
Laboratories for research and development X X X
Municipal Uses X X X
Offices, professional X X X
Offices, medical or dental X X X
Public parks and recreational areas X X X
Public utility installations X X X
Regional Stormwater Facility X X X
Restaurants SE SE SE
17-2
I-1 I-2 I-3
Retail sales, excluding supermarkets, motor vehicle
service stations or garages, motor vehicle sales buildings,
body art establishments, and adult establishments
X
Retail sales as an accessory use X
Retail sale of products produced on the property X
Retail sales on airport property SE
Solid Waste Management Services & Facilities (up to 4
fast-fill CNG dispensers)
X
Solid Waste Management Services & Facilities (5 or
more fast-fill CNG dispensers)
SE
Telecommunications towers X X X
Theater churches SE SE SE
Trucking terminals SE
Warehousing and mini warehousing facilities X X X
Wholesale sales X X
17-3
ARTICLE XVII. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT I-3 (Amended by Ordinance 2020-15, dated 07/27/2020)
SECTION 1701. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this district to provide for manufacturing, industrial, office and commercial
recreation uses and operations which contribute to the economic well-being and vitality of the
area in the vicinity of the Lancaster Airport and to allow the limited use of existing movie
theaters for worship and community activities.
SECTION 1702. USES BY RIGHT
Uses by right shall be as follows:
1. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings and structures related
to the tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products and the sale of farm
and/or garden products on a retail basis.
2. Airports.
3. Industrial activities involving processing, production, repair or testing of materials, goods
and/or products, involving those industries primarily performing conversion, assembly, or
nontoxic chemical operations.
4. Laboratories for scientific or industrial research and development.
5. Warehousing, mini warehousing, and distribution facilities.
6. Offices, professional and medical or dental.
7. Public parks and recreation areas.
8. Public utility installations.
9. Retail sales as an accessory use to any of the industrial activities listed under Section
1702.3 and limited to a maximum of 10% of the total space of such activity. Supermarkets,
motor vehicle service stations or garages, motor vehicle sales, and adult establishments are
not permitted.
10. Commercial recreation facilities.
11. Distribution facilities.
12. Forestry.
13. Telecommunications tower.
14. Educational institutions.
15. Municipal Uses.
16. Regional Stormwater Facility.
17. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
17-4
SECTION 1703. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions to its approval
which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinances, it feels are necessary
requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of this district.
1. Golf driving range.
2. Golf course and Country Clubs.
3. Lawn and garden care products and the outdoor sale of nursery stock.
4. Building materials sales and storage, but with no outside storage of materials.
5. Day-care center as an accessory use to any of the uses by right.
6. Retail sales within an airport; provided, however, that supermarkets, motor vehicle service
stations or garages, motor vehicle sales buildings, body art establishments, and adult
establishments are not provided.
7. Theater churches.
8. Community clubs in existing movie theaters.
9. Restaurants, provided there are no drive-through facilities.
10. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special exception uses.
SECTION 1704. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
1. Maximum building height: 45 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay and Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinances.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Agricultural uses/forestry. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2503.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
17-5
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[b] Side yard:
[i] Farm dwelling, each side: 12 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
[c] Rear yard:
[i] Farm dwelling: 35 feet.
[ii] Agribusiness structures and feedlots: 100 feet from the property line
and/or 200 feet from existing dwellings on adjacent property.
[iii] Other permanent structures: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: 75%.
(6) Sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. Such activities shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2503.1.
B. Airports:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential
district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side contiguous with the
residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous with the residential
district.
[d] Perimeter buffer (all sides): 10 feet provided; however, for any lot
adjacent to a residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide
on all sides contiguous with the residential district.
(5) Minimum open area: 80%.
C. Offices, professional and medical/dental:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
17-6
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 50 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 50 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[i] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; provided, however, that for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides
contiguous with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
D. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
17-7
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 12 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
E. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard. 20 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
F. Commercial recreation facilities:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 150 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
17-8
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: Twenty (20%).
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
(8) Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(9) Length of building: 300’.
G. Telecommunications tower. Such use shall comply with the requirements of Section
2516.
H. Other permitted uses by right:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous
with the residential district.
[d] Adjoining buildings or structures.
[i] No minimum side or rear yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which
two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if:
[a] The buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or
common areas; and
[b] Corridors or common areas are provided by cross easements
for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or structures
and their respective employees, clients and/or visitors.
[ii] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
17-9
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side yard
dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building facade at
minimum distances of every 60 feet. Such visual breaks may consist
of projections from the building, angles of deflection of the
building's center line, or variations in the color or texture of the
facade.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; provided, however, that for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides
contiguous with the residential district.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
3. Any use located within the boundaries of the Airport Safety Zone shall be subject to
approval by the Lancaster Airport Authority.
SECTION 1705. AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND
USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
1. Maximum building height: 35 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay and Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinances.
2. Minimum lot requirements:
A. Golf driving ranges:
(1) Minimum lot area: seven acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 900 feet.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous with the residential
district.
(5) Minimum open area: 80%.
(6) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Golf courses and Country Clubs:
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required for
Country Clubs.
(2) Minimum lot area: 50 acres for a nine-hole course and 100 acres for an
17-10
eighteen-hole course.
(3) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: none.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 35 feet. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 50 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 80%.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
C. Lawn and garden products/nursery stock and building materials:
(1 Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay District. (See Section 2213)
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential
district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the side contiguous with the
residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous with the residential
district.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 10 feet; however, for any lot adjacent to a residential
district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet wide on all sides contiguous
with the residential district.
(5) Minimum open area: 40%.
D. Day-care centers and restaurants. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2508.
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: 100 feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: 100 feet.
17-11
(4) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable T-Zone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[b] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be 50 feet on the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side contiguous with the residential
district.
[e] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum open area: 20%.
E. Retail sales within an airport boundary. Such use shall comply with the requirements
of Section 2409.
F. Theater churches and community clubs in existing movie theaters. Such uses shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2519 and Section 2520.
3. Any use located within the boundaries of the Airport Safety Zone shall be subject to
approval by the Lancaster Airport Authority.
SECTION 1706. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
The uses in this district are also subject to applicable regulations contained in the following
articles:
1. Article XVIII, Signs.
2. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
3. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
4. Article XXII, General Regulations, particularly Section 2214, Airport Safety Zone.
5. Article XXIV, T-Zone Overlay Area.
6. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
18-1
ARTICLE XVIII. SIGNS (Amended by Ordinance 2016-23, dated 12/12/2016
SECTION 1801. PURPOSE
The purposes of this article are as follows:
1. To provide for signs as a means of effective visual communication.
2. To promote adopted comprehensive planning and zoning objectives.
3. To assure compatibility of signs with land uses and buildings in the vicinity of the signs
and in the community as a whole.
4. To improve the safety of pedestrians, vehicular traffic, and property.
5. To enhance the economic value of the community.
6. To enhance the aesthetic environment.
7. To minimize adverse effects of signs on nearby property.
8. To otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
community.
9. To regulate the use of signs through a sign permitting process.
10. To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this article.
SECTION 1802. DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply to those terms whenever they appear in this article. Any
word used in this article which is not defined herein and which is defined in Article V of this
ordinance or 440, Subdivision and Land Development, shall, for the purpose of this article, have
the meaning defined therein. See also Article XIX, Planned Residential Development, for
additional definitions which apply to that article.
AGRICULTURAL SIGN - A sign identifying the sale of farm and/or garden products or a farm
occupation.
BILLBOARD - An off-premises, permanent sign which directs attention to a product, service, or
cause.
BUILDING SIGN - A sign attached to or painted on a building which has a use in addition to
supporting the sign; this includes wall signs and roof signs.
BUSINESS SIGN - An on-premises sign which directs attention to any business, professional,
commercial, or industrial activity which is sold, offered, or conducted, other than incidentally, on
the premises on which the sign is located. Business signs shall include center signs, but not a
home occupation sign. (Also see "center sign.")
CAMPUS SIGN - A sign or signs intended for internal use by users of an educational, industrial
or office campus, retirement community, school, house of worship, or airport property. Any
campus sign, other than an identification sign, shall be located at least 200 feet from any property
18-2
line or public right-of-way.
CENTER SIGN - A business sign which provides identification (but is not an identification sign)
at the primary vehicular entrance(s) to a center such as a shopping center, office complex, or
industrial park. [Refer to "business sign" in Table 1 and "center sign" in Table 2, Part B, and in
Section 1806.2.A.]
CONTRACTOR SIGN - A sign which carries the name and information about a contractor,
designer, architect, developer or similar entity who is actively involved in construction work or
design work occurring on the premises on which the sign is located.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN - An identification sign at a residential development and located at its
entrance. [Refer to "identification sign" in Table 1 and "development sign" in Table 2, Part B,
and in Section 1806.7.A.]
ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGING SIGN (EVMS) - A sign, or a portion thereof, where
the message copy includes characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
electronically from a remote location without touching or physically altering the primary surface
of the sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN - A sign not attached to or painted on a building, or a sign attached to
or painted on a structure that is erected for the sole purpose of supporting the sign.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN - A temporary sign which directs attention to the sale of personal
goods at a private residence or at a residential development.
GOVERNMENT SIGN - An off-premises sign placed by a federal, state or municipal
government or government agency, such as a traffic, directional, informational, or street name
sign or an historical marker.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN - A sign providing information about a business activity
conducted within a dwelling unit on the premises on which the sign is located.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN - An on-premises sign used to identify the name and display
information about an individual, organization, agency, institution, facility, or development, other
than a business, professional, commercial or industrial facility. (Also see "development sign" and
"public use sign.")
INCIDENTAL SIGN - An informational sign, no more than four square feet in size and not
including any commercial message or logo, which carries a message such as "enter," "open,"
"telephone," "rest rooms," "no parking," "no trespassing," "warning," a listing of hours when
open, an on-site direction, or anything similar, except that one "enter" sign per entrance may
include a logo or business name, as long as the entrance is exclusively for that business, and the
logo or business name is subordinate to the word "enter."
ISSUE SIGN - A sign that directs attention to an opinion of a public or private nature, such as,
but not limited to, a community, social, religious, political, or ballot issue.
LOT - When used in Article XVIII, Signs, the word "lot" shall mean a designated parcel, tract or
area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit (e.g., the area used by a dwelling unit in a townhouse structure or a tenant
space in a multiple-tenant building).
18-3
NIT - A measure of light emitted from an LED or like type of display and equaling one candela
per square meter. Brightness of light.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION SIGN - An off-premises sign displaying information about a
house of worship, service club, or other organization which does not operate for the purpose of
making a profit.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN - A sign that does not apply to the property on which it is displayed.
ON-PREMISES SIGN - A sign that applies to the property on which it is displayed.
OPEN HOUSE SIGN - A temporary sign which provides information about a real estate open
house, including the words "open house" and the name of the realtor.
OVERHEAD SIGN - A sign located such that pedestrian or vehicular traffic can safely pass
beneath any part of it.
PERMANENT SIGN - A sign intended to be maintained and displayed for an unlimited period
of time.
PUBLIC USE SIGN - An identification sign used to identify the name and display information
about a public use such as a government building, school, park, firehouse, or house of worship.
(Refer to "identification sign" in Table 1 and "public use sign in Table 2, Part B.)
PUBLIC UTILITY SIGN - A sign with a message relating to a business organization performing
a public service and subject to special governmental regulations (e.g., an electric company, sewer
authority, gas, cable, or telephone company).
REAL ESTATE SIGN - A temporary sign which advertises the sale, lease, rent, financing or
development of the property on which the sign is placed, but not including an open house sign,
temporary business sign, or an auction sign. (See "special event sign.")
ROOF SIGN - A sign attached to or painted on a roof.
SIDEWALK SIGN - A temporary sign placed on the sidewalk or behind the public right-of-way
adjacent to the commercial activity it advertises, but not including a contractor sign, a
garage/yard sale sign, a home occupation sign, an open house sign, a real estate sign, a sandwich
board sign or a special event sign.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN - A temporary sign which carries information about a special event,
such as an auction, flea market, festival, carnival, meal, holiday event, or fund-raising event, but
not including any business sign, such as a "sale" sign at a store or recurring event such as a
sporting or social event.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS SIGN - A temporary business sign that indicates special events, such
as the pending opening, official opening ("Grand Opening"), pending closing or temporary retail
sales.
TEMPORARY SIGN - A sign that is displayed for a limited period in any given year, not to
exceed three (3) months in any one year, unless stated otherwise in this ordinance.
18-4
WALL SIGN - A sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building.
SECTION 1803. SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT
The following guidelines shall apply when interpreting area and height regulations in this article:
1. Area. The area of a sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangle, triangle, or circle that
will encompass all elements of the sign, such as letters, figures, symbols, designs, or other
display.
A. When the sign is a separate unit, the area shall include any borders, framing, trim,
decorative attachments, background, and space between elements; it shall not include
any supporting structure, unless that structure is illuminated, is in the form of a
symbol, or contains advertising elements.
B. When the sign is applied to a wall or otherwise does not have definable edges, the
area shall include all color, artwork, or other means used to differentiate the sign from
the surface upon which it is placed.
C. When a single sign structure has more than one face with the same message, and no
two sign faces are more than three feet apart at any point, the area shall be computed
by determining the greatest total area of all sign faces visible from any single
location.
2. Height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the average ground level beneath the
sign to the highest point of the sign structure. The ground level shall be the lower of the
ground level existing at the time of construction or the ground level existing prior to
construction and prior to any earth disturbance at the site. This prior ground level may be
established by a reliable source, including, without limitation, existing topographic maps,
aerial photographs, photographs of the site, or affidavits of people who are personally
familiar with the site. No person(s) shall artificially increase the maximum height of a sign
by altering the grade at the base of the sign by any means.
A. No sign shall be higher than the height limitation of the district in which it is located.
B. The height of freestanding signs shall be controlled by the standards in Table 2.
C. Wall signs may be at any height on the wall to which they are attached, except that:
(1) Where such sign refers to the first-floor use of a multistory (two or more stories)
mixed-use building, the top of such sign shall not extend above the base of the
second floor window or sill and shall not exceed a maximum height of fifteen
(15) feet above the front sidewalk elevation.
(2) On a single-use building, such sign may not extend higher than the top of the
wall to which it is attached.
D. Roof signs may extend no more than five feet above the lowest point where they are
attached to the building and may not extend above the highest point of the roof.
SECTION 1804. GENERAL REGULATIONS
The following regulations shall apply to all signs, in addition to the specific regulations and
18-5
supplemental regulations contained in the following provisions of this article. Where the general
regulations are contradicted by the specific or supplementary regulations, the specific or
supplementary regulations shall control.
1. All signs shall reflect the general character of the neighborhood.
2. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and
secured in a safe manner.
3. When a sign becomes unsafe, the Zoning Officer or designated code official shall give
written notice to the owner of the premises on which the sign is located that the sign must
be made safe or removed immediately.
4. The areas surrounding all signs shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive
condition.
5. All signs shall be removed within three months if the purpose for which they were erected
no longer exists.
6. Each property which displays one or more permanent freestanding signs and which is in an
area where street addresses have been assigned must prominently display the address on
one permanent freestanding sign visible from the street. The address must include the street
number; the street name is optional. The address must be of a size and design which is
easily identifiable and legible from moving traffic in the street at a distance of 100 feet (sixinch-
high numerals with a three-fourths-inch stroke). Such numerals shall be a contrasting
color to the sign background. The area taken up by the address does not count as part of the
sign area. Center signs are exempt from this requirement.
7. Temporary signs, including temporary business signs, shall be permitted as authorized in
Table 1 of this Article.
8. No sign shall be located within a street right-of-way, except a government sign, a public
utility sign, a sidewalk sign, a nonprofit organization sign, or another sign approved by the
governing body or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
9. No sign within the clear sight triangle should obstruct vision between the heights of 30
inches and eight feet above the elevation of the center line of the street.
10. No signs shall be painted, pasted, nailed, stapled, taped or otherwise attached to utility
poles, trees, fences, fire hydrants, speed limit sign posts, signal control boxes, Townshipowned
utilities, or in an unauthorized manner to walls or other signs, except insofar as such
signs comply with generally applicable rules, regulations, or policies formally adopted by
the governing body.
11. Any freestanding sign within a floodplain must receive specific approval as a special
exception.
12. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct any door, stairway, window, fire escape,
handicapped-accessible route, or other means of egress or ingress.
13. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct ventilation or light from a building.
18-6
14. No overhead sign shall have a clearance of less than eight feet between any pedestrian walk
and the lowest part of the sign; and less than 17 feet six inches between any roadway and
the lowest part of the sign.
15. No sign which is parallel to and attached to the face of a building shall project more than 18
inches over a public sidewalk.
16. No sign which is perpendicular to and attached to the face of a building shall project more
than 48 inches from the building.
17. No sign shall have lights or other illuminating devices which constitute a public safety or
traffic hazard.
18. No sign shall be permitted which imitates or which might be confused with an official
traffic sign or signal, such as by containing the words "stop" or "danger" or by including
red, green, or yellow lights.
19. No sign shall include a revolving beam or beacon of light resembling an emergency vehicle
or facility.
20. No sign shall advertise activities or products which are illegal under federal, state, or local
municipal laws or regulations.
21. No sign shall include statements, words, or pictures which are considered to be vulgar,
obscene, or pornographic.
22. No streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, feather flags, bow
flags, wind flags, inflatable flags, flags (other than as described in Section 1804.23.) below,
air dancer puppets or similar materials shall be displayed outside a building. (See Section
1806.13. for regulations which apply to banners used as special events signs.)
23. In addition to any other signage permitted by this article, any nonresidential property may
display a maximum of three flags where each flag is a maximum of 35 square feet in area
and is located on an approved, standard flagpole. Such flags may display the company or
corporate identification logo, the United States flag or the flag of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. In addition, nonresidential properties shall be permitted to display one
decorative flag not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area.
24. No animated, sequential, intermittent, flashing, rotating, or oscillating signs shall be
permitted except for electronic variable messaging signs in accordance with Section
1806.4.
25. No sign shall emit smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound, or odor.
26. No signs shall be placed on an automobile, truck, trailer, or other vehicle if that vehicle is
being used primarily for displaying such sign. An automobile, truck, trailer or other
vehicle used for business purposes may not be parked off-premise in a manner used to
exhibit the automobile, truck, trailer, or vehicle as a sign display.
27. No inflatable structures shall be permitted on the premises of nonresidential properties.
28. No open flames shall be permitted as part of a sign or in any other way to attract attention.
18-7
29. Advertising painted upon or displayed upon a barn or other structure shall be considered a
sign and shall comply with the regulations of this article.
30. Signs may be interior lighted with nonglaring lights; signs may be externally lighted by
lights which are shielded so there is no direct light transmitted to other properties or public
rights-of-way, and the source of such light is not visible to other properties or public rightsof-
way.
31. The light from any illuminated sign shall not adversely affect safe vision of operators of
vehicles moving on public or private streets or parking areas, any residential district, or any
part of a building or property used for residential purposes.
32. No lighting shall be permitted to outline buildings or structures or architectural elements
thereof through the use of exposed skeleton or neon tubing, strings of lights, or other
illumination means, with the exception of customary holiday decorations, which may be
installed 30 days prior to and removed not later than 21 days after the holiday, and accent
lighting around the perimeter of a sign, in which case the lighting shall be incorporated into
the calculation of total sign area.
33. No signs for permitted nonresidential uses in residential districts shall be illuminated when
the nonresidential use is closed.
34. All electrically illuminated signs shall be constructed to the standards and listing of the
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or other approved nationally recognized testing laboratory
and the most recent adopted edition of the National Electric Code.
35. Freestanding signs greater than twenty (20) square feet in area shall be designed in
accordance with the applicable design and construction requirements of the current
International Building Code, as amended. The design shall be reviewed, signed and sealed
by a licensed design professional registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
36. Signage may be displayed on one (1) construction trailer, provided the construction trailer
is used primarily for storage rather than for advertising; the construction trailer is situated
on an active construction site; the construction trailer complies with all setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district; and the construction trailer is removed once
construction activity is completed or discontinued. Banners or other temporary signage
displays may not be located on the construction trailer.
SECTION 1805. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS
Tables 1 and 2 provide regulations for specific kinds of signs in each zoning district. Note that
separate regulations for planned residential developments are found in the respective section.
Also note that there are also supplemental regulations in Section 1806 which should be reviewed
for most kinds of signs; these are referenced in the second column of Table 1, the note at the top
of Table 2, Part A, and the second column of Table 2,
Part B.
1. Permitted signs and sign permit requirements. Table 1 indicates, for each zoning district,
which kinds of signs are permitted and not permitted, and which kinds of signs require
permits. Part A applies to signs on residential properties; Part B applies to signs on
18-8
nonresidential properties. In those parts, an "N" indicates that the sign is not permitted; a
"P-Y" indicates that the sign is permitted and a permit is required; a "P-N" indicates that
the sign is permitted and a permit is not required. Part C applies to signs in rights-of-way;
these are approved through special processes rather than through the regular permit
procedure.
2. Permitted number, area, height, and setback for signs. Table 2 indicates, for each zoning
district, information about the permitted number, maximum area, maximum height, and
minimum setback for each kind of sign. Part A has standards for the following kinds of
signs: business signs (except center signs), home occupation signs, and identification signs
(except development signs and public use signs). Part B has standards for other kinds of
signs.
SECTON 1806. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
In addition to the regulations contained elsewhere in this article, the following shall apply to
specific kinds of signs. The regulations in Tables 1 and 2 apply in addition to the following
supplemental regulations. Where the provisions in the supplemental regulations and Tables 1 and
2 are contradictory, the provisions contained in the supplemental regulations shall control.
1. Billboards. There may be no more than one billboard structure on a lot; it may have two
surfaces, with a total of two messages, as long as the surfaces are back-to-back or at an
angle of < 45°. Each surface may have an area of 72 square feet, whether or not the
messages are the same. Each billboard structure must have setbacks of 30 feet from any
street right-of-way and 15 feet or the minimum building setback, whichever is greater,
from other property lines. Each billboard structure must be at least 1,200 feet from any
other billboard structure, at least 300 feet from any residential, village or, agricultural
zoning district or overlay district, and at least 300 feet from a residential use, house of
worship, school, library, or other community facility, as measured from the property line of
the parcel on which such use is located.
2. Business signs. Business signs are regulated in accordance with Tables 1 and 2A. Business
signs for individual businesses which are permitted by Table 2A must be located so that
they are identified with the individual business, i.e., rather than being at the street frontage
of a large center, away from the business they are advertising. One special kind of business
sign is regulated in accordance with Tables 1 and 2B:
A. Center signs are allowed for centers such as shopping centers, office parks, and
industrial parks which meet at least two of the following three minimums:
(1) Five units/tenants;
(2) Twenty thousand square feet of building footprint area; and
(3) Five acres of land.
3. Contractor signs.
A. Each contractor, designer, architect, developer or similar entity sign must be setback
at least 10 feet from the right-of-way or at the building face, whichever is less, may
not be in the side yard setback, and may not be illuminated. Contractor signs shall not
18-9
be placed in the clear sight triangle and shall not obstruct the vision of any motorist.
Contractor signs must be removed promptly upon completion of the project; signs
which are not removed promptly may be removed and impounded by the
municipality, and the municipality may recover a fee equal to the cost of removal and
storage. No off-premises contractor signs are permitted.
B. If there are four or more contractor signs on a single lot, they must be combined in a
single display by attaching them to a single background panel not to exceed 32 square
feet in total sign area and a maximum of six square feet per individual sign. The
background is not included in calculating the sign area, the height of the display may
not exceed 10 feet, and the display may project a maximum of 12 inches from the
wall if attached parallel to the building.
4. Electronic variable messaging signs (EVMS).
A. Such sign shall be permitted only on a portion of an approved freestanding sign. The
sign area of an EVMS sign shall be a maximum of 60% of the total area of the total
freestanding sign.
B. The display shall have a maximum luminance of 5,000 nits during daylight hours and
a maximum of 125 nits for dusk through dawn.
C. The message displayed on the sign shall be static and nonanimated and shall remain
fixed for a minimum of five (5) minutes.
D. When the message is transitioned, it shall be accomplished in one second or less with
all moving parts or illumination changing simultaneously and in unison.
E. The sign shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a
malfunction occurs or, in the alternative, shut down.
F. The sign shall not display any message that moves, appears to move, scrolls, or
changes in intensity during the fixed display period.
G. The sign shall retain a dark-colored background with light-colored graphics, letters or
symbols.
H. There shall be a maximum of one EVMS sign per property.
5. Garage/yard sale signs. One on-premises garage/yard sale sign with a maximum of six
square feet may be placed no more than 48 hours before the sale and must be removed
before the end of the day of the sale. A maximum of two off-premises signs with a
maximum of four square feet each are permitted per garage/yard sale. Such signs shall be
freestanding and shall not be attached to any utility poles, signal poles, or trees and shall
only be posted for the day of the sale. Signs which are not removed within the time limit
may be removed and impounded by the municipality, and the municipality may recover a
fee equal to the cost of removal and storage.
6. Home occupation signs. A home occupation sign may include a name, an address, an
occupation or activity, and a logo or trademark. There may be no illumination, except that a
sign for a medical office or emergency service may be illuminated when the business is
open.
18-10
7. Identification signs. Identification signs are regulated in accordance with Tables 1 and 2A.
However, two special kinds of identification signs are regulated in accordance with Tables
1 and 2B: development signs and public use signs.
A. Development signs are allowed for residential developments. They shall include only
the name of the development and shall not include any commercial advertising.
B. Public use signs are permitted for nonresidential uses other than a business, office or
industry and include both freestanding and building signs providing information
pertaining to the use and on-premises activities.
8. Incidental signs. Incidental signs must have a setback of 10 feet from the right-of-way,
unless they are 30 inches or less in height, in which case no setback is required.
9. Nonprofit organization signs. Nonprofit organization signs may be placed in street rightsof-
way with the approval of the Board of Commissioners. The governing body may require
that they be placed at designated entrances to the community or on common display panels.
10. Open house signs. Open house signs must include the words "open house" and the name of
the realtor. They may be displayed no more than three days in advance of the open house
and must be removed within two hours of the end of the open house. The open house must
be attended by the seller or his representative during the entire advertised time of the open
house. Signs which are not removed within the time limits may be removed and impounded
by the municipality, and the municipality may recover a fee equal to the cost of removal
and storage. There may be no more than two off-premises open house signs for each open
house, with not more than one sign per intersection. The placement of open house signs
may not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and must comply with all applicable
general regulations in Section 1804.
11. Real estate signs.
A. Real estate signs must be removed within five (5) days of the completion of the
activity which they advertise. Signs which are not removed within the time limits may
be removed and impounded by the municipality, and the municipality may recover a
fee equal to the cost of removal and storage. No off-premises real estate signs are
permitted.
B. Real estate signs including financial signs may not displayed individually but shall be
combined in a single display by attaching them to a single background panel not to
exceed the maximum requirements of this article for a single real estate sign.
12. Sidewalk signs. Sidewalk signs shall not be more than 24 inches wide and 48 inches high if
placed next to the curb; if placed next to buildings having obstructions such as steps, they
shall not be more than 42 inches wide and 72 inches high. The distance between sidewalk
signs shall be at least 15 feet. The minimum of four feet of unobstructed walkway shall be
maintained.
13. Special event signs. Special event signs may be displayed no more than twenty one (21)
days in advance of the event. All special event signs must be removed within five days (5)
of the end of the event. Signs which are not removed within the time limits may be
removed and impounded by the municipality, and the municipality may recover a fee equal
18-11
to the cost of removal and storage. Any special event signs which do not meet the standards
of this article must be approved by special action of the governing body. An on-premises
auction sign advertising the auction of real estate may be displayed more than twenty one
(21) days in advance of the auction if it follows all real estate sign standards.
SECTION 1807. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Permits for the placement of signs are required as indicated by Table 1. Sign permit application
requirements, such as forms, plans, and fees, shall be established by the governing body.
SECTION 1808. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance that does not conform in
use, location, height or size with the regulations of the zone in which such sign is located shall be
considered a legal nonconforming sign and shall be permitted to continue in such status until
such time as it is either abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the following limitations:
1. Structural alterations, enlargement or re-erection are permissible only where such alteration
will not increase the degree of nonconformity.
2. A legal nonconforming sign may be moved to another position on the building or lot on
which it is located, provided that moving such a sign would reduce or eliminate the
nonconformity. This action shall require the notification and permission of the Zoning
Officer or Sign Code Official.
3. Whenever a nonconforming sign has been altered to lessen the nonconformity, such sign
shall not thereafter be changed to increase the nonconformity.
4. A nonconforming sign which is damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt in the same location
and form as before the damage after obtaining appropriate permits and provided that:
A. The damage or destruction was unintentional and not the result of neglect or
abandonment.
B. The previous foundation is to be used for restoration.
C. The reconstructed sign shall not be larger than the damaged structure.
D. The reconstruction shall start within six months from the time of damage.
E. The repair of a nonconforming structure shall not cause the structure to create further
expansion in a nonconforming dimension or aspect.
5. No nonconforming sign which has been dismantled or damaged by neglect or abandonment
may be repaired or rebuilt, except as a conforming sign, unless specifically approved to be
repaired or rebuilt as a nonconforming sign as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
6. If the use for which a nonconforming sign refers is abandoned, all signs accessory to such
use shall be deemed to become unlawful and shall be removed within three calendar
months from the date such use terminates.
7. Any sign which has been authenticated as historically significant and accurate for its
18-12
specific location, whether original or a replica, may be granted permanent nonconforming
status as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
18-13
Township of Manheim
Table 1: Permitted Signs and Sign Permit Requirements
(See Table 2 and supplemental regulations referenced in second column for additional standards;
also see explanation in Section 1805.1)
LEGEND: Zoning districts – The abbreviation in the
column headings represent the zoning districts of
Manheim Township as follows:
A – Agricultural
R-1 and R-2 – Low-Medium-Intensity Residential
R-3 – Medium-Intensity Residential
IN – Institutional
B-1 and B-2 – Business
B-3 and B-4 – Business
I-1, I-2 and I-3 – Industrial
Other – The other abbreviations within the table are
as follows:
P-Y – Sign is permitted and permit is required.
P-N – Sign is permitted and permit is not required.
N – Sign is not permitted.
Part A – Signs on Residential Properties
Kind of Sign Supp. Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-2
and I-3
Freestanding signs and building signs – permanent
Home occupation sign
Identification sign
Section
1806.6
Section
1806.7
P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y
Incidental sign Section
1806.8
P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N
Billboard Section
1806.1
N N N N P-Y P-Y P-Y
Agricultural sign P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y
EVMS Section
1806.4
N N N P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y
Other N N N N N N N
18-14
Table 1: Permitted Signs and Sign Permit Requirements
(See Table 2 and supplemental regulations referenced in second column for additional standards;
also see explanation in Section 1805.1)
Part A – Signs on Residential Properties
(Continued)
Kind of Sign Supp. Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-2
and I-3
Freestanding signs and building signs – temporary
Garage/yard sale sign
Open house sign
Real estate sign
Contractor sign
Issue signs
Section
1806.5
Section
1806.10
Section
1806.11
Section
1806.3
Section
1802
P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N
Special event sign
(on premises)
Section
1806.13
P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N
Special event sign
(off premises)
Section
1806.13
N N N N P-N P-N P-N
Temporary business
sign
Section 1802 N N N N N N N
Other N N N N N N N
18-15
Table 1: Permitted Signs and Sign Permit Requirements
(See Table 2 and supplemental regulations referenced in second column for additional standards;
also see explanation in Section 1805.1)
Part B – Signs on Nonresidential Properties
Kind of Sign Supp. Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-2
and I-3
Freestanding signs and building signs – permanent
Business sign
Identification sign
Section
1806.2
Section
1806.7
P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y
Incidental sign(a) Section
1806.8
P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N
Billboard Section
1806.1
N N N N P-Y P-Y P-Y
Agricultural sign P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y
Campus sign(a) P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N
EVMS Section
1806.4
N N N P-Y P-Y P-Y P-Y
Other N N N N N N N
Freestanding signs and building signs – temporary
Business sign
Open house sign
Real estate sign
Contractor sign
Special event sign
Issue signs
Section
1806.2
Section
1806.10
Section
1806.11
Section
1806.3
Section
1806.13
Section 1802
P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N P-N
Sidewalk Sign
Temporary Business sign
Section
1806.12
Section 1802
P-N N N N P-N P-N P-N
Other N N N N N N N
NOTES: (a) An electric permit is required if any sign uses electricity, whether directly or
indirectly.
18-16
Table 1: Permitted Signs and Sign Permit Requirements
(See Table 2 and supplemental regulations referenced in second column for additional standards;
also see explanation in Section 1805.1)
Part C – Signs in Rights-of-Way
Kind of Sign Supp. Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-2
and I-3
Nonprofit org. sign Section
1806.9
Permitted by Board of Commissioners
Other Section
1806.8
18-17
Township of Manheim
Table 2: Permitted Number, Area, Height and Setback for Signs
LEGEND:
Zoning districts – The abbreviation in the column headings represent the zoning districts of
Manheim Township as follows:
A – Agricultural
R-1 and R-2 – Low-Medium-Intensity
Residential
R-3 – Medium-Intensity Residential
IN – Institutional
B-1 and B-2 – Business
B-3 and B-4 – Business
I-1, I-2 and I-3 – Industrial
Part A- Business Signs (Except Center Signs), Home Occupation Signs, and
Identification Signs (Except Development Signs and Public Use Signs)
[Number permitted and maximum area refer to the combined total of all the above kinds of signs;
also see supplemental regulations for additional standards: business signs (Section 1806.2.),
home occupation signs (Section1806.6.), and identification signs (Section 1806.7.).]
Kind of Sign and Standards
Zoning District
A
R-1 and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1 and
B-2
B-3 and
B-4
I-1, I-2
and I-3
Freestanding signs
Number permitted per lot 1(d) 1(d) 1(d) 1 1 1(a)(c) 1(a)(c)
Maximum area (square feet) 12 2 2 20 20 (b) (b)
Maximum height (feet) 6 6 6 20 20 20 20
Minimum setback from
right-of-way/property line (feet)
10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Building signs (e)
Single Occupancy Uses
Number permitted per lot (for
single-occupancy uses)
1(d) 1(d) 1(d) No limit No limit No limit No limit
Maximum total area of all
building signs
12 2 2 1 ½ square per linear foot of façade to
which sign is attached, up to maximum of
200 square feet of signage per tenant.
Multi Occupancy Uses
Number permitted per lot (for
shopping centers, office parks or
industrial parks or other multiuse
tenant)
N/A N/A N/A No limit No limit No limit No limit
Maximum total area of all
building signs
N/A N/A N/A 1 1/2 square feet per linear foot of facade
to which sign is attached, up to maximum
of 200 square feet of signage per tenant
18-18
18-19
NOTES:
(a) Number permitted on each parallel street frontage for each parcel, except that, in a structure with
multiple businesses, the individual businesses may not have their own freestanding signs.
(b) The area permitted on each street frontage is 120 square feet.
(c) An additional freestanding sign is permitted for each additional parallel street frontage, with the area
to be calculated as indicated in Note (b) above, and with no freestanding sign to exceed 120 square
feet.
(d) Only one home occupation sign is permitted per property. If a freestanding sign is selected, it must
be located directly behind the curb on a mailbox column (if one is present). If no mailbox column is
present, the sign may be attached to a single post or attached to the building. A building sign may be
used in place of a freestanding sign, but not in addition to a freestanding sign. No sidewalk sign or
business related flags are permitted.
(e) The length of the facade of an irregularly shaped building (e.g., a circular building, an “S” shaped
building, or a building with one or more ells on the side in question) is the straight line distance
between the two ends of the building.
18-20
Table 2: Permitted Number, Area, Height and Setback for Signs
Part B – Other Kinds of Signs
(See supplemental regulations referenced in second column for additional standards;
note that minimum setbacks apply to freestanding signs only and are to be measured
from the right-of-way and/or property line.)
LEGEND:
N/A = Not applicable
Kind of Sign and
Standards
Supp.
Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-
2 and
I-3
Agricultural
Maximum area/surface
(square feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
12
6
10
12
6
10
12
6
10
12
6
10
12
6
10
12
6
10
12
6
10
# permitted 1 per lot
Billboard Section
1806.1.
Maximum area/surface
(square feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
72
25
*
72
25
*
72
25
*
# permitted See Section 1806.1.for applicable standards
Campus sign
Maximum area/surface
(square feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
N/A
N/A
N/A
10
10
200
10
10
200
10
10
200
20
10
200
20
10
200
20
10
200
# permitted No limit
Center Sign Section
1806.1.A.
Maximum area/surface
(square feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
20
6
10
20
6
10
20
6
10
20
6
10
120
20
10
120
20
10
120
20
10
# permitted/center 1 per principal entrance, up to maximum of 2
18-21
Kind of Sign and
Standards
Supp.
Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-
2 and
I-3
Contractor sign Section
1806.3.
Maximum area/surface
(square feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
6
6
*
6
6
*
6
6
*
6
6
*
6
6
*
6
6
*
6
6
*
# permitted/lot 1 per contractor; see Section 1806.3.
for multiple signs on one lot
Development sign Section
1806.7.A.
Maximum area/surface
(square feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
20
6
10
20
6
10
20
6
10
20
6
10
20
20
10
20
20
10
20
20
10
# permitted/res.
development
1 per principal entrance, up to maximum of 2 entrances
Garage/yard sign Section
1806.5.
Permitted number, area, height, and setbacks
are defined in the supplemental regulations
Maximum area/surface
(square feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
# permitted/lot
Government sign None Placed within rights-of-way; generally
not regulated by this article
Incidental sign Section
1806.8.
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
4
6
10
4
6
10
4
6
10
4
6
10
4
6
10
4
6
10
4
6
10
# permitted/lot No limit
Issue sign
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
6
6
10
6
6
10
6
6
10
32
10
10
32
10
10
32
10
10
32
10
10
# permitted/lot No limit for permitted time for display;
1 per street frontage, up to 2 per lot
18-22
Kind of Sign and
Standards
Supp.
Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-
2 and
I-3
Nonprofit org. sign Section
1806.9.
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
4
6
*
4
6
*
4
6
*
4
6
*
4
6
*
4
6
*
4
6
*
# permitted As approved by the Board of Commissioners
Open house sign Section
1806.10
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
6
6
N/A*
6
6
N/A*
6
6
N/A*
6
6
N/A*
6
10
N/A*
6
10
N/A*
6
10
N/A*
# permitted/lot 1 on-premises open house sign; see Section 1806.10.
for off-premises open house signs
Public use sign
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
40
6
10
40
6
10
40
6
10
40
6
10
40
10
10
40
10
10
40
10
10
# permitted/lot 1 building sign per lot and 1 freestanding sign per
principal entrance
Real estate sign Section
1806.11
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
6
6
10
6
6
10
6
6
10
32
10
10
32
10
10
32
10
10
32
10
10
# permitted/lot 1 per street frontage, up to maximum of 2 per lot. See
Section 1806.11. for combined signage.
Sidewalk sign Section
1806.12
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
See Section 1806.12 for applicable standards
# permitted/lot 1 per street frontage, up to maximum of 2 per lot;
no limit for permitted time for display
18-23
Kind of Sign and
Standards
Supp.
Regs.
Zoning District
A
R-1
and
R-2 R-3 IN
B-1
and
B-2
B-3
and
B-4
I-1, I-
2 and
I-3
Special event sign Section
1806.13
Maximum area (square
feet)
Maximum height (feet)
Minimum setback (feet)
16
6
10
16
6
10
16
6
10
16
6
10
16
6
10
16
6
10
19
6
10
# permitted/lot 1 per lot per event; an on-premises auction sign
advertising the auctioning of real estate only may be
displayed more than 21 days in advance of the auction
if it follows all real estate sign standards
Temporary business
sign
Maximum area (square
feet)
16 X X X 16 16 16
Maximum height (feet) 6 X X X 6 6 6
Minimum setback (feet) 10 X X X 10 10 10
No. permitted/lot 1 per lot.
# permitted/shopping
center, office park, or
industrial park.
2 per shopping center, office park or industrial park.
NOTES:
*See supplemental regulations.
20-1
ARTICLE XX. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING (AMENDED BY ORDINANCE 2020-03,
DATED 01/13/2020)
SECTION 2001. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
No building shall be erected, enlarged by an increase of floor area, or converted to a new use
classification in any district, unless off-street parking spaces are provided as set forth in the
following schedule. In addition to the number of parking spaces set forth, there shall also be
provided sufficient passageways and driveways giving access to the parking spaces to allow cars
to enter and leave the lot and to turn within it in a safe and orderly manner and without
disrupting traffic in the public right-of-way.
SECTION 2002. MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
1. Dwellings:
A. Single-family detached, single-family semidetached and duplex: two (2) spaces for
each dwelling unit.
B. Townhouses: One and three quarters (1.75) spaces for each dwelling unit.
C. Apartment dwellings: One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each dwelling unit.
2. Auditoriums (excluding schools), stadiums, theaters, and all other places of assembly
providing seats for an audience, including houses of worship and funeral homes: one (1)
space for each two and one-half (2.5) seats.
3. Extended, intermediate, and long-term care facilities: one (1) space for each three (3) beds
and one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.
4. Retail sales and services: one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor area. (See also Subsection 15, Shopping center.)
5. Restaurants and banquet facilities: one (1) space for each two (2) seats.
6. Hotels, full-service; hotels, limited-service; motels; boardinghouses; and bed-and-breakfast
establishments: one (1) space for each guest unit and one (1) space for each employee on
the largest shift.
7. Industrial and research uses: One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each two employees.
8. Offices:
A. Under 49,999 square feet of gross floor area: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
B. 50,000 to 99,999 square feet of gross floor area: four (4) spaces per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
C. 100,000 plus square feet of gross floor area: Three and one-half (3.5) spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
D. Offices located within an office park: one (1) space for two hundred fifty (250) square
feet gross floor area.
20-2
E. Offices, medical or dental: five (5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet
of gross floor area.
9. Convenience store: one (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area
and one (1) for each employee on the largest shift.
10. Schools:
A. Elementary: two and one-half (2.5) spaces for each classroom.
B. Secondary: four (4) spaces for each classroom.
11. Warehousing: one (1) space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area
and one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.
12. Day-care centers: one (1) space for each six (6) persons cared for and one (1) space for
each employee on the largest shift.
13. Educational institutions: one (1) space for each student and one (1) space for each five
hundred (500) feet of gross floor area devoted to classroom and administrative office use.
14. Hospital: one (1) space for every two (2) beds and one (1) space for each two hundred
(200) feet of gross floor area.
15. Shopping center: four and one-half (4.5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet
of gross floor area.
16. Motor vehicle sales/service: one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1)
space per service bay.
17. Commercial recreation facilities: one (1) per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor
area.
18. Outdoor athletic fields: fifteen (15) per field, plus one (1) per four (4) permanent seats.
19. Community facility/community club and Country Clubs: one (1) space per three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area.
20. Wholesale sales: one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
21. Mini storage facilities. Parking requirements shall be based upon the area of office use
only.
22. Veterinary Facility: four and one-half (4.5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square
feet of gross floor area.
23. Handicapped parking space location, dimensions and number shall be regulated by the
Department of Code Compliance.
24. For other uses which do not fit into one (1) of the above categories, determination of the
adequate off-street parking space requirement shall be made by the Township. It is the
intent of these requirements that adequate off-street parking and loading facilities be
provided for each land use.
20-3
SECTION 2003. PARKING DEMAND NEEDS ASSESSMENT (PDNA)
1. Where an applicant or the Township believes that the parking requirements are
inappropriate for a proposed use or shared parking arrangement and provides a reasonable
explanation, a Parking Demand and Needs Assessment (PDNA) may be submitted at the
developer's expense. The Township may authorize the reduction to the parking
requirements when a PDNA shows that the requirements, as applied to the particular use,
would exceed the minimum necessary to conveniently serve the customers, clients, visitors
and employees. The Township may substitute or rely on the special study for that specific
property.
2. The components of a PDNA shall include, at least, the following:
A. A narrative discussion of the type of use and an explanation of why such use is
unique from a parking needs standpoint.
B. Basic traffic generation data, such as numbers of anticipated vehicles entering and
exiting the site at peak hours. This should include data derived from ITE or similar
uses at other sites.
C. Existing or proposed public transit facilities available to the site and the availability
of potential pedestrian or bicycle access to the site.
D. Proposed means of parking/traffic mitigation measures, such as carpools/vanpools,
varied work shifts, company-operated buses or shuttles and employee incentives for
utilizing alternate modes of transportation.
E. Anticipated number of employees, parking counts from similar land uses, amount of
time a typical user parks at the site, possibility of shared parking between one or more
adjacent land uses, peak period parking demand information, and any additional
relevant information requested by the Township.
3. The Township Board of Commissioners shall review and provide a decision on the parking
demand needs assessment with final plan approval.
4. Where the Township authorizes a reduction in parking, an area suitable for the number of
parking spaces no longer required as a result of the PDNA analysis shall be reserved on site
and shown on the plan as reserved parking should the proposed use(s) change and the
reductions granted no longer be applicable.
SECTION 2004. PARKING SPACE COMPUTATION
When the computation to determine the number of required parking spaces results in a
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be
disregarded, and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall equal one (1) space.
SECTION 2005. PARKING AREA ACCESS AND LOCATION
1. All the required off-street parking and loading areas and access shall be located on the
same lot as the building which they are intended to serve and shall be readily accessible to
it, unless located within an office park, industrial park, shopping center or within the T-6
Urban Transition Overlay area and provided in accordance with Section 2005.6 and 7
20-4
herein.
2. All parking areas, loading areas, and access areas shall be located in the same Zoning
District and T-Zone Overlay as the use which they serve unless otherwise specified in the
T-6 Urban Transition Overlay.
3. Access to a parking lot must be located in the same Zoning District and T-Zone Overlay as
the parking lot unless otherwise specified in the T-6 Urban Transition Overlay.
4. No required off-street parking spaces shall be located within the required front yard, or
yards in the case of a corner lot in a residential district. In all other districts, it shall not be
located within ten (10) feet of any street right-of-way, nor within any space required by this
ordinance as a perimeter buffer area, and, where applicable, shall be located in accordance
with the appendices and relevant T-Zone Overlays.
5. No required off-street parking within a business district or industrial district, with the
exception of off-street parking servicing and located within an office park, industrial park
or shopping center, shall be located within the required rear or side yard building setback if
the lot is adjacent to a residential district.
6. All or part of the off-street parking spaces required within an office park, industrial park,
shopping center or within the T-6 Urban Transition Overlay for two (2) or more uses may
be provided in common parking garages or parking lots, provided that the number of
spaces is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually. Where
shared parking arrangements are formalized between adjoining uses, the perimeter buffer is
not required along the common lot line.
7. All or part of the off-street parking spaces required within an office park, industrial park,
shopping center or within the T-6 Urban Transition Overlay may be provided in parking
structures/decks or parking lots located on a separate lot or lots within a three hundred
(300) feet of walking distance from the use for which the parking is required, provided that
the separate lot must be located within the office park, industrial park, shopping center or
within the T-6 Urban Transition Overlay.
8. A parking structure/deck shall not exceed two (2) parking levels above grade or twentyfive
(25) feet in height, whichever is less, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. In
no case shall the parking structure/deck be taller than the principal buildings on the site.
SECTION 2006. PARKING AREA SCREENING (See Section 2512 and Section 2513.)
SECTION 2007. PARKING AREA SURFACE
Every off-street parking area and access drive thereto shall be surfaced with an all-weather
durable and dustless material, such as stone, asphalt, macadam, or concrete. It shall be so graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation and shall have bumper guards where
needed.
SECTION 2008. PARKING AREA DIMENSIONS
1. Each parking space shall be a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum depth of
eighteen (18) feet, except that a maximum of three (3) percent of the required spaces or
five (5) spaces, whichever is less, may be designed to accommodate motorcycles.
20-5
Motorcycle spaces shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width and nine (9) feet in length.
2. Minimum dimensions for off-street parking and maneuvering space shall be as follows:
Parking Angle
Stall Width
(feet)
Stall Depth
(feet)
Aisle Width
(feet)
90° 9 18 24
60° 9 18 20
45° 9 18 18
3. Parallel parking spaces shall measure a minimum of seven (7) feet wide by twenty-two (22)
feet long and shall not be located within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersection.
4. When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of said
alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement, but not as part
of the parking space minimum area.
SECTION 2009. PARKING AREA RESERVATION
All off-street parking areas shall be reserved for and used for motor vehicle parking only, with
no sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling, or servicing of any kind. The parking of one (1)
commercial motor vehicle with a maximum payload capacity of two and one-half (2 1/2) tons is
permitted on a residential dwelling lot in any zoning district if needed by the resident of the
dwelling for a home occupation or for a business not conducted on the premises. A maximum of
one (1) recreation vehicle is permitted to be parked overnight on a lot in any zoning district,
except where expressly permitted as part of the principal use, provided it is not to be used for
sleeping, recreation, or living purposes at any time while parked on the property.
SECTION 2010. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE
1. Off-street loading and unloading space or spaces shall be designed with appropriate means
of vehicle access to a street in a manner which will least interfere with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
2. Loading and unloading spaces shall have paved surfaces.
3. Loading and unloading spaces shall not be located within the required front yard.
4. Required off-street parking space shall not be utilized for loading and unloading purposes.
5. Where possible, off-street loading and unloading space or spaces shall be located on the
face of a building not facing any adjoining land in residential districts. If such loading and
unloading spaces are located on the face of a building adjoining residentially zoned land, a
continuous visual screen shall be provided along the property line.
6. No storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle repair work of any kind, except emergency
20-6
work, shall be permitted within any loading or unloading space or spaces.
7. Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width by at
least fifty (50) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering spaces, and shall have a
vertical clearance of at least sixteen (16) feet.
SECTION 2011. HANDICAP PARKING
Handicap parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities
Act.
SECTION 2012. RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS
1. A driveway shall be surfaced with an all-weather, durable and dustless material. Such
material shall extend the full length and width of the driveway. Any portion of a driveway
constructed within the public right-of-way shall be constructed to the approved standards of
the Township or PennDOT.
2. Residential driveways shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet.
3. Residential driveways shall be setback three (3) feet from the property line.
4. Refer to Section 2211.
SECTION 2013. BICYCLE RACKS
All parking facilities containing between fifty (50) and one hundred (100) parking spaces shall
provide bicycle racks on the site. For each additional one hundred (100) spaces, an additional
rack shall be provided. Not more than five (5) bicycle racks shall be required for any one (1)
facility. Bicycle racks shall be located along the front or sides of buildings, clearly visible from
main entrances. Racks shall be located so as to permit a minimum clearance of four (4) feet
along sidewalks. Smaller racks at multiple locations are preferred over larger racks located far
from main entrances.
21-1
ARTICLE XXI. ACCESSORY USES (Amended by Ordinance 2016-06, dated 3/28/2016; Ordinance
2016-18, dated 9/26/2016)
SECTION 2101. ANIMALS AND ANIMAL SHELTERS
1. In any zoning district, it is permitted to maintain as domestic animals five (5) dogs or five
(5) cats, or a combination thereof, not to exceed a total of five (5) domestic animals, each
over six (6) months of age, provided it is on a noncommercial basis. Where a shelter and/or
exercise pen is maintained, it shall be located in the rear yard at least ten (10) feet from any
lot line, and no closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest dwelling other than that of the
owner.
2. In any zoning district, it is permitted as a conditional use to maintain up to a total of twelve
(12) pigeons and fowl, provided it is in the rear yard, it is on a noncommercial basis and is
strictly as an incidental use, the area in which the fowl or pigeons are kept is enclosed by a
fence that will contain them, all parts of which are at least fifty (50) feet from any lot line,
and is not closer than one hundred (100) feet to the nearest dwelling other than that of the
owner.
3. In any zoning district, unless regulated by other provisions in this ordinance, it is permitted
to maintain up to two (2) saddle horses, provided no building, corral, or stable is less than
one hundred (100) feet from any lot line and is not closer than two hundred (200) feet to
the nearest existing dwelling other than that of the owner. A pasture fence shall be located
at a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the property line.
4. No manure storage facility or area shall be established closer than one hundred (100) feet
to any property line.
SECTION 2102. DETACHED PRIVATE GARAGES
1. Maximum capacity:
A. For a single-family detached or semidetached dwelling unit: three (3) vehicles.
B. For a garage associated with a townhouse or apartment development: Garage spaces
may be grouped into detached structures with a maximum of eight (8) vehicles.
2. Maximum height: Twenty (20) feet.
3. No temporary structures shall be permitted.
4. No structure shall be permitted between the required building setback line and the street
line, except that where the street line is a principal arterial roadway, the setback shall be
five (5) feet.
5. No structure shall be located within the minimum required side yard of the prevailing
district.
6. No structure shall be located within ten (10) feet of the rear property line.
7. Direct driveway access is required for each space within a garage.
21-2
8. A detached, front-loaded garage shall be set back a minimum of forty (40) feet from the
street right-of-way from which it takes access.
SECTION 2103. OTHER OUTBUILDINGS/STRUCTURES
1. Maximum height: ten (10) feet.
2. No structure shall be within five (5) feet of any property line.
3 No structure shall be permitted between the required building setback line and the street
line, except that where the street line is a limited access legislative route to which the lot
has no access, the setback shall be five (5) feet.
4. Accessory buildings associated with elementary and secondary schools shall have a
maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
SECTION 2104. SWIMMING POOLS
1. No permanent structure shall be permitted without an operable, maintained filtering system
utilizing an approved method of treated water.
2. All swimming pools which have the capability to contain more than twenty-four (24)
inches of water shall be enclosed by a permanent fence which is at least four (4) feet in
height. No fence will be required for aboveground permanent pools which have sides
which are at least four (4) feet above grade and access to the pools can be secured, unless
the Zoning Officer determines that conditions warrant greater safety measures. However,
all aboveground permanent pools shall be screened by a landscape screen, which shall be
composed of shrubs that have a minimum height of at least four (4) feet, measured from
ground level, at the time of planting.
3. No structure shall be within ten (10) feet of any property line which shall be measured from
the nearest water surface.
4. No structure shall be permitted between the building setback line and the street line.
5. An approved temporary construction fence shall be erected around the excavation site
during the construction of the pool and shall remain in place until the permanent fence is
erected.
6. Water shall not be placed into a swimming pool until a permanent, approved fence has
been erected and a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued.
SECTION 2105. TENNIS COURTS
1. No facility shall be permitted unless it is protected by an open mesh permanent fence ten
(10) feet in height behind each baseline extending ten (10) feet beyond the playing area in
each direction.
2. No facility shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of any property line.
3. No facility shall be located between the building setback line and the street line.
21-3
4. If lighting is provided, it shall be so arranged so that there is no objectionable glare on
adjoining properties.
SECTION 2106. PATIOS AND PAVED TERRACES
No patio, paved terrace, or deck shall be located within any required setback, or between the
required building setback line and the street line or public right-of-way, except:
1. Where otherwise specified for single-family semidetached, townhouse, or zero lot line
dwellings; or
2. Where the street line is a limited access highway to which the site has no access, the
setback shall be five (5) feet.
SECTION 2107. PUBLIC NUISANCES
1. No activities shall be permitted which create a public nuisance and/or interfere with the use
of adjacent residential lots.
2. Nothing in this section shall limit other uses not mentioned so long as, in the opinion of the
Zoning Officer, they are accessory to the residential use of the land, are temporary in
nature, and do not create a threat to the public health, safety, and/or welfare of the
community.
SECTION 2108. FENCES AND FREESTANDING WALLS
1. Upon property devoted to residential use, no fence or freestanding wall shall be erected to a
height of more that forty-two (42) inches in any front yard, nor more than six (6) feet in
any other yard, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance.
2. Upon property devoted to municipal, commercial or industrial use, no fence or freestanding
wall shall be erected to a height of more that forty-two (42) inches in any front yard, nor
more than eight (8) feet, including any barbed wire atop the fence or freestanding wall, in
any other yard unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance. Where such municipal,
commercial or industrial use abuts a residential use, such fence or freestanding wall shall
not exceed six (6) feet.
3. Where any lot abuts a limited access legislative highway to which the lot has no access, the
fence or freestanding wall may be a maximum of eight (8) feet in height along the property
boundary which abuts such limited access legislative highway.
4. Fence height exceptions. All portions of fencing shall be subject to the maximum fence
height regulations specified in this Ordinance, except for fence posts and decorative finials
on the fence post. The height of any such projection on the fence post shall not exceed the
height of the fence by more than six (6) inches.
5. Fences along side or rear lot lines are not subject to yard or setback requirements.
Freestanding walls shall be setback five (5) feet from side and rear lot lines. Fences or
freestanding walls within the front yard shall be a minimum of two (2) feet behind the
21-4
required street right–of-way line. All fences shall be located completely within lot
boundaries and no fence may coincide with any lot line.
21-5
6. No solid fence or freestanding wall shall be erected within the required front yard setback,
except where required to maintain the build-to-line of adjacent buildings.
7. No fence or freestanding wall shall be erected which blocks or limits visibility for
driveways on adjacent properties.
8. No fence or freestanding wall shall be located within any clear site triangle as required by
this Ordinance or the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
9. No fence or freestanding wall shall be erected in a public right-of-way or other rights-ofway
or easements, including but not limited to public or private drainage, utility or access
easements, unless otherwise require by this Ordinance, the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance or the Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
10. Unless required for security purposes for commercial or industrial use, no fence shall be
constructed of barbed wire, razor, or other sharp components capable of causing injury, and
only then if the portion of the fence containing barbed wire, razor, or other sharp
components capable of causing injury is not lower than six feet above the average
surrounding ground level.
11. All fences and freestanding walls shall comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code (PA UCC) as enforced by the Township.
SECTION 2109. SATELLITE ANTENNAS
1. The diameter of ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed twelve (12) feet.
2. Ground-mounted antennas, including supports, shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
3. Ground-mounted antennas shall be located in rear yards only and be located no closer than
ten (10) feet to any property line.
4. Roof-mounted antennas shall not project more than five (5) feet above the roofline.
SECTION 2110. HOME OCCUPATIONS
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for home occupations which are
compatible with the neighborhood in which they are located. It is the intent of this section
to:
A. Insure the compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in the
residential districts;
B. Insure that permitted home occupations are incidental and secondary to the use of a
dwelling as a residence;
C. Maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods;
21-6
D. Promote the efficient use of public services and facilities by assuring these services
are provided to the residential population for which they are planned and constructed,
rather than commercial uses.
2. Approval. Home occupations complying with the criteria established in
Section 2110.3 shall be considered minor in character and permitted by right. Major home
occupations shall commence only after the receipt of a special exception as outlined in
Section 2805.2 of this ordinance.
3. Criteria: minor occupations. Uses classified as minor shall be permitted in all residential
districts. The following regulations shall apply to all minor home occupations:
A. Such use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling or within a detached garage
located on a single-family detached or single-family semidetached residential lot and
in existence on the effective date of this ordinance and operated by one or more
persons, all family members, and all of whom reside within the dwelling. Persons in
building trades and similar fields, using their dwelling as an office for business
activity carried on off site, may have other employees, provided they are not
employed on site, they do not park on or near the dwelling site, and they do not visit
the dwelling during the course of business.
B. Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure in which the occupation is
conducted shall not be altered or the occupation within the residence shall not be
conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential
character.
C. No more than twenty-five (25) of the gross floor area of the dwelling, including
attached garage area, or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is smaller, shall be
used for the home occupation. The attached garage or detached garage area may be
used for home occupation purposes, provided that such use does not cause the
elimination of the required off-street parking spaces for the dwelling.
D. The business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies, or products shall not be
conducted on the premises, except that orders previously made by telephone, by
appointment or at a sales party may be filled on the premises, e.g., direct sales of
products off display shelves or racks is not allowed, but a person may pick up an
order placed earlier as described above.
E. No storage or display of goods shall be visible from outside the structure.
F. No explosive or highly combustible material shall be used or stored on the premises.
No activity shall be allowed which would interfere with radio or television
transmission in the area, nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odors, heat, or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
G. A home occupation shall not create significantly greater vehicle or pedestrian traffic
than normal for the district in which it is located.
21-7
H. Parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking orders shall not be held more
than one (1) time each month.
I. A minor home occupation shall not create a need for off-street parking spaces in
excess of those required for a dwelling in 2002.1 of this ordinance. Commercial
vehicles used for a home occupation must be parked in an off-street parking space. In
addition, commercial vehicles for persons in building trades or similar fields must be
parked in a garage or screened from the street and adjacent residential uses.
J. No use of material or equipment not recognized as being part of the normal practices
of owning and maintaining a residence shall be allowed.
K. Deliveries from commercial suppliers shall comply with the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code and shall not restrict traffic circulation.
L. A home occupation shall not generate waste products or materials of a quality or
quantity not normally associated with a residential use.
M. A home occupation shall not increase water or sewer use so that either is significantly
more than the average for residences in the neighborhood.
N. Passenger drop-off and pickup areas for minor family day-care centers shall be
provided on site and arranged so that passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on
or adjacent to the site.
O. Permitted minor home occupations are limited to the following:
(1) Artists, craftsmen and sculptors;
(2) Authors and composers;
(3) Office facilities, excluding medical offices and dental offices;
(4) Individual tutoring;
(5) Preparation of food or food products to be sold or served off site;
(6) Individual instrument instruction, provided that no instrument may be
amplified;
(7) Telephone solicitation work;
(8) Minor family day-care centers (only in a detached or semidetached singlefamily
dwelling);
(9) Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring;
(10) Uses not listed that, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, are considered to be of
the same general character as the minor home occupations permitted.
21-8
P. Prohibited minor home occupations. The following uses, by the nature of the
investment or operation, have a pronounced tendency once started to rapidly increase
beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and thereby impair the use and
value of a residentially zoned area for residence purposes. Therefore, the uses
specified below shall not be permitted as minor home occupations:
(1) All uses prohibited as major home occupations;
(2) Hairstylists/Single chair hairstylist;
(3) Private schools with organized classes;
(4) Television and other electrical repairs;
(5) Upholstering;
(6) Other similar uses which may, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, result in an
adverse impact on a residential neighborhood.
4. Criteria: major home occupations. Uses classified as major shall be considered uses by
special exception according to this ordinance. In granting any special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach certain conditions to its approval which, in addition to the
requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels are necessary requirements in order to
preserve and protect the character of residential areas. The following regulations shall
apply to all major home occupations:
A. Such use shall be conducted entirely within a single-family detached or single-family
semidetached dwelling or within a detached garage located on a residential lot as a
single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached dwelling and in
existence on the effective date of this ordinance and operated by one or more persons,
all family members, and all of whom reside within the dwelling. There may be one
full-time equivalent nonresident employee permitted on site. Persons in building
trades and similar fields, using their dwelling as an office for business activity carried
on off site, may have other employees, provided they are not employed on site, they
do not park on or near the dwelling site, and they do not visit the dwelling during the
course of business.
B. Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure in which the occupation is
conducted shall not be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in
a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character.
C. No more than twenty-five (25) of the gross floor area of the dwelling, including
attached garage area, or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is smaller, shall be
used for the home occupation. The attached garage or detached garage area may be
used for home occupation purposes, provided that such use does not cause the
elimination of the required off-street parking spaces for the dwelling.
21-9
D. The business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies, or products shall not be
conducted on the premises, except that incidental retail sales may be made in
connection with other permitted home occupations, and orders previously made by
telephone, by appointment or at a sales party may be filled on the premises.
E. There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material used in the home
occupation, nor of any explosive or highly combustible material. No activity shall be
allowed which would interfere with radio or television transmission in the area, nor
shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
F. Deliveries from commercial suppliers shall comply with the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code and shall not restrict traffic circulation.
G. Parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking orders shall not be held more
often than one (1) time each month.
H. A major home occupation that employs a nonresident of the dwelling shall provide
one off-street parking space for use by the employee. Commercial vehicles used for a
home occupation must be parked in an off-street parking space. In addition,
commercial vehicles for persons in building trades or similar fields must be parked in
a garage or screened from the street and adjacent residential uses. If the nature of the
major home occupation may result in more than one (1) customer or client to visit the
premises at any one time, the Zoning Hearing Board shall specify the number of
parking spaces required and the location of such spaces. Additional off-street parking
area shall not be located within the required front yard setback or within three (3) feet
of any side or rear property line.
I. A home occupation shall not generate waste products or materials of a quality or
quantity not normally associated with a residential use.
J. A home occupation shall not increase water or sewer use so that either is significantly
more than the average for residences in the neighborhood.
K. All major family day-care centers shall furnish a valid certificate of compliance for
the proposed facility, issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
L. Passenger drop-off and pickup areas for family day-care centers shall be provided on
site and arranged so that passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to
the site.
M. Permitted major home occupations are limited to the following:
(1) Any use permitted as a minor home occupation;
(2) Medical offices and dental offices;
(3) Single-chair hairstylists and personal care facility such as single chair nail
salon;
21-10
(4) Organized classes with up to six (6) students at one time;
(5) Television and other electrical repairs, excluding major appliances such as
refrigerators or stoves;
(6) Upholstering;
(7) Minor or major family day-care centers;
(8) Uses not listed that, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer and upon review and
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, are considered to be of the same general
character as the major home occupations permitted.
N. Prohibited major home occupations. The following uses, by the nature of the
investment or operation, have a pronounced tendency once started to rapidly increase
beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and thereby impair the use and
values of a residentially zoned area for residence purposes and are more suited to
professional or business districts. Therefore, the uses specified below and other
similar uses shall not be permitted as home occupations:
(1) Minor or major motor vehicle repair, painting of vehicles, trailers, or boats;
(2) Funeral chapel or home;
(3) Rental businesses;
(4) Photo studios;
(5) Photo development;
(6) Material fabrication shops or machine shops;
(7) Small engine repair;
(8) Production woodworking and cabinetmaking;
(9) Other similar uses which may, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, result in an
adverse impact on a residential neighborhood.
5. Home occupation application requirements.
A. The application for a minor home occupation shall be submitted in such a form as the
Zoning Officer may prescribe and shall be accompanied by the required filing fee as
adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The form shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
(1) Name, mailing address and phone number of applicant.
(2) Street address of the property.
(3) Description of all activities involved in the business and how the business will
operate.
B. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning Officer shall examine the same within a
reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the provisions of
21-11
all pertinent laws, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant in writing. Such
notification shall include findings in support of the decision and the applicant's right
of appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. The application for a major home occupation shall be submitted to the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions regarding such applications in accordance with Article XXVIII, Zoning
Hearing Board; Administrative Proceedings, of this ordinance.
6. Home occupation permits.
A. In the event an application is approved, then a home occupation permit shall be issued
to the applicant. Said permit shall apply only to the applicant, occupation, and
premises stated in the application. The permit is nontransferable and nonassignable.
Said permit shall also be deemed to be automatically revoked upon the earliest of the
following: the applicant dies; the applicant moves from the premises where the permit
was granted; or the applicant otherwise ceases engaging in the home occupation.
B. Home occupation permits shall expire December 31 of each year and, once granted,
may be renewed without additional hearings, subject to the provisions of this section,
by completing the renewal form prescribed by the Zoning Officer and paying the
annual permit fee as adopted by the Board of Commissioners. Failure to apply for
renewal and/or failure to pay for the annual permit shall be grounds for revocation of
a permit.
C. There may be one (1) annual inspection each year by the Zoning Officer, or designee,
of home occupations issued a home occupation permit. In addition, the Zoning
Officer, or designee, shall have the right, at any time, upon reasonable request, to
enter and inspect the premises covered by said permit for compliance purposes.
7. Existing home occupations. Any person engaged in a home occupation at the time of the
passage of this ordinance shall have a period of ninety (90) days from said date to apply for
a home occupation permit, subject to the following:
A. The applicant must provide adequate proof that he or she has been engaged in a home
occupation prior to the date this ordinance was passed.
B. The applicant must provide adequate proof that the home occupation met the
Township requirements in effect at the time the home occupation was established.
SECTION 2111. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
See Section 2523.
SECTION 2112. GARDEN PONDS
1. Such pond shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines and shall be
permitted in the required front yard.
2. Garden ponds shall require a zoning permit.
3. Garden ponds that utilize electricity for lighting, fountains, etc., shall require a building
permit.
21-12
21-13
SECTION 2113. FARMERS MARKETS (Added by Ordinance 2016-06, dated 3/28/2016
1. The farmers market area shall be setback from any street line or property line a minimum
of twenty (20) feet and a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the principal building wall(s).
2. The farmers market shall be located within forty (40) feet of the use to which it is
permitted as an accessory use.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate that ample off-street parking exists in existing parking
areas located a maximum of six hundred (600) feet from the market area. A farmers
market will not be permitted on a property where a variance of off-street parking or relief
through the Parking Demand Needs Assessment has been previously granted by the
Township.
4. The farmers market shall not be located within any designated clear sight triangle, access
drive travel lane or parking lot aisle.
5. The farmers market shall not adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the
Township.
6. Operations including set up and removal shall be limited to two (2) days per week during
daylight hours and shall not cover a period greater than 6 months.
7. No permanent structures shall be erected in connection with the farmers market. Market
materials such as stands, booths, and tables shall be removed at the conclusion of the
market day.
8. Any structure shall comply with the building height regulations for accessory uses.
9. The farmers market may not obstruct sidewalks, pathways or any pedestrian walkway.
10. At least ninety (90) percent of the products for sale shall be farm products.
11. The area of the farmers market shall be limited to 4,000 square feet.
12. Market vendors shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
13. Additional signage shall comply with Article XIII, Signs.
SECTION 2114. BEEKEEPING
1. In any zoning district, beekeeping is permitted as an accessory use, provided it is on a
noncommercial basis. Hives shall be located in the rear yard at least ten (10) feet from any
lot line, and no closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest dwelling other than that of the
owner.
2. Any beekeeper shall provide documentation that they are in compliance with the
Pennsylvania’s Bee Law, 3 Pa. C.S.A. §§ 2101-2117, which requires the owner of an
apiary located in Pennsylvania to register the apiary with the Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture.
22-1
ARTICLE XXII. GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 2201. UNSAFE DWELLINGS, STRUCTURES OR LAND
1. No dwelling or structure or land shall be used or occupied if such dwelling or structure or
land, as determined by the Board of Commissioners or appointed representatives, is in need
of structural repairs or is unsafe or unsanitary, if the premises do not have connection with
a public sewer system or alternative sanitary sewage facilities approved by the State or
Local Board of Health, or if pertinent laws, ordinances, or codes of any governmental body
having jurisdiction shall not have been complied with. This includes the International
Building Code (IBC) and the National Electric Code, which Manheim Township has
officially adopted.
2. No dwelling or structure or land shall be permitted to be left in an unsafe or unsanitary
condition.
SECTION 2202. VISIBILITY AT STREET INTERSECTIONS
The clear sight triangle as specified in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, shall
be provided and maintained at all street intersections. The triangle shall be established by
measuring one hundred (100) feet or seventy-five (75) feet as defined in the Subdivision and
Land Development from the point of intersection of the center lines of the streets. No building,
planting, fencing, or other obstruction that would obscure the vision of a motorist shall be
permitted within the area.
SECTION 2203. REMOVAL OF NATURAL RESOURCES
Removal of surface and subsurface natural resources, except trees and other vegetative growth,
shall not be permitted, except as follows:
1. As part of the construction or alteration of a building or the grading incidental to a
building.
2. In connection with normal lawn preparation and maintenance.
3. In connection with the construction or alteration of a street or utility improvement.
4. In farming operations, provided sound soil conservation practices are observed.
SECTION 2204. PUBLIC UTILITIES AND MUNICIPAL USES
1. Public Utilities.
A. This ordinance shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension
thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if, upon petition of the
corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing,
decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
2. Public Uses and Municipal Uses.
A. Any structure or other improvement for the purpose of servicing a public utility or
22-2
municipal use, except common or contract carriers, may be erected within any zoning
district. If requested by the Township, public utilities shall file a plan with the
Township, indicating the location of all proposed structures and rights-of-way within
the Township.
SECTION 2205. CORNER LOTS
A corner lot shall have two (2) front yards, and a front yard setback shall be required for each.
SECTION 2206. REQUIRED YARDS
1. The minimum required yard as set forth in underlying districts or overlays shall remain
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up, except as may be specifically provided
for in this ordinance.
2. Permitted encroachments into required yards.
A. Cornices, eaves, chimneys, steps, stoops, canopies, fire escapes, required basement
egress structures, and similar extensions from an existing building that utilize such
building for support may project up to a maximum of five (5) feet into any required
yard, but in no case shall be closer than five (5) feet to any property line.
B. Enclosed porches, decks, and patios shall be considered part of or immediately
adjacent to the principal building and shall not project into any required yards.
C. The following are permitted within the required setbacks: minor public utility
structures, public transit shelters, fences, freestanding walls, hedges, and retaining
walls.
3. Build-to lines. In order to provide for visual diversity and interest along a streetscape:
A. Up to ten (10) percent of the buildings along a street may be offset from the build-to
line a maximum of two (2) feet. Where such variation in build-to line is provided, it
shall be clearly delineated on the plan.
B. A maximum of forty (40) percent of an individual building facade may be offset from
the build-to line a maximum of four (4) feet in order to allow for recesses, courtyards,
plazas, or the like.
C. Projections and cantilevered sections of a building shall encroach on the established
build-to line for the block a maximum of four (4) feet.
SECTION 2207. LOT WIDTH, DEPTH, AND AREA EXCEPTIONS FOR LOTS OF RECORD
A conforming building may be constructed for a conforming use on any lot or parcel of land of
record at the effective date of this ordinance, regardless of the area, depth, and width of such lot,
provided such lot or parcel, at the time of passage of this ordinance, is shown to be a separate
and distinct numbered lot of record on a previously approved plan of lots which has been
recorded or which depicts streets or alleys which have been legally dedicated to public use, and
provided the height limitations, maximum building footprint, and building setback regulations
prescribed in this ordinance are complied with.
SECTION 2208. BUILDING HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS
22-3
All buildings and structures shall be subject to the maximum height regulations specified
elsewhere in this ordinance, except chimneys, spires, farm buildings and farm accessory
buildings, towers, elevator penthouses, cupolas, clock towers, steeples, water tanks, antennas,
and flagpoles. The height of any such projection shall not exceed eighty-five (85) feet, except
with respect to principal buildings and other structures permitted by right in the Industrial
District I-2; however, the permitted height limits are also subject to applicable Federal Aviation
Regulations, Part 77, regarding objects affecting navigable airspace.
SECTION 2209. ARTERIAL AND MAJOR COLLECTOR ROADS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following roads shall be classified as arterial, limited
access highways and major collector roads:
Fruitville Pike
Harrisburg Pike
Lititz Pike (PA Route 501)
Manheim Pike (PA Route 72)
New Holland Pike (PA Route 23)
Oregon Pike (PA Route 272)
U.S. Route 222
U.S. Route 283
U.S. Route 30
SECTION 2210. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
All floodplain areas shall be subject to the Floodplain Management Ordinance and the
requirements of Article XXIV.
SECTION 2211. DRIVEWAYS
1. The maximum width of a driveway shall be thirty (35) feet. This width shall be measured
at the point where the driveway meets the right-of-way line of a public road.
2. No driveway shall be permitted within three (3) feet of any side or rear property line.
3. A driveway shall be surfaced with an all-weather, durable and dustless material. Such
material shall extend the full width of the driveway. Any portion of a driveway constructed
within the public right-of-way shall be constructed to the approved standards of the
Township or PennDOT.
4. Refer to Section 2012.
SECTION 2212. VEHICULAR ACCESS; FLAG LOTS
1. Direct vehicular access to a residential property shall be provided by means of an abutting
improved public street or permanently maintained private street which is protected by a
permanent easement.
2. Flag lots shall not be permitted, except as specified within the Planned Residential
Development provisions.
SECTION 2213. SPECIAL BUILDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
22-4
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be applicable for the various roads
as listed in accordance with the applicable T-Zone Overlay regulations. The building setback
requirement shall be measured from the existing or required right-of-way line of the road.
Road Name
Setback Distance
(feet)
East Oregon Road (PA Route 722) 40
Fruitville Pike 40
Harrisburg Pike 50
Lititz Pike (PA Route 501) 50
Manheim Pike (PA Route 72) 50
New Holland Pike (PA Route 23) 50
Oregon Pike (PA Route 272) 40
Petersburg Road, from Koser Road to West Oregon Road (PA
Route 722)
40
U.S. Route 30 50
U.S. Route 222 50
U.S. Route 283 50
West Oregon Road 40
SECTION 2214. AIRPORT SAFETY ZONE
1. Purpose and intent.
A. State and federal law require the limitation of building and structural height in airport
hazard areas.
B. Areas within Manheim Township have been identified as being within the airport
hazard area of the Lancaster Airport, as defined in the Pennsylvania Aviation Code,
and require special height controls.
C. These height restrictions are aimed at preventing the erection of structures that would
interfere with or obstruct normal airplane approaches or airport operations. Such
interference or obstruction would pose a threat to the health, safety, welfare, and
convenience of the residents of the Township, as well as passengers aboard airport
aircraft.
D. The Airport Safety Zone is used to impose needed height restrictions as an overlay
zoning district, thereby enhancing public safety and minimizing disruption of existing
zoning policies.
2. Lands in zone defined.
22-5
A. The Township's Airport Safety Zone includes areas within Manheim Township
depicted on the "Airport Hazard Area for Lancaster Airport." A copy of this map is
available at the Township Municipal Office.
B. Two separate zones have been identified.
(1) Airport Safety Zone 1 includes areas most seriously affected by the airport
operations. Areas contained within Airport Safety Zone 1 are located in such
close proximity to airport runway approaches that this ordinance's normal
permitted structural height (35 feet) could pose a safety hazard. Accordingly,
height restrictions are strict, and review of proposed development is carefully
scrutinized.
(2) Airport Safety Zone 2 includes areas just beyond Airport Safety Zone 1 and
outlying areas that have particularly high elevations. These areas include those
that cannot support structures that are higher than thirty-five (35) feet up to the
maximum permitted structural height identified in Section 2208. Within this
zone, regulations permit the placement of thirty-five (35) foot-high structures
but require special review for structures higher than thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Relationship to other articles. The Airport Safety Zone represents an overlay zoning district
that is concerned only with permitted heights. The underlying zoning district shall
prescribe all other zoning-related standards and uses. In those instances where the Airport
Safety Zone prescribes a height restriction different than that imposed by the underlying
zoning district, the most restrictive standard shall apply.
4. Regulations within Airport Safety Zone 1. Any proposed use which involves the
construction, erection or projection of a building or structure above the natural land grade
shall require the following before a building permit can be issued by the Zoning Officer:
A. The applicant shall submit such plans, drawings, and blueprints as are reasonably
necessary to ascertain the height of any proposed building or structure to the
Lancaster Airport Authority for a review by the Authority for compliance with
Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77. Upon receipt of a report from the Authority, the
applicant shall then submit the plans, drawings, and specifications to the Zoning
Officer and shall furnish the Zoning Officer with the report from the Authority,
stating the results of its review. In the event that the Authority fails to issue a report
within 45 days of receipt of all information necessary to make a compliance review,
the applicant may submit a certification from a professional engineer stating that the
engineer has reviewed the applicant's plans, drawings, and specifications and has
examined Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77 and this ordinance and that the
proposed use does not violate Federal Regulation No. 77. The Zoning Officer shall
then determine if the proposed use is in compliance with Federal Aviation Regulation
No. 77.
B. If the Zoning Officer determines that the application does comply with Federal
Aviation Regulation No. 77 and all other applicable provisions of this ordinance, he
shall issue a building permit. If the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed use
does not comply with Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77, then the Zoning Officer
22-6
shall deny the application for a building permit. The applicant shall have the right of
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, as elsewhere provided herein.
C. No variances to the height limitations set forth in Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77
will be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board without expressed written consent
thereto from the Federal Aviation Administration. Such consent is to be obtained by
the applicant. In addition, the applicant shall notify the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation of the applicant's intent to request a permit or any variances. Such
notification shall be in written form and be sent so as to reach the Department at least
ten (10) days before the application is to be submitted.
5. Regulations within Airport Safety Zone 2. Any proposed use involving structural height up
to and including thirty-five (35) feet shall be permitted by right. Any proposed use which
involves the construction, erection, or projection of a building, structure, or any other
object exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height shall require the following before a building
permit can be issued by the Zoning Officer:
A. The applicant shall submit such plans, drawings, and specifications as are reasonably
necessary to ascertain the height of any proposed building or structure to the
Lancaster Airport Authority for a review by the Authority for compliance with
Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77. Upon receipt of a report from the Authority, the
applicant shall then submit the plans, drawings, and specifications to the Zoning
Officer and shall furnish the Zoning Officer with the report from the Authority,
stating the results of its review. In the event that the Authority fails to issue a report
within forty-five (45) days of receipt of all information necessary to make a
compliance review, the applicant may submit a certification from a professional
engineer stating that the engineer has reviewed the applicant's plans, drawings, and
specifications and has examined Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77 and this
ordinance and that the proposed use does not violate Federal Regulation No. 77. The
Zoning Officer shall then determine if the proposed use is in compliance with Federal
Aviation Regulation No. 77.
B. If the Zoning Officer determines that the application does comply with Federal
Aviation Regulation No. 77 and all other applicable provisions of this ordinance, he
shall issue a building permit. If the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed use
does not comply with Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77, then the Zoning Officer
shall deny the application for a building permit. The applicant shall have the right of
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, as elsewhere provided herein.
C. No variances to the height limitations set forth in Federal Aviation Regulation No. 77
will be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board without expressed written consent
thereto from the Federal Aviation Administration. Such consent is to be obtained by
the applicant. In addition, the applicant shall notify the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation of the applicant's intent to request a permit or any variances. Such
notification shall be in written form and be sent so as to reach the Department at least
ten (10) days before the application is to be submitted.
SECTION 2215. OBSCENITY
22-7
Obscenity shall be prohibited in all zoning districts in the Township.
SECTION 2216. OWNERSHIP, ADMINISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON
OPEN SPACE
The method utilized for ownership, administration and maintenance of common open space shall
be approved by the Board of Commissioners.
1. The ownership, administration and maintenance of common open space shall be arranged
to be in accordance with one or more of the following:
A. The Township may accept dedication of common open spaces or any interest therein
for public use and maintenance, for no consideration to be paid by the Township.
Unless waived by the Board of Commissioners at time of approval, the Township
shall have the option to accept all or any portion of the common open space at any
time within ten (10) years of the recording of the final subdivision plan for the
development. The final plan shall contain a note, in language acceptable to the
Township Solicitor, that the common open space is irrevocably offered for dedication
to the Township for a period of ten (10) years from the date of the recording of the
final plan. Said note shall also state that the Township shall have no duty to maintain
or improve the dedicated common open space unless and until it has been accepted by
formal action of the Board of Commissioners.
B. The landowner may establish an automatic-membership homeowners' or community
association made up of the owners of property in the Planned Residential
Development, or other development where common amenities are provided, as a
nonprofit corporation, for the purpose of owning, administering and maintaining
common open space; provided, however, the association shall not be dissolved nor
shall it dispose of the common open space by sale or otherwise (except to an
organization conceived and established to own, administer and maintain common
open space approved by the Board of Commissioners) without first offering the
common open space for dedication to the Township. The property owners' association
shall be empowered to levy and collect assessments from the property owners of the
planned residential development to cover replacements, working capital, operating
expenses, insurance against casualty and liability, and contingencies.
C. The landowner may establish a deed or deeds of trust, approved by the Board of
Commissioners, for the purpose of owning, administering and maintaining common
open space, with the trustee empowered to levy and collect assessments from the
property owners of the Planned Residential Development, or other development
where common amenities are provided, to cover replacements, working capital,
operating expenses, insurance against casualty and liability, and contingencies.
D. With permission of the Township, and with appropriate deed restrictions in favor of
the Township and in language acceptable to the Township Solicitor, the developer
may transfer the fee simple title in the common open space or a portion thereof to a
private, nonprofit organization among whose purposes is the conservation of open
22-8
space land and/or natural resources, provided that:
(1) The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a bona fide conservation
organization with a perpetual existence;
(2) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper retransfer or reverter
in the event that the organization becomes unable to continue to carry out its
functions; and
(3) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is entered into by the
developer, organization and Township.
E. If a portion of the common open space is to be used for agricultural purposes, that
portion of the common open space may be transferred to a person or other entity who
will farm the land. Prior to the transfer of any common open space for agricultural
purposes, a permanent conservation easement in favor of the Township, in language
acceptable to the Township Solicitor, shall be imposed against such land. The
conveyance shall contain appropriate provisions for the retransfer or reverter to the
Township or any association or trustee holding the remainder of the common open
space in the event the land ceases to be used for agricultural purposes.
F. If a portion of the common open space is to be used for an existing cemetery or a
cemetery proposed as part of a house of worship, that portion of the common open
space may be transferred to a religious organization, cemetery corporation, or other
similar entity which will operate or maintain the cemetery. Prior to the transfer of any
common open space for cemetery purposes, a permanent deed restriction in favor of
the Township, in language acceptable to the Township Solicitor, shall be imposed
against such land. The conveyance shall contain appropriate provisions for the
retransfer or reverter to the Township or any association or trustee holding the
remainder of the common open space in the event the land is not used for cemetery
purposes.
2. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain common open space, or
any successor organization, shall at any time fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development plan, the Board of
Commissioners may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the
landowners/residents of the development setting forth the manner in which the organization
has failed to maintain the common open space in reasonable condition, and said notice
shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within thirty
(30) days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within fourteen (14) days of the notice. At such hearing, the Board of Commissioners may
modify the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of
time within which they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice
or in the modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said thirty (30) days or any
extension thereof, the Board of Commissioners, in order to preserve the taxable values of
the property within the development and to prevent the common open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon the common open space and maintain the
same for a period of one (1) year. Said maintenance by the Township, as directed by the
Board of Commissioners, shall not constitute a taking of said common open space, nor vest
22-9
in the public any rights to use the same. Before the expiration of said year, the Board of
Commissioners shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing upon
notice to such organization, or to the landowners/residents of the development, to be held
by the Board of Commissioners or its designated agency, at which hearing such
organization or the residents/landowners of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Township shall not, at the option of the Township, continue for a
succeeding year. If the Board of Commissioners, or its designated agency, shall determine
that such organization is ready and able to maintain the common open space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said open space at the end of said year. If
the Board of Commissioners or its designated agency shall determine that such
organization is not ready and able to maintain said common open space in a reasonable
condition, the Township may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said common open
space during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination,
in each year thereafter. The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be subject to
appeal to court in such manner and within the same time limitation as is provided for
zoning appeals by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended or
supplemented. The cost of maintenance of such common open space by the Township shall
be assessed ratably against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a lien on said properties. The
Township, at the time of entering upon said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania, upon the properties affected by the lien within the development.
SECTION 2217. REGIONAL STORMWATER FACILITY
1. Any stormwater management facility designed as a regional stormwater facility may be
constructed within any Zoning District or T-Zone Overlay except for the agricultural
district provided the stormwater management facility is designed in conformance with the
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
23-1
ARTICLE XXIII. HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION 2301. PURPOSE; INTENT
The purpose of the Historic Overlay District is to promote, protect and facilitate the general
welfare of Manheim Township by preserving the natural and historic features and resources in
the Township's environment and implement MPC Sections 603(b)(5), 603(g)(2), 604(1) and
605(2)(vi), regarding the protection and preservation of natural and historic features and
resources. The intent of the Historic Overlay District is to establish review procedures for
proposed changes affecting natural and historic features and resources, encourage mitigation of
any negative effects of proposed changes to natural and historic resources, encourage continued
use and facilitate appropriate adaptive reuse of historic resources, encourage the preservation and
restoration of historic settings and landscapes, and discourage the demolition of historic
resources.
SECTION 2302. APPLICABILITY; EXPLANATION OF PROVISIONS
1. Historic Overlay District. The Historic Overlay District shall be comprised of the historic
resources shown on the Historic Resources Map provided for in the Lancaster County
Comprehensive Historic Site Survey. The district shall be deemed an overlay on any
zoning district now or hereafter enacted to regulate the use of land in Manheim Township.
For any property in the Historic Overlay District, the provisions of this article, to the extent
such provisions are more restrictive, shall supersede conflicting provisions of the
underlying zoning district. However, all other provisions of this ordinance and all other
ordinances of the Township shall remain in full force. Should any or all provisions of the
Historic Overlay District become inapplicable as a result of legislative, administrative or
judicial action, the provisions of the underlying zoning districts shall apply.
2. Preservation of other restrictions. It is not intended by the article to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing Township regulations. However, where this article imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this article shall prevail.
SECTION 2303. HISTORIC RESOURCES
1. Classification. The historic resources which may be included in the Historic Overlay
District shall be as follows:
A. Class I.
(1) Historic resources listed on, or eligible to be listed on, the National Register of
Historic Places maintained by the United States Department of the Interior (A
final determination of eligibility for the National Register shall be based on an
official opinion of eligibility form the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission or a determination of eligibility from the United States Department
of the Interior.); or
(2) Historic resources listed on, or determined by the Historic Preservation Trust to
be eligible to be listed on, the Lancaster County Historic Sites Register as
having Levels of Significance I or II.
23-2
2. Historic Resources Map. The Historic Overlay District shall be identified as those
properties included on the Historic Resources Map. The Official Historic Resources Map
shall be filed in the Township office and shall be maintained by the Township Manager-
Secretary.
3. Historic resources list. There shall be an official list of all historic resources shown on the
Historic Resources Map and included in the Historic Overlay District. The Township
Manager-Secretary shall maintain the official copy of the historic resources list. This list
shall include at least the following information about each historic resource: present name,
historic name, street address or exact location, description of extent of site (e.g., building
only, portion of parcel of land and all buildings thereon, or entire parcel of land and all
buildings thereon), site number from Lancaster County Historic Sites Inventory,
classification (e.g., Level of Significance I, Level of Significance II, Level of Significance
III or Level of Significance IV), and whether listed on the National Register of Historic
Places.
4. Establishment and amendments. The Historic Resources Map and historic resources list
shall be established and amended by official action of the Board of Commissioners. Prior
to any amendment of the Historic Resources Map and historic resources list, the following
criteria shall be met:
A. The Board of Commissioners shall request a written recommendation from the
Historic Preservation Trust.
B. The owners of any properties which are subject to such action shall be given written
notice of the proposed action and a copy of the Historic Preservation Trust's
recommendations, if any, at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which the
public hearing is scheduled.
C. The Board of Commissioners shall enact an ordinance to amend this ordinance in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
SECTION 2304. HISTORIC PRESERVATION TRUST
1. Advisory role. The Historic Preservation Trust's advisory role in the administration of this
article shall include, but not be limited to, making recommendations concerning
establishment of or amendments to the Historic Resources Map and historic resources list;
making recommendations concerning requests for special exceptions, conditional uses, or
variances affecting historic resources; making recommendations concerning rehabilitation,
alteration, or enlargement of historic resources; making recommendations on demolition of
historic resources; and performing any other lawful activities which shall be deemed
necessary to further the purposes of this article.
2. Review and recommendation schedules. Unless specified to the contrary elsewhere in this
article, the Historic Preservation Trust shall make all recommendations within thirty (30)
days of receiving a request.
SECTION 2305. MODIFICATION TO LOT AREA REGULATIONS
The subdivision of a lot which contains an historic resource of any level of significance as
23-3
identified in the Lancaster County Comprehensive Historic Site Survey shall be accomplished in
such a manner that the resulting lot which will contain the historic resource is of adequate size
and configuration to preserve the integrity of the setting of the resource. The size and
configuration of the subdivided lot shall depend on the level of significance of the historic
resource and the characteristics of the landscaping of the subdivided lot and the adjacent lots.
SECTION 2306. STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION
1. Standards for rehabilitation. Any proposed rehabilitation, alteration, or enlargement of a
Class I historic resource should be, whenever reasonably possible, in substantial
compliance with the United States Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation,"
as reproduced below:
A. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that
requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and
environment.
B. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of
historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall
be avoided.
C. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use.
Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding
conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be
undertaken.
D. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic
significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
E. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of
craftsmanship that characterize an historic property shall be preserved.
F. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the
severity of the deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new
feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and,
where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by
documentary, physical or pictorial evidence.
G. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
H. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and
preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be
undertaken.
I. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy
historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated
from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural
features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
J. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a
23-4
manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic
property and its environment would be unimpaired.
2. Review. The Zoning Officer shall refer applications for permits which propose
rehabilitation of Class I historic resources to the Historic Preservation Trust. The Historic
Preservation Trust shall review applications for permits and make written
recommendations to the Zoning Officer.
SECTION 2307. PERMITS
1. Permits. No permit required by Section 2703 of this ordinance for any land within the
Historic Overlay District shall be issued by the Zoning Officer prior to the Historic
Preservation Trust having an opportunity to review and make recommendations on the
permit application.
2. Review and recommendations. The Zoning Officer shall provide to the Historic
Preservation Trust with a copy of the permit application, together with any plans or
diagrams required by this ordinance, within five (5) days of receipt of a complete
application. The Historic Preservation Trust shall make written recommendations to the
Zoning Officer, with a copy to be sent to the applicant, indicating whether the plans will
have any detrimental effect on the architectural integrity or public enjoyment of an historic
resource. The report shall indicate what specific changes in the plans can be made to
mitigate any detrimental effect.
3. Issuance of permit. If the plans satisfy all other requirements of the Township, the Zoning
Officer shall issue the permit upon receiving a report of no detrimental effect from the
Historic Preservation Trust; upon the plans having been revised by the applicant in
accordance with the recommendations of the Historic Preservation Trust to mitigate any
detrimental effect; or not later than ninety (90) days from the date of the permit application.
SECTION 2308. DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES
1. Demolished by neglect. No Class I historic resource shall be demolished by neglect.
Demolition by neglect includes leaving a building or structure open or vulnerable to
vandalism or decay by the elements. Unoccupied structures shall be properly protected
against weather and vandalism.
2. Demolition permit. No Class I historic resource shall be demolished, in whole or in part,
including the indiscriminate removal or stripping of any significant interior or exterior
architectural features, unless a permit is obtained from the Zoning Officer in accordance
with the procedures and requirements of this section and other applicable standards and
procedures of the Township.
3. Demolition application requirements for historic resources. In addition to any other
applicable standards and procedures of the Township, any applicant seeking a permit to
demolish an historic resource shall provide the following information or documents with
regard to that historic resource:
A. Owner of record.
B. Classification in Historic Resources Map.
23-5
C. Site plan showing all buildings and structures on the property.
D. Recent photographs of the resource proposed for demolition.
E. Reasons for the demolition.
F. Method of demolition.
G. Future uses of the site and of the materials from the demolished resource.
4. Review by Historic Preservation Trust. The Zoning Officer shall provide the Historic
Preservation Trust with a copy of the application for demolition within five (5) days of
acceptance of a properly completed application. The Historic Preservation Trust may make
recommendations as indicated below.
5. Recommendation of the Historic Preservation Trust.
A. The Historic Preservation Trust may recommend immediate approval of the permit
and may so advise the Zoning Officer.
B. The Historic Preservation Trust may elect to use the following time period to provide
adequate opportunity for documentation of the historic resource or for discussion with
the applicant with respect to alternatives to demolition:
(a) Class I historic resources: a maximum of seventy-five (75) days from the date
of application.
C. Within the time period stipulated in Section 2308.5. (B), the Historic Preservation
Trust may recommend approval of the demolition permit. The Zoning Officer may
issue the permit in accordance with any applicable standards and procedures.
D. In all cases, the Zoning Officer shall act upon an application to demolish an historic
resource within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete application for a demolition
permit.
SECTION 2309. ADAPTIVE REUSE
1. Legislative intent. It is the intent of this section to provide for the adaptive reuse of existing
historic buildings in order to promote, protect, enhance, perpetuate, and preserve those
historic resources for the educational, cultural, economic, enjoyment, and general welfare
of the public. The Board of Commissioners recognizes that existing historic buildings have
not been designed in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance, and that
restricting and limiting such historic buildings to the uses and regulations which would be
imposed on newly constructed buildings limits the use of such historic buildings. By
allowing flexibility and adaptive reuse, the Board of Commissioners believes that historic
buildings can be put to profitable use and thereby be maintained and preserved for future
generations. Such adaptive reuse, however, must be carefully monitored in order to insure
there will be no adverse effect upon the neighborhood.
2. Authorization for adaptive reuse. Within all business districts and industrial districts, an
historic building shown on the Official Historic Resources Map and located within the
Historic Overlay District pursuant to Section 2302 of this ordinance and which is listed at
23-6
Significance Level I, II, or III in the Lancaster County Historic Sites Inventory may, by
conditional use approval, be put to an adaptive reuse if all requirements of this section are
met.
3. Permitted uses. Any historic building which shall be put to an adaptive reuse shall contain a
combination of residential and nonresidential uses meeting the ratio set forth in Section
2309.4 below. Permitted uses shall be limited to the following:
A. Day-care centers.
B. Apartment dwellings.
C. Banks and similar financial institutions.
D. Commercial recreational facilities.
E. Educational institutions.
F. Bed-and-breakfast.
G. Offices, professional and medical/dental.
H. Public utility installations.
I. Restaurants, excluding drive-in/drive through restaurants, provided that the physical
location of such facility shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from adjacent
residential properties, unless outdoor dining is offered, in which case the facility shall
be two hundred (200) feet from adjacent residential properties.
J. Retail sales and retail services, provided that such retail uses shall be compatible with
other permitted uses and shall not include convenience stores, supermarkets, motor
vehicle stations or garages, motor vehicle sales areas or buildings, body art
establishments or adult establishments, and further provided that no single such
establishment shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in gross floor area, and
the aggregate total of retail sales and retail services shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the total gross floor area of the historic building.
K. All other uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
L. Uses customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted use.
4. Required ratio of residential and nonresidential uses. Subject to the limitations in Section
2309.3.(J) for retail sales and retail services, the nonresidential use of an historic building
which will be converted to an adaptive reuse shall be a minimum of five hundred (500)
square feet of gross nonresidential floor area per apartment dwelling, except that a bed-andbreakfast
shall be exempt from this requirement.
5. Minimum standards for allowance of adaptive reuse.
A. Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
B. Access. The tract containing the historic building must abut and have access to a
public roadway.
23-7
C. Minimum lot area, width and depth: none, except as based upon required minimum
yard dimensions, minimum open area, minimum open area, minimum off-street
parking requirements and other applicable standards contained within this section.
D. Minimum yard dimensions for an historic building which will be subdivided and
located on a separate lot or for an historic building which will be part of a land
development with other principal buildings on the same lot (all subject to Section
2213 of this ordinance):
(1) Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) Side yard, each side: Twenty-five (25) feet, provided that if the lot is adjacent to
a residential district, the side yard shall be seventy-five (75) feet along the side
contiguous with the residential district.
(3) Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet, provided that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be seventy-five (75) feet along the side
contiguous with the residential district.
(4) Perimeter buffer: Ten (10) feet.
E. Buffering/screening/landscaping/lighting. At a minimum, all buffering, screening,
landscaping and lighting shall be provided in accordance with Section 2507, Section
2511, Section 2512 and Section 2513 of this ordinance.
F. Minimum open area: Thirty (30) percent.
G. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
XX of this ordinance.
6. Application procedure. An applicant who desires conditional use approval for an adaptive
reuse shall submit an application which shall include all of the following:
A. A conceptual site plan for the entire lot on which the historic building is located,
which shall include all of the following information:
(1) Lot boundaries and adjacent landowners. If the historic building will be located
on a lot which will be subdivided from a larger lot, the site plan must show the
boundaries of the existing lot and the proposed lot. If the historic building is
located on a lot containing other principal structures and will not be subdivided
into a separate lot, the site plan must show how the historic building will meet
all setbacks from other principal structures identified in Section 2309.5.
(2) A location map for the adaptive reuse.
(3) North point, scale and date.
(4) Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
(5) Significant topographical and physical features.
(6) Size and location of existing structures.
(7) Identification of proposed demolition of existing structure(s).
23-8
(8) Identification of generalized land uses.
(9) Potential lot configuration.
(10) Proposed landscaping, screening and buffering.
(11) Proposed interior street or access drive layout and parking lot configuration.
(12) Proposed interior circulation plan for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
B. A traffic study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer meeting the requirements of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
C. Evidence that the site plan has been submitted to the Historic Preservation Trust of
Lancaster County for review and comment.
D. Narrative identifying all of the proposed uses for the historic building, including the
area to be devoted to each use.
E. A floor plan of the historic building indicating the portions of the historic building
that will be devoted to residential use, including floor area, and the portions that will
be devoted to nonresidential uses, including floor area of each nonresidential use and
the total floor area for all nonresidential uses.
F. Identification of how the adaptive reuse will contribute to the preservation of the
historic building.
G. Required application fee.
7. Consideration of application for conditional use approval. The applicant shall demonstrate
that the adaptive reuse proposal meets all of the applicable requirements of this Section
2309 of this Article XXIII and of this ordinance. The applicant shall also demonstrate and
assure that the adaptive reuse is in substantial compliance with applicable requirements of
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, with
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings,
published by the United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service, either by
providing documentation from the Secretary of the Interior evidencing such compliance or
by establishing to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners compliance with the
following standards:
A. The adaptive reuse shall require minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
historic building and its site and environment.
B. Any alterations to the exterior features shall be limited but shall be permitted in order
to enhance the function and reusability of the historic building. Any exterior
alterations shall complement the existing architecture and functionality of the historic
structure.
C. The exterior features of the historic building may be altered to provide or change
ingress and egress or to address fire safety or emergency services concerns only to the
extent required to meet applicable laws or regulations.
D. The historic character of the historic building shall be retained and preserved. The
23-9
removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a
property shall be prohibited unless the applicant presents evidence that such removal
is required to comply with applicable state or federal regulations.
E. Each historic building shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and
use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding
conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be
undertaken.
F. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic
significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
G. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of
craftsmanship that characterize an historic building shall be preserved.
H. The adaptive reuse shall not require demolition or removal of any historic resource on
the lot.
I. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the
severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature
shall match the old in design, color texture, and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by
documentary, physical or pictorial evidence.
J. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
8. Effect of approval of site plan. The Board of Commissioners, in approving a conditional
use application for an adaptive reuse, shall make compliance with the site plan, together
with all accompanying documents and any revisions thereto required by the
Commissioners, part of the approval. The applicant shall develop the adaptive reuse in the
manner set forth on the site plan, all accompanying documents, and any required revisions
thereto, unless a change to the site plan is authorized in accordance with Subsection 8.A or
B below.
A. An applicant may make minor revisions to the site plan as may be necessary to
accommodate fully engineered stormwater management facilities, public sewer
facilities, public water facilities, floodplains, and changes to street or driveway design
as may be required by PennDOT as part of a highway occupancy permit. The Board
of Commissioners during the subdivision and/or land development process shall
determine whether the applicant's proposed changes to the approved site plan
constitute minor revisions necessary to accommodate fully engineered stormwater
management facilities, public sewer facilities, public water facilities, floodplains, and
changes to street or driveway design as may be required by the PennDOT as part of a
highway occupancy permit. In the event a subdivision and/or land development plan
is not required for the adaptive reuse, the Board of Commissioners shall review the
plan which is submitted with the application for a building permit to determine
whether it is consistent with the conditional use approval.
23-10
B. An applicant who desires to make a change to an approved site plan which the Board
of Commissioners determines does not constitute a minor revision authorized by
Subsection 8.A above shall apply for and obtain an additional conditional use
approval. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of
Commissioners during the additional conditional use approval process that such
change will:
(1) Generally enhance the development plan or, in any case, not have an adverse
impact on its physical, visual or spatial characteristics.
(2) Generally enhance the neighborhood or, in any case, not have an adverse impact
on the neighborhood.
(3) Not result in any danger to the public health, safety or welfare by making access
to the property by emergency vehicles more difficult, by depriving adjoining
properties of adequate light and air or by violating the other purposes for which
zoning ordinances are to be enacted under Section 604 of the Municipalities
Planning Code
(4) Allow for equal or better results than the originally approved site plan and
represent the minimum modification necessary.
9. Modification of standards. The Board of Commissioners may, by conditional use approval,
permit the modification of the design standards set forth in this section and incorporated by
reference into this section in order to encourage adaptive reuse and preservation of historic
resources. An applicant desiring to obtain such conditional use approval shall, when
making application for conditional use approval for an adaptive reuse, also make
application for conditional use approval under this section. The Board of Commissioners
shall consider both conditional use approval requests simultaneously. Any conditional use
to permit a modification of the design standards for adaptive reuse shall be subject to the
following requirements:
A. Such modifications of any design standards shall better serve the intended purposes
and goals of adaptive reuse as expressed in Section 2309.1.
B. Such modifications of design standards will not result in any adverse impact to
adjoining properties or future inhabitants within the historic building.
C. Such modifications will not result in an increase in residential or nonresidential
densities permitted for the adaptive reuse.
D. Such modifications will not result in a removal of architectural features which
characterize the historic building or adversely impact the nature of the historic
resource as a whole.
E. The extent of any modification provides the minimum amount of relief necessary to
ensure compliance with the preceding criteria in this Section 2309.
24-1
ARTICLE XXIV. T-ZONE OVERLAY AREAS (Amended by Ordinance 2020-15, dated 07/27/2020)
SECTION 2401. PURPOSE
The purpose of the T-Zone Overlay Areas is as follows:
1. To address and incorporate the goals of the Manheim Township Comprehensive Plan.
2. To promote the efficient use of land within the urban and village growth areas of Manheim
Township, thereby preserving agricultural areas outside of the designated growth areas.
3. To organize and enhance the form of development based on the rural to urban transect,
where the development within each T-Zone Overlay Area has distinct physical
characteristics, regardless of use, worthy of being preserved, promoted and emulated.
4. To encourage design compatibility between new development, infill and redevelopment
and existing neighborhoods.
5. To enhance streetscapes throughout Manheim Township to become more pedestrian
friendly.
6. To promote a greater mix of compatible uses and dwelling types throughout the Township.
7. To expand and enhance the open space and pedestrian network.
8. To provide focused provisions to address the unique needs of particular areas, such as the
Villages of Neffsville and Oregon, highway regeneration along commercial corridors, the
Lancaster Airport, and urban transition areas identified in the Manheim Township
Comprehensive Plan.
9. To promote context-sensitive massing, proportion, height, articulation and detailing of
buildings, streetscape elements, signage, and landscaping in accordance with Appendix A,
Form-Based Code Standards.
10. To promote more appropriate development types in specific areas of Manheim Township
as illustrated in Appendix B, Transformation Concepts.
11. To promote the use of best practices and sound land use planning principles in Planned
Residential Development in accordance with Appendix C, Design Standards.
12. To promote the use of best practices and sound land use planning principles in accordance
with Appendix D, Best Practices and Models.
SECTION 2402. APPLICABILITY; EXPLANATION OF PROVISIONS; SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS
1. This article applies to all new development, change of use, and redevelopment, including
development and redevelopment of accessory buildings and uses incidental to elementary
and secondary schools, located within a T-Zone Overlay Area as described herein and
shown on the T-Zone Overlay Area Map, which is incorporated herein by reference and
made a part of this ordinance. The T-Zone Overlay Area Map is separated into eight
24-2
distinct T-Zone Overlay Areas, each with specific regulations as set forth in this article and
in Appendixes A, B, C, and D, particularly Table A-1, Applicability of Appendix A. The
T-Zone Overlay Areas are as follows:
A. T-1 Natural Resources Overlay Area (T-1);
B. T-4 Urban Neighborhood Overlay Area (T-4);
C. T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area (T-5);
D. T-5 Neffsville Village Overlay Area (T-5);
E. T-6 Urban Transition Overlay Area (T-6);
F. D-Retrofit Overlay Area (D-R);
G. D-Airport Overlay Area (D-A);
H. D-Corridor Overlay Area (D-C).
2. All existing uses within the T-Zone Overlay Areas shall be governed by the applicable
underlying zoning district regulations.
3. All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment located within a T-Zone Overlay
Area as shown on the T-Zone Overlay Area Map shall be governed by and comply with the
district regulations in this Article XXIV. Where such regulations conflict with those of the
underlying district, these regulations shall supersede, unless otherwise specified. Where
such regulations conflict with those governed by the Planned Residential Development
regulations, the Planned Residential Development regulations shall apply. Where
regulations are not specified herein, but are specified within the underlying district, the
underlying district regulations shall rule.
4. Unless otherwise specified, the supplemental regulations found in Articles XVIII, XX,
XXI, XXII, XXV and XXVI shall apply.
5. The design standards, transformation concepts, and best practices found in Appendixes A,
B, C and D shall apply.
SECTION 2403. T-1 NATURAL RESOURCES OVERLAY AREA
1. Purpose. The following natural resource protection standards are established to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare by minimizing adverse environmental impacts and are
specifically authorized by Section 604 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10604. These standards are intended to meet the following purposes:
A. Promote and implement Sections 603(c)(7), 603(g)(2), and 604(1) of the Act,
providing for the protection and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas and
natural resources through municipal zoning ordinances.
B. Define and delineate selected environmental resources within the Township and
establish resource protection standards to assist the Township in reducing the impact
proposed uses will have on the environment.
C. Conserve, protect, and preserve valuable natural resources within the Township in
24-3
accordance with the goals and objectives of the Manheim Township Comprehensive
Plan.
2. Applicability. It shall be a violation of this article to regrade, fill, pipe, divert, channel,
build upon, or otherwise alter or disturb a natural resource protected by this section prior to
the submission, review, and approval of an application for development.
A. Where disturbance of a natural resource is permitted, it shall not take place until it has
been determined that such disturbance is consistent with the provisions of this section
and other applicable article provisions.
B. Restrictions to the disturbance of resources shall apply before, during, and after
construction on a site.
C. In the event that two or more natural resource areas identified in this section overlap,
the resources with the most restrictive standard (the least amount of permitted
alteration, regrading, clearing, or building) shall apply to the area of overlap.
3. Floodplains. All floodplain areas shall be subject to Chapter 265, Manheim Township
Floodplain Management. Areas subject to flooding, as defined in Chapter 265, Manheim
Township Floodplain Management, shall not be used to compute minimum lot area
requirements, but may be used to compute density in Planned Residential Developments
and apartment developments.
4. Riparian Buffers/Riparian Forest Buffers.
A. Delineation.
(1) The required riparian buffer or riparian forest buffer width shall be fifty (50)
feet from the edge of all natural permanent or intermittent streams, rivers,
brooks, runs, creeks, channels, swales, ponds, lakes or other body of surface
water carrying or holding surface water or watercourse measured
perpendicularly from the following reference points: top of bank of perennial
streams, center line of intermittent streams, and mean water level of lakes and
ponds. A riparian buffer or riparian forest buffer shall not be required adjacent
to man-made swales or man-made detention facilities utilized solely for
stormwater management from the project site.
(2) Where areas of the 100-year floodplain or a wetland abut the riparian buffer or
riparian forest buffer, the riparian buffer or riparian forest buffer shall be
extended to encompass the entire 100-year floodplain and wetland area.
B. Protection standards.
(1) Existing vegetated areas shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible,
except that invasive species shall be removed and replaced with native species.
(2) The following uses shall have a minimum separation distance from the top of
bank of any stream, floodplain, or wetland included in the riparian buffer or
riparian forest buffer, unless a more stringent separation distance is required by
the jurisdictional agency:
24-4
Use
Minimum Separation Distance
(as measured from top of stream bank)
(feet)
Septic drainfields and sewer disposal systems 100
Solid waste disposal facilities/junkyards 300
Petroleum storage facilities 150
Application of biosolids 100
(3) Filling, regrading or disturbance.
[a] Except as listed below, no filling, regrading, or disturbance shall be
permitted within the Riparian Buffer or Riparian Forest Buffer outside of
the floodplain:
[i] Provision for unpaved trail access;
[ii] A soil or stream conservation project, including reforestation and
stream bank stabilization, approved by the Lancaster County
Conservation District;
[iii] Livestock crossings; and
[iv] Infrastructure and public utilities.
[b] The above uses shall be permitted to disturb a maximum of five (5) of the
Riparian Buffer or Riparian Forest Buffer.
(4) Areas of the Riparian Buffer or Riparian Forest Buffer within the floodplain
shall be in accordance with Chapter 265, Manheim Township Floodplain
Management.
(5) There shall be no disposal of trash or any other materials, except as permitted
above, within the Riparian Buffer or Riparian Forest Buffer.
5. Wetlands.
A. Delineation. The applicant shall delineate the limits of wetlands on the site in
accordance with the following:
(1) A full wetland delineation report conducted by a qualified wetland biologist,
soil scientist, or environmental professional of demonstrated qualifications shall
be submitted to Manheim Township. If there is a question as to the accuracy of
the wetland delineation report, the Township may hire a qualified consultant to
review the delineation and recommend revisions at the applicant's expense.
(2) Such a professional shall certify that the methods used correctly reflect the
currently accepted technical concepts set forth and accepted by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, including identification and analysis of wetland vegetation,
hydric soils, and hydrologic indicators. Methods used in the delineation report
24-5
shall be acceptable to the Township Engineer.
(3) The wetland report shall include a determination of whether wetlands are
present or not present on the site and a full delineation, area measurement (in
square feet), and description of any wetlands determined to be present.
(4) A wetlands delineation report shall identify areas where the following criteria
are met, even if the report concludes that such areas do not meet the standards:
[a] Areas delineated as Wetlands in the National Wetlands Inventory and/or
the 1990 Lancaster County Natural Areas Inventory;
[b] Areas consisting of one or more of the following soil types having a very
high percentage of hydric components, as designated by the Natural
Resource Conservation Service:
[i] Bail silt loam (Ba).
[ii] Bowmansville silt loam (Bo).
[iii] Holly silt loam (Hg).
[iv] Towhee silt loam, 0% to 3% slopes (ToA).
[v] Watchung extremely stony silt loam, 0% to 8% slopes (WbB)B.
B. Resource protection standards.
(1) Any applicant proposing a use, activity, or improvement which would entail the
regrading or placement of fill in wetlands shall provide the Township with proof
that the PA DEP and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have been contacted to
determine the applicability of state and federal wetland regulations. The
applicant shall concurrently provide to the Township a copy of the application
and any other wetlands information submitted to PA DEP and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
(2) Wetlands shall not be regraded, filled, piped, diverted, channeled, built upon, or
otherwise altered or disturbed except where state or federal permits have been
obtained.
(3) Existing wetlands shall not be used for stormwater management, except where
the wetlands are highly degraded and a mitigation program is provided.
(4) A thirty-five (35) foot wetlands buffer shall be maintained around the wetlands
boundary. This buffer shall be conserved for naturally occurring vegetation or
the reestablishment of native plant species. No land disturbance is permitted
within the wetlands buffer.
(5) No septic drainfields or sewage disposal systems shall be located within one
hundred (100) feet of the wetlands boundary. The replacement of existing septic
systems shall comply with the one-hundred (100) foot setback, regardless of the
location of the existing system.
24-6
SECTION 2404. T-4 URBAN NEIGHBORHOODS OVERLAY AREA
1. Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted in accordance with the underlying Zoning District.
2. Area and bulk regulations:
A. Maximum building height: Thirty-six (36) feet, except that nonresidential or mixeduse
buildings within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the T-6 Urban Transition Overlay
Area, the D-C Corridor Overlay Area, or the D-R Retrofit Overlay Area shall be
permitted to increase the maximum height to fifty (50) feet with the purchase of
transferable development rights in accordance with Article XXVI. However, all
structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
B. Build-to line.
(1) A build-to line shall be established for each development, or in the case of a
Planned Residential District, for each block within the development. Such
build-to line shall fall within the range of ten (10) feet to twenty-five (25) feet
for all uses, except that:
[a] Agricultural uses shall be in accordance with the underlying zoning
district regulations;
[b] In the case of infill properties, the build-to line for new principal structures
shall be equal to or less than the front yard setback of the principal
buildings on adjacent parcels, but shall not exceed the maximum of
twenty-five (25) feet, except that the building setbacks listed in Section
2213 shall apply.
(2) In the case of an existing nonconforming building that cannot meet the build-to
line, a fence, hedge or wall shall be constructed along the build-to line in order
to maintain the street wall.
C. Minimum required open area:
(1) Residential uses: in accordance with the underlying zoning district;
(2) Nonresidential uses: Twenty-five (25) percent.
D. Minimum lot area and setback requirements: Unless otherwise specified, in
accordance with the underlying zoning district.
3. Design requirements.
A. All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment within the T-Zone Overlay
Areas shall comply with the design standards in Appendix A.
B. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
design standards of applicable transformation concepts in Appendix B.
C. All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment within the T-Zone Overlay
Areas shall comply with the design standards in Appendix C.
D. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
24-7
applicable best practices in Appendix D.
SECTION 2405. T-5 NEFFSVILLE VILLAGE OVERLAY AREA
1. Purpose: to enhance the viability of the Village of Neffsville as a traditional village where
growth is intended to be directed, while preserving and enhancing the traditional physical
character, mix of uses, and promoting economic development.
2. Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted in accordance with the underlying zoning district,
except that:
A. Motor vehicle sales and service and washing facilities shall not be permitted within
the overlay area.
B. The following additional uses shall be permitted in any nonresidential district within
the T-5 Neffsville Village Overlay Area:
(1) Apartments in combination with business uses.
(2) Hotels/motels with a maximum of twenty-five (25) guest rooms.
(3) Park-and-ride facilities.
(4) Restaurants with or without outdoor dining. (See Section 2526)
C. Planned residential development shall be required on all new residential development
on five (5) acres or more within the T-5 Neffsville Village Overlay Area.
3. Maximum density. The maximum density permitted in the T-5 Neffsville Village Overlay
Area shall be in accordance with the underlying zoning district, except that such density
may be increased through the purchase of transferable development rights in accordance
with Article XXVI.
4. Area and bulk regulations:
A. Maximum building height: Thirty (36) feet, except that buildings along Lititz Pike
shall be permitted to increase the maximum height to fifty (50) feet with the purchase
of transferable development rights in accordance with Article XXVI. However, all
structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance.
B. Build-to line.
(1) A build-to line shall be established for each development, or in the case of
planned residential development, for each block within the development. Such
build-to line shall fall within the range of ten (10) feet to twenty (20) feet for all
uses, except that:
[a] Agricultural uses shall be in accordance with the underlying zoning
district regulations.
[b] In the case of infill properties, the build-to-line for new principal
structures shall be equal to or less than the front yard setback of the
principal buildings on adjacent parcels, but shall not exceed the maximum
of twenty-five (25) feet.
24-8
(2) In the case of an existing nonconforming building that cannot meet the build-to
line, a fence, hedge or wall shall be constructed along the build-to line in order
to maintain the street wall.
C. Minimum required open area:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings: Forty (40) percent.
(2) Single-family semidetached and duplex dwellings: Forty (40) percent.
(3) Single-family attached/townhouses and apartment buildings: Thirty (30)
percent.
(4) Nonresidential uses: Twenty (20) percent.
D. Building size.
(1) New nonresidential or mixed-use buildings, other than elementary and
secondary schools, shall have a maximum building footprint of seven thousand
five hundred (7,500) square feet.
(2) New nonresidential or mixed-use buildings, other than elementary and
secondary schools, shall have a maximum length of one hundred fifty (150)
feet.
(3) Accessory buildings associated with elementary and secondary schools shall
have a maximum building footprint of 20,000 square feet and a maximum
building length of 250 feet.
(E) Minimum lot area and setback requirements: Unless otherwise specified, in
accordance with the underlying zoning district.
5. General design requirements.
A. All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment within the T-Zone Overlay
Areas shall comply with the design standards in Appendix A.
B. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
design standards of applicable transformation concepts in Appendix B.
C. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable design standards in Appendix C.
D. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable best practices in Appendix D.
SECTION 2406. T-5 OREGON VILLAGE OVERLAY AREA
1. Purpose: to permit as an option in specific circumstances and by conditional use a
coordinated master site planned development process which permits a mixture of medium
and higher density residential development via providing a variety of dwelling types and a
mixture of various office, commercial uses and hospitality services by capitalizing on the
transportation opportunities and public utilities while protecting the surrounding
agricultural uses and historic character of the Village of Oregon. The intent of the Board of
24-9
Commissioners in enacting the Oregon Village Overlay Area is:
A. To encourage a variety of uses, including medium and higher density mixed
residential and commercial development.
B. To encourage increased flexibility in order to promote mixed use.
C. To encourage development in an orderly and compatible manner which maximizes
the transportation opportunities along the major roadways while protecting the quality
and character of the Village of Oregon and surrounding agricultural uses.
D. To encourage a pattern of vehicular circulation and pedestrian accessibility to
minimize traffic congestion while promoting safe and easy pedestrian movement.
E. To reduce the excessive sprawl of development and segregation of land uses that
result in the inefficient use of irreplaceable natural resources due to the dependence
on private vehicles for transportation.
F. To discourage generic-type modern suburban development that bears no relation to
the historic development pattern of Lancaster County.
G. To promote a high quality of design for buildings, parking areas and open space
areas.
H. To provide for the growth of existing businesses within the T-5 Oregon Village
Overlay Area.
I. To protect and preserve our natural environment.
J. To protect and preserve historical structures.
K. To encourage more efficient use of land through compact development in areas
capable of supporting compact development.
2. Location and general development criteria.
A. All regulations within the T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area shall apply to those uses
listed below if the master site planned development process is pursued. All other uses
shall be controlled by the regulations of the underlying zoning district. Where the
regulations of the T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area conflict with other provisions of
this ordinance, the regulations of the T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area shall prevail.
The T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area shall be permitted as a conditional use in
accordance with the general standards as set forth in Section 2810.3 herein and
specific criteria as set forth below. Where the general and specific criteria overlap, the
specific criteria shall supersede the general criteria.
B. In compliance with Section 605(2) and (3) of the Municipalities Planning Code, this
overlay provides an optional set of design standards that can be applied to property
within the Oregon Village Overlay Area. The Board of Commissioners may also, by
conditional use approval, permit the applicant to modify the design standards of this
overlay, if such modification will enable the design of a better development. The
design standards of this overlay and the modified design standards that may be
24-10
approved by the Board of Commissioners shall be considered voluntarily selfimposed
by the applicant but enforceable by the Township.
3. Options for development. The T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area provides for flexibility in
planning and designing new developments by providing for two forms of development
referred to as "options" and summarized below:
A. Option One: uses and developments permitted in the underlying zoning district. The
provisions of the underlying zoning districts shall govern. See the applicable
underlying zoning districts for permitted uses, lot and building-related dimensional
standards and provisions.
B. Option Two: master site planned development.
(1) Where the Option Two provisions of this section are chosen, the provisions of
the T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area shall be met and shall supersede the
provisions of the underlying zoning district, unless otherwise provided by this
section.
(2) After a master site planned development is approved by conditional use, the
land area included in the master site plan shall be permitted to be developed in
accordance with the approved master site plan and reviewed and approved in
accordance with the preliminary and final plan requirements in the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
(3) Master site planned developments may be developed in phases and be owned
and constructed by different applicants, provided that the phase of the master
site plan development is consistent with the master site plan. A phase of the
master site planned development shall not contain less than two acres.
(4) If the applicant's land extends into an adjacent municipality or zoning district,
the master site plan shall also show such area with a plan for coordinated road
and infrastructure system.
(5) Where feasible and appropriate, the master site plan shall be coordinated with
any existing, proposed or approved development on adjacent land.
(6) Any changes proposed within a previously approved master site planned
development will require the obtainment of a conditional use. Minor revisions
of the master site planned development that were previously approved as a part
of the master site planned development are permitted by right if they do not
violate any conditions imposed as a part of the approval of the master site
planned development and do not change any principal use. An owner of a part
of the property within the master site planned development shall be permitted to
propose the modification of the portion of the master site plan owned by such
applicant, provided that the area within the master site plan complies with the
area and bulk regulations set forth in Section 2406.7.
(7) One (1) transferable development right is required to be acquired in accordance
with Article XXVI for each three (3) gross acres included in the master site
planned development.
24-11
(8) Building heights shall be permitted to increase to the maximum height of fiftyfive
(55) feet with the purchase of transferable development rights in
accordance with Article XXVI.
4. Minimum requirements for a master site planned development.
A. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
B. Minimum tract acreage. A minimum of ten (10) gross acres of land shall be required
to qualify for a master site planned development. The acres comprising the master site
planned development shall not be required to be contiguous if the tracts are separated
by a street. Applications that expand previously approved master site planned
development shall have no minimum area requirement.
5. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within approved master site planned
developments:
A. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings, related to the
tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of
farm and/or garden products on a retail basis (See Section 2503), subject to the area
and bulk regulations set forth in Section 605.
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
C. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
D. Duplex dwellings.
E. Apartment dwellings.
F. Townhouse dwellings.
G. Houses of worship. (See Section 2513)
H. Community clubs. (See Section 2513)
I. Offices, professional and medical/dental.
J. Full-service hotels.
K. Limited-service hotels.
L. Banks and financial institutions. (See Section 2504)
M. Retail sales of goods and services; provided, however, that adult establishments and
body art establishments are not permitted.
N. Holiday tree sales.
O. Convenience stores.
P. Retail sales of lawn and garden care products and the outdoor sale of nursery stock.
Q. Public parks and public recreation areas.
24-12
R. Community facilities.
S. Public utility installations. (See Section 2513)
T. Temporary retail sales. (See Section 2517)
U. Day-care centers. (See Section 2508)
V. Restaurants with or without outdoor dining. (See Section 2526)
W. Fueling station associated with a retail store or convenience store.
X. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. (See Section 2505)
Y. Commercial recreation facilities.
Z. Agritourism enterprises.
AA. Educational institutions.
BB. Elementary and secondary schools.
CC. Group homes.
DD. Municipal services.
EE. Supermarkets.
FF. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
6. Master site plan development components. Development within a master site planned
development may be composed of two (2) components or portions thereof. Each
development qualifying for consideration as a master site planned development shall
comply with the following:
A. The residential component shall be permitted to comprise a part of or all of the gross
acres within the master site planned development and shall comply with the
following:
(1) Residential development, including single-family detached, single-family
semidetached, duplex dwellings, townhouse dwellings and apartment dwellings,
shall not exceed a maximum of ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre of the
residential component within the master site planned development. The
maximum dwelling units per gross acre proposed within the various phases or
areas within the master site plan shall be identified. The number of dwelling
units per gross acre as used herein shall be based upon the number of dwelling
units in relation to the total land area proposed for the residential component
within the master site planned development, including, but not limited to, the
area for the nonresidential uses as set forth in Section 2406.6.A.(2) below,
rights-of-way, interior parking areas, access drives, private streets, sidewalks,
common open space, public or semipublic parks and playgrounds, and
stormwater facilities.
(2) Nonresidential uses, as set forth in Section 2406.5, shall not exceed twenty-five
24-13
(25) percent of the gross acres of the residential component.
(3) Single-family detached dwellings shall abut existing single-family detached
dwellings on adjoining lots that are not a part of the master site plan
development. This requirement shall not apply if the residential uses are
separated from each other by a public street, dedicated to and maintained by the
Township, or where a setback of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the property
line is provided.
(4) Agricultural uses: no minimum or maximum area of the residential component.
B. The mixed center component shall be permitted to comprise a part of or all of the
gross acres within the master site planned development and shall comply with the
following:
(1) Nonresidential uses: As set forth in Section 2406.5.
(2) Residential uses, including apartments on upper floors over permitted groundfloor
nonresidential uses, and those residential uses as set forth in Section
2406.5, shall not exceed a maximum of six (6) dwelling units per gross acre of
the mixed center component of the master site planned development and shall
not be less than two (2) dwelling units per gross acre of the mixed center
component of the master site planned development. The number of dwelling
units per gross acre as used herein shall be based upon the number of dwelling
units in relation to the total land area proposed for the mixed center component
of the master site planned development, including, but not limited to, the area
for the nonresidential uses, rights-of-way, interior parking areas, access drives,
private streets, sidewalks, common open space, public or semipublic parks and
playgrounds, and stormwater facilities.
(3) Agricultural uses: no minimum or maximum area of the gross acres of the
component.
C. Common open space.
(1) A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross tract area shall be designated as
common open space. Where both a mixed center component and a residential
component are proposed, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the required
open space shall be located within the mixed center component. Common open
space shall be combined into an interconnected network of open space and
pedestrian gathering places that also connect to adjoining tracts.
(2) A maximum of fifty (50) percent of the required common open space may
contain stormwater and drainage easements.
(3) The master site planned development shall have at least one central plaza or
green that is a minimum of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet that
serves as a gathering place for patrons, employees, visitors and/or residents.
This central plaza or green shall be embellished with pedestrian amenities, such
as civic art or fountains, benches, pedestrian-scale lighting, walkways or
sidewalks, and landscaping consisting of native species.
24-14
(4) Existing attractive or unique natural features, such as streams, creeks, ponds,
woodlands, specimen trees and other areas of mature vegetation, are encouraged
to be preserved in a natural state as part of a greenway.
(5) As part of the conditional use approval, the Board of Commissioners may
condition that a nonmotorized path or greenway be accommodated and/or
installed in accordance with the standards in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
(6) The ownership, administration and maintenance of common open space shall be
approved by the Board of Commissioners and shall be arranged in accordance
with Section 2216.
(7) The construction schedule of the development shall coordinate the
improvements of the common open space with the construction of the
development. At no time in the development of the various phases may the total
area of common open space in the phases developed be less than fifteen (15)
percent of the gross area of the developed lands, unless additional areas to
produce the required percentage are permanently reserved as common open
space on the remaining land of the total development.
7. Area and bulk regulations for principal buildings and permitted uses. See the table of area
and bulk regulations.
8. Streets within a master site planned development.
A. A minimum of two (2) interconnections with the existing public street system shall be
provided where possible.
B. If an alley is proposed, it shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) The alley shall be a private street and shall not be dedicated to the Township.
The rights of access and maintenance must be clearly defined in an agreement
and approved by the Township Solicitor.
(2) Minimum paved width: Ten (10) feet (one way).
(3) Width of easement: Twenty (20) feet (two way).
(4) No parking shall be permitted on either side of the cartway of the alley.
(5) Curbing shall not be required except at corners of intersections with other street
types. At such corner locations, curbing shall be required for the entire corner
radius and five feet preceding same. Such curbing shall not extend more than
six inches above the finished pavement.
(6) Alley lighting shall be provided on garages or poles adjacent to the alley.
Lighting fixtures and poles shall be of consistent architectural style and shall
complement the predominant architectural theme.
(7) Design speed shall not exceed 10 mph.
9. Parking. The master site planned development shall meet the parking requirements
24-15
contained in Article XX, except as modified herein:
A. Parking for apartment dwellings shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the
apartment building entrance.
B. All off-street parking spaces required within a master site planned development for
two (2) or more uses may be provided in common parking garages/decks or parking
lots, provided that the number of spaces is not less than the sum of the spaces
required for each use individually, unless modified hereby.
C. All or part of the off-street parking spaces required within a master site planned
development may be provided in parking garages/decks or parking lots located on a
separate lot or lots within three hundred (300) feet walking distance from the use for
which the parking is required, provided that the separate lot must be located within
the master site planned development.
D. Parking for permitted uses within the master site planned development that share
common parking facilities, excluding residential and hotel spaces, four and one half
(4.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be provided
for all such uses.
E. The parking lot layout shall take into consideration pedestrian circulation. Pedestrian
crosswalks shall be provided where necessary and appropriate and shall be integrated
into the network of pedestrian walkways, sidewalks and nonmotorized paths.
F. A protected sidewalk or pathway within parking lots shall be required if the number
of parking spaces within the parking lot exceeds one hundred (100) spaces.
G. Parking areas shall not be required to be located in the same zoning district as the
building use, provided that the parking area is within the master site planned
development area within the Oregon Village Overlay Area.
10. Loading and other service areas. When provided, the master site planned development shall
meet the loading requirements contained in Article XX, Section 2010, in addition to the
following:
A. Screening and landscaping shall prevent direct views of the loading areas and other
service areas from adjacent properties or from the public right-of-way. Screening
shall also prevent spillover glare, noise or exhaust fumes.
B. Screening and buffering shall be achieved through walls, fences and/or landscaping
and shall be a minimum of five (5) feet high at time of planting. Recesses in the
buildings or depressed access ramps may also be used.
C. The placement of loading docks, solid waste facilities, recycling facilities and other
service areas shall be placed with consideration to apartments located on the upper
floor of mixed-use buildings.
D. Dumpsters shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any residentially
zoned properties adjoining the master site planned development and shall be enclosed
or screened from view from adjoining properties, residential uses, or the public rightof-
way.
24-16
11. Sidewalks and nonmotorized paths.
A. Sidewalks with a minimum of five (5) feet in width within the residential component
and a minimum width of eight (8) feet within the mixed center component shall be
provided on both sides of all streets within the master site planned development.
Where sidewalks are provided, the width of the sidewalk shall accommodate the
following where applicable:
(1) Sidewalks shall be wide enough to accommodate a five (5) foot clearance for
outdoor seating for restaurant uses.
(2) Bus shelters or waiting areas.
(3) Sidewalk displays in front of retail establishments.
(4) Decorative trash receptacles in the vicinity of nonresidential and nonagricultural
uses.
B. The establishment of nonmotorized paths is integral to the overall pedestrian
connectivity in the Township. Linkages to adjacent developments and neighborhoods
with pedestrian and nonmotorized paths are recommended wherever possible. The
Board of Commissioners may require, as a condition of final plan approval, the
dedication and/or improvement of nonmotorized paths. The standards for
nonmotorized paths are set forth in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
12. Additional building and site design standards.
A. Architectural guidelines shall be submitted with the application for overall master site
planned development approval by the Township. The guidelines shall be prepared by
a registered architect licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
architectural guidelines shall demonstrate architectural styling and themes for the
neighborhood and clearly prescribe suggested architectural elements, proportions,
fenestration, roof pitches, detailing, alignment, and hierarchy. When the architectural
guidelines have been approved in conjunction with the approval of the overall master
site planned development approval, these architectural guidelines shall then be
recorded in the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds office concurrent with the
recording of final land development plan for the master site planned development.
Architectural guidelines will be reviewed by the Board of Commissioners and
approved as it deems appropriate.
B. Sidewalk displays. See Section 2527.
13. Master site plan and accompanying documents. The applicant shall prepare and submit a
master site plan with its application for conditional use. Such master site plan shall include
the following specifications and accompanying documents:
A. Tract boundary and adjacent landowners.
B. Location of development within the Township and adjacent municipalities.
C. North point, scale and date.
24-17
D. Landmarks within the tract, including the location of all existing streets, buildings,
easements, rights-of-way, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drainage structures,
and watercourses.
E. All existing land uses and lot lines within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed
development, including the location of all public and private streets, drives or lanes,
railroads, historic sites and other significant natural or man-made features.
F. Significant topographical and physical features.
G. A list of site data, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Total acreage of the tract.
(2) Proposed gross area of the development.
(3) Proposed gross mixed center.
(4) Proposed gross residential density.
(5) Acreage and percentage of open space.
(6) Proposed number of parking spaces.
(7) Proposed number of lots.
(8) Potential size and location of proposed structures.
(9) Identification of proposed generalized land uses.
(10) Potential lot configuration.
(11) Proposed landscape plan.
(12) Proposed interior street layout and parking lot configuration.
(13) Proposed interior circulation plan for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, including
sidewalks, nonmotorized paths and bikeways.
(14) Proposed open space areas.
(15) Proposed phasing plan for the development.
H. Proposed architectural guidelines for the master site planned development.
14. Supplemental regulations. The uses in the T-5 Oregon Village Overlay Area are also
subject to applicable regulations contained in the following articles, except to the extent
modified in this section:
A. Article XVIII, Signs.
B. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
C. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
D. Article XXII, General Regulations.
24-18
E. Article XXVI, Transfer of Development Rights (TDR).
F. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
G. Appendices A, B, and D.
24-19
Township of Manheim
Area and Bulk Regulations
Use
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)*
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yard Dimensions
(feet)
Perimeter
Buffer
Minimum
Open Area
(%)
Maximum
Building
Length
(feet)
At
Street
Line –
ROW
At Front
Yard
Setback
Line
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Interior
Yard
Single-family detached
dwellings
35 3,800 35 40 95 12 9 8 None 40% None
Single-family semidetached
dwellings
35 3,100 (per
DU)
30 (per
DU)
32 (per
DU)
95 12 9
(each
side)
8 None 40% None
Duplex dwellings 35 3,100 (per
DU)
30 32 95 12 9
(each
side)
8 None 40% None
Apartment dwellings** 55 2,000 (per
DU)
100 150 150 25 50 50 25 None 40% 200
Townhouse dwellings 35 1,900 16 20 95 12 9
(each
side)
8 None 40% None
Houses of worship
(See Section 2513)
55 40,000 100 150 100 25 25 50 20 50% 150
Community clubs
(See Section 2513)
35 40,000 100 150 100 25 25 50 20 50% 150
Offices, professional 35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25 20 20% 150
Full-service hotels 55 80,000 100 200 200 100 50; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
50; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25 10 40% 300
24-20
Use
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)*
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yard Dimensions
(feet)
Perimeter
Buffer
Minimum
Open Area
(%)
Maximum
Building
Length
(feet)
At
Street
Line –
ROW
At Front
Yard
Setback
Line
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Interior
Yard
Limited-service hotels 55 80,000 200 200 200 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25 10 20% 300
Banks and similar financial
institutions
(See Section 2504)
35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
20 20% 150
Offices, medical/dental,
professional
35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25 20 150
Retail sales of goods and
services (provided,
however, that adult and
body art establishments are
not permitted)
35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25 20 20%
Supermarkets 35 80,000 150 200 200 100 50; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
50; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25 10 20% 300
Holiday tree sales
(See Section 2518)
Convenience stores 35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25 20 20% 150
Retail sales of lawn and
garden products and the
outdoor sale of nursery
stock
35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
20 20% 150
Public parks and public
recreation areas
35 None 50 50 None 25 20 35 None None
24-21
Use
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)*
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yard Dimensions
(feet)
Perimeter
Buffer
Minimum
Open Area
(%)
Maximum
Building
Length
(feet)
At
Street
Line –
ROW
At Front
Yard
Setback
Line
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Interior
Yard
Community facilities 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
20 20% 150
Public utility installations
(See Section 2513)
35 None None None None 25 10 10 25 None
Temporary retail sales
(See Section 2517)
Day-care centers
(See Section 2508)
35 20,000 100 100 150 50 25 50 20 20% 50
Restaurants
(See Section 2504)
35 20,000 100 100 150 25 25 25 25 20 20% 150
Fueling station associated
with a retail store or
convenience store
35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
20 20% 150
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments
(See Section 2505)
Commercial recreation
facilities
35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
20 20% 150
Agritourism enterprise
(See Section 2503.3)
10 acres
Educational institutions 35 40,000 100 150 100 25 25 50 20 50% 150
Elementary and secondary
schools
35 40,000 100 150 100 25 25 50 20 50% 150
Group homes
(See Section 2509)
35 20,000 100 100 150 50 25 50 20 20% 150
24-22
Use
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)*
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yard Dimensions
(feet)
Perimeter
Buffer
Minimum
Open Area
(%)
Maximum
Building
Length
(feet)
At
Street
Line –
ROW
At Front
Yard
Setback
Line
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Interior
Yard
Municipal services 35 40,000 150 150 150 50 25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
25; 75
(adjace
nt to
res)
20 20% 150
Accessory buildings and
uses customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses
NOTE:
* Building heights increased above 35 feet are required to purchase transferable development rights in accordance with Article XXVI.
** Building heights apply to both stand alone apartment buildings and apartments located above non-residential uses.
24-23
SECTION 2407. T-6 URBAN TRANSITION OVERLAY AREA
1. Permitted uses:
A. Uses permitted in the underlying zoning district continue to be permitted in the
overlay.
B. Agricultural uses and necessary buildings, including farm dwellings, related to the
tilling of the land, the raising of farm products, the raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, and other livestock, the raising of poultry and poultry products, and the sale of
farm and/or garden products on a retail basis. (See Section 2503)
C. Single-family detached dwellings.
D. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
E. Duplex dwellings.
F. Apartment dwellings.
G. Townhouse dwellings.
H. Public parks and recreation areas.
I. Group homes.
J. Offices, professional and medical/dental.
K. Community facilities.
L. Public utility installations.
M. Banks and financial institutions.
N. Supermarkets.
O. Restaurants with or without outdoor dining. (See Section 2526)
P. Retail sales of goods and services.
Q. Retail sales of alcoholic beverages.
R. Convenience stores.
S. Wholesale clubs.
T. Full-service hotels.
U. Limited-service hotels.
V. Motor vehicle service stations or garages.
W. Veterinarian offices. (See Section 2513)
X. Temporary retail sales. (See Section 2513)
Y. Holiday tree sales. (See Section 2518)
24-24
Z. Day-care centers. (See Section 2508)
AA. Educational institutions (less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area).
BB. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. (See Section 2505)
CC. Motor Vehicle Sales (Added by Ordinance 2016-05, dated 3/28/2016)
DD. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
2. The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach certain conditions
to its approval which, in addition to the requirements listed within this ordinance, it feels
are necessary requirements in order to preserve and protect the character of the T-6 Urban
Transition Overlay in which the proposed use would be located.
A. Houses of worship. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
B. Community clubs. (See Section 2513)
C. Elementary and secondary schools.
D. Boardinghouses.
E. Commercial recreation facilities.
F. Educational institutions (20,000 square feet of gross floor area or greater).
3. Uses permitted by conditional use.
A. Planned residential development. (See Article XIX.)
B. Parking structures, parking garages, and parking lots.
4. The following uses shall not be permitted within the T-6 Urban Transition Overlay,
regardless of underlying district:
A. No drive-through facilities shall be permitted.
5. Area and bulk regulations:
A. Building height:
(1) Minimum building height: Twenty (20) feet.
(2) Maximum building height: Forty-five (45) feet, except that buildings shall be
permitted to increase the maximum height to sixty-four (64) feet with the
purchase of transferable development rights in accordance with Article XXVI.
However, all structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this
ordinance. Such height increase may be permitted in accordance with the
following:
[a] No height increase shall be permitted within one hundred fifty (150) feet
of the T-4 Urban Neighborhood Overlay, unless the adjacent buildings
within the T-4 Urban Neighborhood Overlay are built to the maximum
24-25
permitted height in that T-4 Urban Neighborhood Overlay;
[b] The perimeter buffer shall be increased by one (1) foot along the side and
rear yards for each five (5) feet (or fraction thereof) of height over fortyfive
(45) feet; and
[c] Building area above the fifth story shall be set back an additional ten (10)
feet from the build-to line.
B. Build-to line.
(1) A build-to line shall be established for each development, or for each block
within the development, so long as the build-to line becomes shallower with
more intensely developed blocks. Such build-to line shall fall within the range
of eight (8) feet to fifteen (15) feet for all uses, except that:
[a] In the case of infill properties, the build-to line for new principal structures
shall be equal to or less than the front yard setback of the principal
buildings on adjacent parcels, but shall not exceed the maximum of fifteen
(15) feet.
[b] The build-to line along public rights-of-way listed in Section 2213 shall be
a maximum of twenty (20) feet.
[c] In the case of an existing nonconforming building that cannot meet the
build-to line, a fence, hedge or wall shall be constructed along the build-to
line in order to maintain the street wall.
C. Maximum building length. No building shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length;
provided, however, that:
(1) There must be a visual break in the building facade every seventy-five (75) feet.
Such break shall consist of, as a minimum, a two (2) foot recess or projection
projecting from the building for a linear distance of fifteen (15) feet along the
façade; or at least a thirty (30) degree angle of deflection of the building's center
line. Such break shall extend the entire height of the building. Color and texture
variations may accompany the above facade treatments.
(2) The maximum length may be increased to a length of three hundred (300) feet
with the purchase of transferable development rights in accordance with Article
XXVI.
D. Minimum lot area – as per the underlying zoning district.
E. Full-service hotels:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: Two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: Three hundred (300) feet.
24-26
[b] At front yard setback line: Three hundred (300) feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: Three hundred (300) feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Side yard, each side: Twenty (20) feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be thirty (30) feet on
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[b] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the rear yard shall be thirty-five (35) feet
along the side contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Perimeter buffer, rear and side yards: Ten (10) feet.
(6) Minimum open area: Forty (40) percent.
F. Limited-service hotels:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: Eighty thousand (80,000) square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: Two hundred (200) feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: Two hundred (200) feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: Two hundred (200) feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Side yard, each side: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that if the
lot is adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be thirty (30) feet
on the side contiguous with the residential district.
[b] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet along
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Perimeter buffer, rear and side yards: Ten (10) feet.
(6) Minimum open area: Twenty (20) percent.
G. Public parks and public recreation areas:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: Fifty (50) feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Side yard, each side: Twenty (20) feet.
24-27
[b] Rear yard: Thirty-five (35) feet.
(5) Minimum open area: none.
H. Public utility installations:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot depth: none.
(4) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Side yard, each side: Twelve (12) feet.
[b] Rear yard: Twelve (12) feet.
(5) Perimeter buffer: Ten (10) feet along all lot lines, including the front yard.
(6) Minimum open area: none.
(7) Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
I. Bed-and-breakfast establishments. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of
Section 2505.
J. Other permitted uses by right, except when located in an existing building:
(1) Sewer and water. Public sewer and/or public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: Fifty (50) feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: Fifty (50) feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: One hundred (100) feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Side yard, each side: Twenty (20) feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be thirty (30) feet on
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[b] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet along
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Perimeter buffer, rear and side yards: Fifteen (15) feet.
(6) Minimum open area: Twenty (20) percent.
K. Other permitted uses by special exception, except where located in an existing
building, shall meet the following requirements:
24-28
(1) Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
(2) Minimum lot area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width:
[a] At street line: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
[b] At front yard setback line: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
(5) Minimum yard dimensions:
[a] Side yard, each side: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that if the
lot is adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be fifty (50) feet
on the side contiguous with the residential district.
[b] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the rear yard shall be fifty (50) feet along
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[c] Perimeter buffer, rear and side yards: Twenty (20) feet.
(6) Minimum open area: Twenty (20) percent.
(7) All pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns shall be located in a manner that
reduces or eliminates potential hazards to the people utilizing the facility.
L. Other permitted uses by conditional use shall comply with the requirements of Article
XIX.
6. Design requirements.
A. All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment within the T-Zone Overlay
shall comply with the design standards in Appendix A.
B. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable transformation concepts in Appendix B.
C. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable design standards in Appendix C.
D. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable best practices in Appendix D.
E. Mixed-use buildings that provide apartments or office uses over ground-floor
commercial uses are strongly encouraged. All uses contained in a mixed-use building
shall be permitted uses within the overlay.
F. The street and alley network shall maintain blocks that emulate those found in
northern Lancaster City, south of the T-6 Urban Transition Overlay; such network
shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) The perimeter of a block shall measure a maximum of one thousand six hundred
24-29
(1,600) feet, except where constraints such as railroad tracks, highways or other
rights-of-way exist;
(2) Blocks shall form a distinct shape; and
(3) Existing streets and alleys shall be extended, where feasible.
SECTION 2408. D-R RETROFIT OVERLAY AREA
1. Permitted uses:
A. Uses permitted per the underlying zoning district continue to be permitted in the
overlay.
B. Offices, professional.
C. Community facilities.
D. Office, medical and dental.
E. Banks and financial institutions, whether or not in combination with offices.
F. Full-service hotels.
G. Limited-service hotels.
H. Commercial recreation facilities.
I. Laboratories for research and development.
J. Educational institutions.
K. Warehousing and mini warehousing facilities.
L. Public parks and public recreation areas.
M. Public utility installations.
N. Veterinarian offices. (See Section 2513)
O. Temporary retail sales. (See Section 2517)
P. Holiday tree sales. (See Section 2518)
Q. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
2. Area and bulk regulations:
A. Maximum building height: Forty-five (45) feet, except that buildings shall be
permitted to increase the maximum height to sixty (64) feet with the purchase of
transferable development rights in accordance with Article XXVI. However, all
structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance. Such height
increase may be permitted in accordance with the following:
(1) No height increase shall be permitted within one hundred fifty (150) feet of
residentially zoned district or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the T-4
Urban Neighborhood Overlay, except where adjacent buildings in the T-4
24-30
Urban Neighborhood Overlay have been built to the maximum permitted
height;
24-31
(2) The perimeter buffer area shall be increased by one (1) foot along the side and
rear yards for each additional five (5) feet of height, or fraction thereof, above
forty-five (45) feet;
(3) Any floor area above the fifth story shall be set back an additional ten (10) feet
from the build-to line.
B. Build-to line.
(1) A build-to line shall be established for each development, or for each block
within the development, so long as the build-to line becomes shallower with
more intensely developed blocks. Such build-to line shall fall within the range
of fifteen (15) feet to twenty-five (25) feet for all uses.
(2) In the case of infill properties, the build-to line for new principal structures shall
be equal to or less than the front yard setback of the principal buildings on
adjacent parcels, but shall not exceed the maximum of twenty-five (25) feet,
except that the setbacks listed in Section 2213 shall only apply to Fruitville
Pike, Manheim Pike, Route 30, Route 222, and Oregon Pike north of Route 30.
(3) In the case of an existing nonconforming building that cannot meet the build-to
line, a fence, hedge or wall shall be constructed along the build-to line in order
to maintain the street wall.
C. Maximum building length. No building, other than elementary and secondary
schools, shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet in length; provided, however, that:
(1) There must be a visual break in the building facade every seventy-five (75) feet.
Such break shall consist of, as a minimum, a two (2) foot recess or projection
projecting from the building for a linear distance of fifteen (15) feet along the
façade; or at least a thirty (30) degree angle of deflection of the building's center
line. Such break shall extend the entire height of the building. Color and texture
variations may accompany the above facade treatments.
(2) The maximum length may be increased to a length of four hundred (400) feet
with the purchase of transferable development rights in accordance with Article
XXVI.
(3) Accessory buildings associated with elementary secondary schools shall have a
maximum length of 250 feet.
D. Building Size – Unless otherwise specified, in accordance with the underlying zoning
district, other than accessory buildings associated with elementary and secondary
schools which shall have a maximum building footprint of 20,000 square feet.
24-32
3. Design requirements.
A. All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment within the T-Zone Overlay
shall comply with the design standards in Appendix A.
B. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable transformation concepts in Appendix B.
C. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable design standards in Appendix C.
D. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable best practices in Appendix D.
SECTION 2409. D-A AIRPORT OVERLAY AREA
1. Purpose. The purpose of this overlay is to permit and encourage the development of uses
dependent upon, supportive of, or related to air transportation and the aviation industry at
the Lancaster Airport. This overlay is intended to provide for the efficient layout and
operation of the airport, including facilities for commercial airline operations, air cargo,
general aviation, instruction, and an appropriate range of retail and service uses that serve
airport customers; permit transportation-related and operations-related activities; and
permit limited industrial uses that are compatible with and/or supportive of the Lancaster
Airport to locate within the immediate vicinity. All regulations of the Airport Safety Zones
in Section 2214 shall apply throughout the overlay.
2. Permitted uses.
A. Uses permitted in the underlying zoning district continue to be permitted in the
overlay district.
B. The following uses shall be permitted throughout the D-A Airport Overlay as a use by
right:
(1) Agricultural use and necessary buildings.
(2) Airports (underlying I-3 District only).
(3) Industrial activities involving processing, production, repair, or testing and
conversion, assembly, and nontoxic chemical operations.
(4) Laboratories for research and development.
(5) Limited-service hotel.
(6) Public parks and public recreation areas.
(7) Public utility installations.
(8) Warehousing, mini warehousing and distribution facilities.
(9) Educational institutions that support the aviation industry, such as aviation
technical schools.
24-33
(11) Public or commercial service establishments that support the aviation industry,
such as security services and inspection facilities.
(12) Business or industrial uses that are related to aviation and require direct access
to an airport facility or aviation services, including assembly or sale of aircraft,
air frames, aircraft engines, aircraft parts or associated components, radios or
navigational equipment, and similar products or services; aircraft maintenance
and repairs; and aviation service facilities.
(13) Retail sales as an accessory use to the permitted industrial activities, where such
sales are limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area
of such activity, excluding motor vehicle service stations that are open to the
public, motor vehicle sales, and adult establishments.
(14) Commercial recreation facilities.
(15) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted
uses.
C. The following uses shall be permitted throughout the overlay as a use by special
exception:
(1) Aviation-related dormitories.
(2) Banks and financial institutions.
(3) Parking structures and decks.
(4) Community clubs in existing movie theaters. (See Section 2520)
(5) Day-care center as an accessory use to any of the uses by right.
(6) Laundromat/laundry services.
(7) Offices, professional.
(8) Offices, medical and dental.
(9) Restaurants without drive through service but with or without outdoor dining.
(See Section 2526)
(10) Retail service establishments, such as auto rental and travel agencies, and motor
vehicle service stations.
(11) Retail sales within an airport, provided that supermarkets, motor vehicle sales
buildings, and adult establishments are not provided.
(12) Theater churches. (See Section 2519)
(13) Convenience store within an airport property.
(14) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above special
exception use.
(15) Conference / Event Center (underlying I-3 District only).
24-34
3. Area and bulk regulations:
A. Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required for all uses
other than agricultural uses.
B. Maximum building height: Thirty (35) feet, except that all structures are subject to
Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance, and the maximum building height
may be increased to a maximum height of fifty-five (55) feet with the purchase of
transferable development rights in accordance with Article XXVI. Where such height
increase may be permitted, it shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) No structure within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned land shall
exceed three stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
(2) The perimeter buffer shall be increased to a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
along the side and rear yards and fifty (50) feet when adjacent to a residential
use or zone.
C. Build-to line - Except as listed below, buildings shall be placed along a build-to line
that falls within the range of fifteen (15) feet to twenty-five (25) feet for all uses:
(1) Where Section 2213 requires a greater setback, then such setback shall apply.
(2) Where the principal use of a site is an airport, then a building setback of fifty
(50) feet shall apply to all property lines.
(3) In the case of an existing nonconforming building that cannot meet the build-to
line, a fence, hedge or wall shall be constructed along the build-to line in order
to maintain the street wall.
D. Maximum building length. No building shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet in
length unless otherwise provided in this ordinance; provided, however, that:
(1) There must be a visual break in the building facade every seventy-five (75) feet.
Such break shall consist of, as a minimum, a two (2) foot recess or projection
projecting from the building for a linear distance of fifteen (15) feet along the
façade; or at least a thirty (30 degree angle of deflection of the building's center
line. Such break shall extend the entire height of the building. Color and texture
variations may accompany the above facade treatments.
(2) The maximum length may be increased to a length of four hundred (400) feet
with the purchase of transferable development rights in accordance with Article
XXVI.
E. Minimum lot requirements:
(1) Agricultural uses. (See Section 605.2.A)
(2) Airports:
[a] Minimum lot area: Ten (10) acres.
[b] Minimum lot width: Three hundred (300) feet.
24-35
[c] Minimum lot depth: Three hundred (300) feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: Fifty (50) feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: Fifty (50) feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to
a residential district, the side yard shall be seventy-five (75) feet on
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[iii] Rear yard: Fifty (50) feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be seventy (75) feet along the
side contiguous with the residential district.
[iv] Perimeter buffer: Ten (10) feet; however, for any lot adjacent to a
residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be twenty (20) feet
wide on all sides contiguous with the residential district.
[e] Minimum open area: Eighty (80) percent.
(3) Banks and financial institutions, restaurants, day-care centers:
[a] Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: One hundred (100) feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: One hundred (100) feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: Fifty (50) feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: Twenty (25) feet; provided, however, that if the
lot is adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be seventy
(75) feet on the side contiguous with the residential district.
[iii] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet; however, if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be seventy-five (75) feet along
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[iv] Perimeter buffer: Twenty (20) feet.
[e] Minimum open area: Twenty (20) percent.
(4) Other retail sales within the D-A Airport Overlay.
[a] Separate structures for retail use shall be limited to fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet.
[b] Retail sales as part of structures containing other uses shall not exceed
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
24-36
[c] The total floor area of retail sales within an airport boundary shall be
limited to ten (10) percent of the total floor area of all buildings located
within the airport boundary.
(5) Convenience stores within an airport property.
[a] Minimum lot area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: One hundred (100) feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: One hundred (100) feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: Fifty (50) feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: Twenty (25) feet.
[iii] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
[iv] Perimeter buffer: Ten (10) feet.
[e] Minimum open area: Twenty (20) percent.
[f] Maximum building footprint for a convenience store shall be limited to
seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
[g] Vehicle fuel dispensing facilities shall be limited to a maximum of 16 fuel
dispensers under a single canopy.
[h] Convenience stores shall have a minimum of one access from an arterial
legislative street route as identified by the Township.
[i] No more than one convenience store shall be permitted within an airport
property. Airport property shall mean all land within the tract presently
containing an airport as existing of July 8, 2013, without regard to any
future reduction/diminution of such parent tract by subsequent subdivision
or sale of any part thereof, and shall include any future land acquisitions or
additions to such parent tract, so that the single convenience store which
may be permitted as a special exception on such parent tract shall be the
sole and only convenience store which may be permitted on the parent
tract or any remaining balance thereof following any subdivision or sale of
any part thereof and any increase thereof following future additions
thereto.
[j] Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the convenience
store use, including but not limited to, vehicle fuel canopies, pumps, and
carwash, shall have a maximum building height of thirty-five (35) feet and
all minimum yard dimensions shall be in accordance with Section
2409.3.E.(5).(d).
24-37
(6) Community clubs in existing movie theaters. Such uses shall comply with the
requirements of Section 2520.
(7) Theater churches. Such uses shall comply with the requirements of Section
2519.
24-38
(8) Public parks and public recreation areas:
[a] Minimum lot area: none.
[b] Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: none.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: 20 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 35 feet.
[iv] Minimum open area: none.
(9) Public utility installations:
[a] Minimum lot area: none.
[b] Minimum lot width: none.
[c] Minimum lot depth: none.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 25 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: 12 feet.
[iii] Rear yard: 12 feet.
[e] Minimum open area: none.
[f] Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
(10) Commercial recreation facilities and Conference / Event Centers in I-3 zoning
district:
[a] Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
[b] Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
[c] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: 150 feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: 150 feet.
[d] Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
24-39
[e] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front yard: 50 feet, unless otherwise specified in the applicable TZone
Overlay or Section 2213.
[ii] Side yard, each side: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be 75 feet on the
side contiguous with the residential district.
[iii] Rear yard: 25 feet; provided, however, that if the lot is adjacent to a
residential district, the rear yard shall be 75 feet along the side
contiguous with the residential district.
[f] Minimum open area: Twenty (20%).
[g] Landscaping and screening. (See Section 2512 and Section 2513)
[h] Perimeter buffer: 20 feet.
[i] Length of building: 300’.
(11) Other permitted uses by right and by special exception:
[a] Minimum lot area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width:
[i] At street line: One hundred (100) feet.
[ii] At front yard setback line: One hundred (100) feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty (150) feet.
[d] Minimum yard dimensions:
[i] Front Yard: 50 feet. (See Section 2213)
[ii] Side yard, each side: Twenty (25) feet; provided, however, that if the
lot is adjacent to a residential district, the side yard shall be seventyfive
(75) feet on the side contiguous with the residential district.
[iii] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, that if the lot is
adjacent to a residential district, the rear yard shall be seventy (75)
feet along the side contiguous with the residential district.
[iv] Perimeter buffer: Ten (10) feet; provided, however, that for any lot
adjacent to a residential district, the perimeter buffer shall be 20 feet
wide on all sides contiguous with the residential district.
[e] Minimum open area: Twenty (20) percent.
24-40
4. Fencing. Fencing shall be provided as required by the FAA, the Department of Homeland
Security, or the Transportation Security Administration.
5. Screening. See Section 2512 and Section 2513.
6. Design requirements.
(1) All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment within the T-Zone Overlay
shall comply with the Design Standards in Appendix A.
7. Supplemental regulations. The uses in this overlay are also subject to applicable regulations
contained in the following articles:
A. Article XVIII, Signs.
B. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
C. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
D. Article XXII, General Regulations.
E. Article XXVI, Transfer of Development Rights (TDR).
D. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
SECTION 2410. D-C CORRIDOR OVERLAY AREA
1. Permitted uses.
A. Uses shall be permitted in accordance with the underlying zoning district.
2. Area and bulk regulations:
A. Maximum building height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except that buildings shall be
permitted to increase the maximum height to fifty-five (55) feet with the purchase of
transferable development rights in accordance with Article XXVI. However, all
structures are subject to Section 2208 and Section 2214 of this ordinance. Such height
increase may be permitted in accordance with the following:
(1) No height increase shall be permitted within one hundred fifty (150) feet of
residentially zoned land;
(2) No height increase shall be permitted unless the building is within three hundred
(300) feet of the D-R Corridor Overlay;
(3) The perimeter buffer shall be increased by one (1) foot for each additional foot
of height along the side and rear yards.
24-41
B. Build-to line.
(1) A build-to line shall be established for each development, or for each block
within the development, so long as the build-to line becomes shallower with
more intensely developed blocks. Such build-to line shall fall within the range
of fifteen (15) feet to twenty-five (25) feet for all uses.
(2) In the case of infill properties, the build-to line for new principal structures shall
be equal to or less than the front yard setback of the principal buildings on
adjacent parcels, but shall not exceed the maximum of twenty-five (25) feet,
except that the setbacks listed in Section 2213 shall apply.
(3) In the case of an existing nonconforming building that cannot meet the build-to
line, a fence, hedge or wall shall be constructed along the build-to line in order
to maintain the street wall.
C. Maximum building length. No building shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in
length; provided, however, that:
(1) There must be a visual break in the building facade every seventy (75) feet.
Such break shall consist of, as a minimum, a two (2) foot recess or projection
projecting from the building for a linear distance of fifteen (15) feet along the
façade; or at least a thirty (30) degree angle of deflection of the building's center
line. Such break shall extend the entire height of the building. Color and texture
variations may accompany the above facade treatments.
(2) The maximum length may be increased to a length of two hundred fifty (250)
feet with the purchase of transferable development rights in accordance with
Article XXVI.
3. Design requirements.
A. All subdivision, land development, and redevelopment within the T-Zone Overlay
shall comply with the design standards in Appendix A.
B. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable transformation concepts in Appendix B.
C. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
applicable design standards in Appendix C.
D. All subdivision, land development and redevelopment shall be consistent with the
best practices in Appendix D.
24-42
4. Supplemental Regulations.
A. Article XVIII, Signs.
B. Article XX, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
C. Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
D. Article XXII, General Regulations.
E. Article XXVI, Transfer of Development Rights (TDR).
F. Article XXV, Performance Standards.
25-1
ARTICLE XXV. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION 2501. APPLICABILITY
In addition to all other requirements of this ordinance, the following performance standards shall
apply to specific uses permitted in the various zoning districts.
SECTION 2502. ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS
Adult establishments shall comply with all of the following requirements:
1. No building that contains any adult establishment shall contain any other kind of adult
establishment.
2. No more than one adult establishment shall be permitted in any one building.
3. No adult establishment shall be located within the following distances, measured in a
straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the closest point of the building
within which the adult establishment is located to the closest point of the following:
A. One thousand feet of any building within which is located another adult
establishment.
B. One thousand feet of any R-1, R-2, and/or R-3 Residential District.
C. One thousand feet of any existing residential dwelling or residential property.
D. One thousand feet of the lot line of any lot upon which is located a school, houses of
worship, child-care facility, commercial recreation facility, community facility,
library, recreation area, recreation center, public park, or playground, whether such
use is as a principal use or as an accessory use.
E. One thousand feet of any establishment licensed to serve and/or sell alcoholic
beverages.
F. One thousand feet of the lot line of any lot upon which is located any medical or
dental office establishment or hospital.
4. No display of merchandise outside the building shall be permitted.
5. No pornographic material, displays or words shall be placed in view of persons who are not
inside of the establishment. The building will be windowless or have an opaque covering
over all windows or doors of any area in which materials are displayed.
6. No adult establishment shall be used for any purpose that violates any federal, state or
municipal law.
7. The adult establishment shall not include the sale or display of obscene materials, as
defined by state law and as may be interpreted or construed by applicable court decisions.
8. No adult establishment shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 7:00 a.m.
25-2
9. No adult establishment may be changed to a different adult establishment prior to obtaining
a special exception for the new adult establishment.
10. All adult establishments shall comply with the requirements of Act 120 of 1996, 68
Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
11. For public health reasons, private or semiprivate viewing booths of any kind are prohibited.
This specifically includes, but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult movies or nude
dancers.
SETION 2503. AGRICULTURAL USES
1. The sale of farm and/or garden products on a retail basis in all districts shall comply with
the following:
A. At least fifty (50) percent of such products (by volume) shall have been produced on
the property on which they are offered for sale, based on all products offered
throughout an entire year.
B. Parking space for at least three (3) vehicles shall be provided behind the street rightof-
way line.
C. Sale of such products shall be conducted from a portable stand located behind the
street right-of-way line and removed or dismantled at the end of the growing season,
or from a permanent building located at least fifty (50) feet from the street right-ofway
line.
D. A ten (10) foot perimeter buffer shall be provided along all road frontage of property
on which a permanent building has been erected for the sale of such products.
E. The floor area of any portable stand shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square
feet; a permanent building shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet.
2. A farm occupation as a conditional use in the Agricultural and R-1 and R-2 Districts shall
comply with the following:
A. Only one farm occupation shall be permitted per lot or farm.
B. No structural alterations to an existing building shall be made which will significantly
change the external appearance.
C. Where practicable, farm occupations shall be conducted within an existing farm
building. However, any building constructed for use as any farm occupation shall be
located within proximity to existing farm buildings. The location of any building
constructed for use as any farm occupation shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Commissioners.
D. The floor area of any farm occupation building shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
E. Any outside storage, parking, or display of products, equipment, or supplies shall be
screened by a landscape screen or other visual barrier approved by the Township.
F. No mobilehome shall be used for a farm occupation.
25-3
G. No farm occupation shall result in any additional access points to any public road.
Such uses shall not be permitted at any location where safe ingress or egress are not
provided.
H. The person conducting the farm occupation shall be a resident of the farm.
I. No more than two (2) persons not in residence of the farm shall be employed by the
farm occupation.
J. No more than one and one-half (1.5) acres (or 65,340 square feet) of the farm shall be
used for any farm occupation.
K. Signs shall be in accordance with Article XVIII.
3. Agritourism enterprise. In addition to the conditions for a farm occupation, agritourism
enterprises shall be permitted as a conditional use in the Agricultural and R-1 Districts and
shall comply with the following:
A. Such use shall be proposed on an existing and operating farm with a minimum lot
size of ten (10) acres.
B. Proof of all required governmental permits and licenses have been obtained for the
agritourism enterprise.
C. A sketch plan depicting the location and dimensions of all structures, parking areas,
existing and proposed driveways, parking and vehicular turning areas, sanitary
facilities (if required by PA DEP), areas where visitors will be permitted and
restricted, and landscaping if required to buffer adjacent properties.
D. Hours of operation shall be identified.
E. Sale of local products handcrafted on the farm are permitted.
F. All prepared foods available for sale shall be prepared in accordance with applicable
federal, state, or local regulations.
G. No vehicles shall be parked on adjacent shoulders of roads.
H. If the applicant proposes municipal endorsement/publicity and/or municipal
participation, the applicant shall submit an indemnity agreement in favor of the
municipality and include the municipality as an additional insured on its public
liability insurance policy.
4. Anaerobic digester. Anaerobic digesters shall be permitted as an accessory to an
agricultural use in the Agricultural District, subject to special exception approval and the
following:
A. Anaerobic digesters shall be permitted as an accessory use to agricultural uses when
livestock and poultry manure generated on site is used to generate and supply
electrical or thermal power exclusively for on-site use by the agricultural use, except
that when such agricultural use or farm is connected to a public utility, net metering
shall be permitted in accordance with state law.
25-4
B. All equipment associated with the digester shall be set back a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet from all property lines and/or two hundred (200) feet from
existing dwellings on adjacent property.
C. All equipment and processing shall take place within an enclosed structure.
D. There shall be no outdoor storage of biomass materials or other materials or
equipment.
E. The applicant shall address and document performance standards for siting to
minimize impacts on neighboring properties, which shall include odor, prevailing
wind patterns, proximity to nonagricultural properties, operational noise, and specific
hours of operation.
F. All systems shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the PA DEP and all
applicable local, state and federal codes and regulations. Copies of all such approvals
shall be submitted prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
G. The applicant shall provide either a letter from the Lancaster County Conservation
District stating that the proposed anaerobic digester has been reviewed and approved
for compliance with the regulations, and requirements of the State Manure
Management Program have been satisfied; or a letter from the Lancaster County
Conservation District stating that no review is required under applicable ordinances
or that it will not review the proposal.
5. Outdoor hydronic heaters. Outdoor hydronic heaters shall be permitted as accessory to an
agricultural use in the Agricultural and R-1 Districts, subject to the following:
A. The minimum lot size for such outdoor hydronic heater shall be ten (10) acres in the
Agricultural District and shall be three (3) acres in the R-1 District.
B. Fuel sources:
(1) Permitted fuel sources include clean wood or wood pellets made from clean
wood; home heating oil, natural gas, or propane that complies with all
applicable sulfur limits and is used as a starter or supplemental fuel for dualfired
boilers; or any other fuel specified by the manufacturer and approved in
writing by PA DEP.
(2) Combustion of the following fuel substances is expressly prohibited: industrial
waste, rubber, plastics, used motor oil, toxic chemicals, contaminated waste,
yard waste, household garbage, cardboard and wastepaper, animal waste and
any material prohibited for combustion by federal or state statute.
C. The outdoor hydronic heater shall be an EPA-qualified Phase 2 appliance under the
Phase 2 Voluntary Partnership Program for Hydronic Heaters, or, if amended,
meeting the most recent standards for emission levels. Such heater shall maintain the
hang tag (i.e., white hang tag for Phase 2 demonstrating compliance on the boiler unit
at all times). Manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as part of the application.
D. Such outdoor hydronic heater shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any
property line, and no heater shall be located between the principal building and the
25-5
street right-of-way line.
E. All outdoor hydronic heaters shall have an attached stack with a minimum height of
ten (10) feet that also extends at least two feet above the highest peak of any
residence located less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the outdoor hydronic
heater.
F. In the event that an outdoor hydronic heater is damaged, abandoned, or physically
decayed to the point of becoming noncompliant with this section, the boiler shall be
removed and/or replaced with a new unit within sixty (60) days of the date that notice
is received from the Township. In the event of replacement, all provisions of this
section in effect at the time of replacement shall be complied with.
G. The outdoor hydronic heater shall meet all applicable EPA and PA DEP regulations.
SECTION 2504. BANKS, FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND RESTAURANTS IN THE B-1
BUSINESS DISTRICT
1. All restaurants and banks and financial institutions shall be accessory to the principal
permitted uses within the building and shall be primarily oriented to serving persons within
said offices.
2. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
3. All restaurants and banks and financial institutions shall be located within a building in
which offices are located. The building within which these uses are located shall be at least
two hundred (200) feet from adjacent residential properties.
4. Entrances to these facilities shall be located the maximum distance possible from adjacent
residential properties.
5. No more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of any one building may be utilized
for all restaurants and banks and financial institutions combined.
6. Buildings containing restaurants and banks and financial institutions in combination with
offices shall comply with all other minimum lot requirements for offices as delineated
within the B-1 Business District.
7. Parking shall be provided for restaurants and banks and financial institutions in addition to
what is required and provided for the offices in which these facilities are located. (See
Section 2002)
8. No drive-in restaurant or restaurant serving alcohol shall be permitted within the site.
SECTION 2505. BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
Within a zoning district in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment is permitted by special
exception or by right, the Township may approve such a use, subject to the following
requirements:
1. The owner of a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be the primary occupant of the
establishment.
25-6
2. The operator of a bed-and-breakfast establishment may be a family member who is not the
owner.
3. The owner of a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall keep a register indicating the names
of all guests and the length of stay of all such guests.
4. No more than five (5) bed-and-breakfast units shall be permitted in any bed-and-breakfast
establishment located in a residential district and no more than eight units in a business
district.
5. The minimum lot size shall equal that for a single-family detached dwelling in the
underlying district for the first three (3) guest rooms, plus one quarter (1/4) acre for each
additional guest room.
6. Breakfast shall be the only meal furnished to those guests currently occupying a bed-andbreakfast
unit. In no case shall food be served to persons not staying in a bed-and-breakfast
unit.
7. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in any bed-and-breakfast unit.
8. Bed-and-breakfast units shall be rented on a nightly basis for periods not to exceed one (1)
week.
9. There shall be no external alteration of the building except as may be necessary for reasons
of safety. Fire escapes and outside stairways shall, where practicable, be located to the rear
of the building.
10. One (1) sign shall be permitted within the property of a bed-and-breakfast establishment,
provided said sign is in full compliance with the sign provisions contained in Article
XVIII.
11. In addition to the parking requirements provided for in this ordinance, one (1) off-street
parking space shall be provided for each bed-and-breakfast unit within a bed-and-breakfast
establishment.
12. No more than two (2) nonfamily members of the owner of a bed-and-breakfast
establishment shall be employed within the establishment.
13. Proper storage area for food storage and garbage disposal shall be provided within a bedand-
breakfast establishment.
14. Where a bed-and-breakfast establishment has more than one (1) bed-and-breakfast unit, the
bed-and-breakfast establishment shall have a minimum of two (2) bathrooms for every
three (3) bed-and-breakfast units.
15. No bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of
another such establishment unless separated by a public street.
16. Where a bed-and-breakfast establishment is located within a residential district, the area
and bulk regulations for single-family detached dwellings shall apply. The area and bulk
regulations for a bed-and-breakfast establishment in a nonresidential district shall be in
accordance with the applicable zoning district.
25-7
SECTION 2506. BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
1. No such establishment shall be allowed within one thousand (1,000) feet of another such
body art establishment.
2. No such establishment shall be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of a residential
district.
3. No such establishment shall be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of an existing
school, day care or preschool, park or playground or houses of worship.
4. All body art establishments shall be required to pass an annual inspection conducted by the
City of Lancaster Health Division. Application and inspection fees shall be processed
through the Manheim Township Planning and Zoning Department.
SECTION 2507. BUSINESS USES
All business uses shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Highway access (driveway locations):
A. Distance from intersection of right-of-way lines:
(1) Entrance onto an arterial road or a major collector road: One hundred (100) feet.
(2) Entrance onto other road classifications: Fifty (50) feet.
B. Distance between driveways located on the same lot, measured from driveway edges:
(1) Entrance onto an arterial road or a major collector road: One hundred (100) feet.
(2) Entrance onto other road classifications: Fifty (50) feet.
C. Distance from side property lines: Ten (10) feet except where shared access is
provided between two (2) lots and access rights and responsibilities are defined by an
access agreement.
2. Business activity shall not be conducted outside a building, except where expressly
specified. In those instances when merchandise is displayed on the exterior of the building,
the merchandise shall not be permitted to be located in the required perimeter buffer.
3. Light emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two (2)
footcandles measured at a three (3) foot height at the property line except where the
adjacent properties are developed as an office park, industrial park or shopping center.
Energy-efficient lights shall be utilized such as low- and high-pressure sodium and metal
halide.
4. Waste material shall not be stored on the lot outside of a building except in a container that
is in compliance with all rules and regulations of the Lancaster County Solid Waste
Management Authority and the PADEP. Any such containers for garbage or recycling shall
be located to the rear or side of the lot, screened from view. One central collection area
shall be provided for all users in each building.
5. Screening and landscaping shall be in accordance with Section 2512 and Section 2513.
25-8
6. Loading facilities shall not be permitted in the area between the building setback line and
the street line.
7. Operations shall not be permitted which constitute a danger or nuisance to the community.
8. Any mechanical equipment which is not enclosed within a building shall be fully and
completely screened from view in a manner compatible with the architectural and
landscaping style of the overall property.
SECTION 2508. DAY-CARE CENTERS, COMMERCIAL
1. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
2. Location of day-care centers.
A. A day-care center may be located either within an office building or within any other
building permitted within each zoning district, or it may be located on a separate lot.
B. The day-care center shall be located in a manner that reduces or eliminates potential
hazards to the children being cared for at the facility. It shall be the responsibility of
the landowner to show, to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board, full
compliance with this provision.
3. Buildings containing day-care centers, whether in combination with offices or on separate
lots, shall comply with all minimum lot requirements for offices as delineated within the
applicable zoning district.
4. Adequate parking shall be provided for both the day-care centers and all offices when
located on the same lot. The circulation pattern of the parking area shall be designed to
provide a safe and convenient pedestrian access from all parking spaces to the entrance of
the facility, with the crossing of traffic lanes minimized to the greatest extent feasible.
5. Any outside play area associated with a day-care center shall be properly and completely
fenced, in accordance with Section 2108 of this ordinance.
SECTION 2509. GROUP HOMES
1. A group home shall only be located within a single-family detached dwelling and shall
comply with the area and bulk regulations for a single-family detached dwelling within the
applicable zoning district.
2. The purpose of a group home shall be to provide an opportunity for disabled individuals to
return to or remain in their communities in order to develop their maximum potential as
citizens.
3. A group home shall comply with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
Rules and Regulations, the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare Rules and
Regulations, and the Manheim Township Building and Fire Codes.
4. All group homes shall be licensed by either the county government or the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and shall be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of
those bodies.
25-9
SECTION 2510. HORTICULTURAL USES
1. At least fifty (50) percent of such plants and products shall have been grown or produced
on the property on which they are offered for sale, based on all plants and products offered
throughout an entire year.
2. Parking spaces for at least three (3) vehicles shall be provided behind the street right-ofway
line.
3. Sale of plants and products shall be conducted from a portable stand located behind the
street right-of-way line and dismounted at the end of the growing season, or from a
permanent building located at least one hundred (100) feet from the street right-of-way
line.
4. The floor area of the portable stand shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet, and
the floor area of a permanent building shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet.
SECTION 2511. INDUSTRIAL USES
1. Highway access (driveway locations):
A. Distance from intersection of right-of way-lines:
(1) Entrance onto an arterial road or a major collector road: One hundred (100) feet.
(2) Entrance onto other road classifications: Fifty (50) feet.
B. Distance between driveways located on the same lot, measured from driveway edges:
(1) Entrance onto an arterial road or a major collector road: One hundred (100) feet.
(2) Entrance onto other road classifications: Fifty (50) feet.
C. Distance from side property lines: Twenty (20) feet except where shared access is
provided between two (2) lots and access rights and responsibilities are defined by an
access agreement.
2. Screening and landscaping shall be in accordance with Section 2512 and Section 2513.
3. Light emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two (2)
footcandles measured at a three (3) foot height at the property line. Energy-efficient lights
shall be utilized such as low and high-pressure sodium and metal halide.
4. No industrial use, including lighting, shall carry on operations that would produce heat or
glare beyond the property line of the lot on which the industrial operation is located.
5. Waste material shall not be stored except in an enclosed building or approved containers
and shall be in conformance with all applicable local, state, and/or federal standards. Any
such containers for garbage or recycling shall be located to the side or rear of the principal
building. One central collection area shall be provided for all tenants of a single building.
6. Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at
any lot lines shall not be permitted.
7. No industrial use shall emit noxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes or gases.
25-10
8. All industrial operations shall be in compliance with all other applicable local, state, and/or
federal standards as required by the most recent regulations at these governmental levels.
9. Loading facilities shall not be permitted in the area between the building setback line and
the street line.
10. Operations shall not be permitted which constitute a danger or nuisance to the community.
SECTIOIN 2512. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
1. Landscape materials. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of all vegetation required for a site
shall consist of native species. Invasive species shall not be permitted.
2. Planting strip.
(A) Planting strip required. All nonresidential uses shall be separated from all side and
rear property lines and all street right-of-way lines by a planting strip having a
minimum width of ten (10) feet measured from the property line, right-of-way line, or
easement, except that uses located within the T-6 Urban Transition or D-R Retrofit
Overlays may reduce the width of such planting strip in order to meet the required
build-to line and sidewalk provisions. Such planting strips shall be located in the
perimeter buffer and the required front yard.
(1) Said planting strip shall be planted in grass, shrubbery, trees, or other plant
material and shall not be paved or otherwise covered by an impervious surface,
except that, where located within the D-R Retrofit or T-6 Urban Transition
Overlay, brick pavers may be installed along the right-of way line in lieu of
vegetation. The installation of pavers or vegetation shall be consistent along an
entire block.
(3) Said planting strip shall only be broken by approved entrances or exits,
including sidewalks, walkways, or nonmotorized paths.
3. Parking lot screen and landscaping.
A. Screening along street rights-of-way. All parking lots with more than ten (10) spaces
shall be screened from any street right-of-way by a landscape screen to be installed
within a ten (10) foot-wide planting strip measured from the right-of-way line.
(1) The landscape screen may be composed of a combination of shrubs, trees,
fences/walls, earthen berms, or some combination thereof.
[a] Shrubs shall have a minimum height of two (2) feet measured from ground
level at the time of planting and shall reach a maximum height of fortytwo
(42) inches at maturity.
[b] Trees shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet above finished ground
level and a trunk caliper of at least one and one-half (1 ½) inches at the
time of planting.
[c] Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of one (1) foot. Earthen
berms shall not be permitted within the T-6 Urban Transition or D-R
25-11
Retrofit Overlays.
[d] Within the D-R Retrofit or T-6 Urban Transition Overlays, a combination
of walls and landscaping materials is encouraged. Fencing shall not be
permitted, except in combination with masonry piers or walls. Walls shall
consist of stone or brick and shall have a maximum height of forty-two
(42) inches.
(2) The plants selected for use in the landscape screen shall be predominantly
native species, suited for such plantings, and be arranged in such manner as to
provide a continuous visual buffer within two (2) years of planting.
(3 The Township encourages naturalistic planting designs which enhance the
visual effect of the landscape along public streets.
(4) The landscape screen shall be broken only at points of vehicular or pedestrian
access or as specified in Section 2512.2.A.
(5) In order for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the requirements
of this section, a plan shall be submitted showing the proposed design of the
landscape screen. Said plan shall include a plant schedule and sufficient
information as required for the installation of the screen. The plan shall be
sealed by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Screening of residential parking lots from adjoining residential uses. All residential
parking lots with more than four (4) spaces shall be screened from adjoining
residential uses by a landscape screen.
(1) The landscape screen shall be composed of shrubs that have a minimum height
of at least three (3) feet, measured from ground level at the time of planting.
(2) The plants shall be arranged in such manner as to provide a continuous visual
buffer.
(3) The Zoning Officer may require the submittal of such information necessary to
determine compliance with the requirements of this section.
(4) The Township encourages naturalistic planting designs which enhance the
visual effect of the landscape screen.
C. Parking lot interior landscaping. All parking lots with twenty (20) or more spaces
shall be provided with interior landscaped areas. The intent of this section is to
require landscaping within parking lots; therefore, landscaping screens, planting strips
and landscaping surrounding buildings shall not be considered as interior
landscaping.
(1) The interior landscaping shall be provided within island planters having a
minimum area of nine (9) feet by thirty-six (36) feet. All islands shall be curbed
except where curb cuts are included as part of stormwater conveyance.
(2) The interior parking lot landscaping shall be placed so as to delineate driving
25-12
lanes, define rows of parking, mitigate stormwater, and generally mitigate the
visual impact of parking lots. One standard-sized or larger island shall terminate
each parking row. Two trees underplanted with ground cover shall be provided
for each standard island at the end of a parking row.
(3) One (1) standard island shall be provided per each twenty (20) spaces, or each
ten 10 spaces in a single row. A minimum of one (1) tree underplanted with
ground cover shall be provided in each interior island.
(4) Landscaping shall be composed of a combination of native shrubs and trees.
(5) In order for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the requirements
of this section, a plan shall be submitted showing the proposed design of the
interior landscaping. Said plan shall include a plant schedule and sufficient
information as required for the installation of the landscaping. The plan shall be
sealed by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(6) Any tree or shrub, planted to meet the requirements set forth in Section 2512
and Section 2513.
4. Screening of nonresidential uses. All nonresidential uses shall be screened from adjoining
residential uses by a landscape screen to be installed within the required perimeter buffer
and planting strip.
A. The landscape screen along any parking area, loading area, or outdoor storage area
shall consist of a double row of evergreen planting material which shall be a
minimum of four (4) feet in height measured at ground level at the time of planting,
the material shall be planted at a maximum spacing of eight (8) feet, and the two (2)
rows shall be staggered to provide the most effective screening. An opaque fence or
wall six (6) feet in height with one (1) row of plant material as required herein on the
side facing the adjoining property may be substituted for the double row of plant
material. Said fence or wall shall not be located within any required perimeter buffer.
B. The landscape screen along areas other than parking areas, loading areas, or outdoor
storage shall be composed of the following combination of trees and shrubs:
(1) Shrubs shall have a minimum height of three (3) feet measured from ground
level at the time of planting.
(2) Trees shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet above finished ground level
and a trunk caliper of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches.
C. The plants selected for use in the landscape screen shall consist of fifty (50) percent
native species, suited for such plantings, and be arranged in such manner as to
provide a continuous visual buffer within two (2) years of planting.
D. In order for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the requirements of this
section, a plan shall be submitted showing the proposed design of the landscape
screen. Said plan shall include a plant schedule and sufficient information as required
for the installation of the screen. The plan shall be sealed by a landscape architect
25-13
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Any tree or shrub, planted to meet the requirements set forth in Section 2512 and
Section 2513, that dies shall be replaced.
F. The Township encourages naturalistic planting designs which enhance the visual
effect of the landscape screen.
5. Screening of residential apartment buildings greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height from
existing single-family residential uses. All apartment dwelling units exceeding thirty-five
(35) feet in height shall be screened from existing adjacent residential uses by a ten (10)
foot-wide landscape screen.
A. The landscape screen shall be composed of a combination of evergreen trees and
shrubs.
(1) Shrubs shall have a minimum height of three (3) feet measured from ground
level at the time of planting.
(2) Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet above finished
ground level and a trunk caliper of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches at the time of
planting.
B. The plants selected for use in the landscape screen shall be predominately native
species, suited for such plantings, and be arranged in such manner as to provide a
continuous visual buffer so as to block the ground-level views between grade and a
height of six (6) feet. The effective visual barrier shall be achieved within two (2)
years of planting.
C. The Township encourages naturalistic plantings and encourages the preservation of
existing plantings if it can provide a continuous visual buffer.
D. Any tree or shrub, planted to meet the requirements set forth in Section 2512 and
Section 2513, that dies shall be replaced.
E. In order for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the requirements of this
section, a plan shall be submitted showing the proposed design of the landscape
screen. Said plan shall include a plant schedule and sufficient information as required
for the installation of the screen. The plan shall be sealed by a landscape architect
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SECTION 2513. SCREENING OF SPECIFIC USES
The following uses shall comply with the standards for screening as indicated:
1. Community clubs. All outdoor storage and parking and/or loading areas within one
hundred (100) feet of a rear or side property line shall be screened from the adjacent
properties by a landscape screen comprised of plant materials, fencing or some
combination thereof approved by the Township.
2. Houses of worship. All outdoor storage and parking and/or loading areas within one
hundred (100) feet of a rear or side property line shall be screened from the adjacent
25-14
properties by a landscape screen comprised of plant materials, fencing or some
combination thereof approved by the Township.
3. Funeral homes. All outdoor storage and parking and/or loading areas within one hundred
(100) feet of a rear or side property line shall be screened from the adjacent properties by a
landscape screen comprised of plant materials, fencing or some combination thereof
approved by the Township.
4. Golf courses and golf driving ranges. All buildings, outdoor storage, and parking and/or
loading areas within one hundred (100) feet of a rear or side property line shall be screened
from the adjacent properties by a landscape screen comprised of plant materials, fencing or
some combination thereof approved by the Township.
5. Stables and kennels. All outdoor storage and animal facilities and parking and/or loading
areas within one hundred (100) feet of a rear or side property line shall be screened from
the adjacent properties by a continuous visual buffer approved by the Township.
6. Veterinary offices/hospitals. All outdoor storage and animal facilities and parking and/or
loading areas within one hundred (100) feet of a rear or side property line shall be screened
from the adjacent properties by a continuous visual buffer approved by the Township.
7. Public utility installations. All buildings and parking and/or loading areas within one
hundred (100) feet of a rear or side property line shall be screened from the adjacent
properties by a continuous visual buffer approved by the Township.
SECTION 2514. OFFICE PARKS
1. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the orderly and integrated development of a
campus-like professional office park, consisting of a variety of office facilities and uses for
local residents as well as the general public.
2. An office park shall be permitted as a conditional use in accordance with general standards
as set forth in Section 2810.3 herein and specific criteria as set forth below. Where said
general standards and specific criteria overlap, the specific criteria shall supersede the
general standards.
A. Conceptual site plan. A conceptual site plan for the entire tract shall be provided and
be consistent with the following criteria. Such site plan shall include the following
specifications:
(1) Tract boundary and adjacent landowners.
(2) Location of development within the Township and adjacent municipalities.
(3) North point, scale and date.
(4) Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
(5) Significant topographical and physical features.
(6) Potential size and location of proposed structure.
(7) Identification of generalized land uses.
25-15
(8) Potential lot configuration.
(9) Proposed landscaping, screening and buffering plan.
(10) Proposed interior street layout and parking lot configuration.
(11) Proposed interior circulation plan for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(12) Statement that the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect upon
congestion of streets and highways or upon traffic levels of service or any
hazards arising therefrom. The Township may require the applicant to submit a
traffic study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer to satisfy this requirement.
B. Office park criteria.
(1) Permitted uses:
[a] Day-care centers.
[b] Banks and similar financial institutions, provided that the building shall be
located at least two hundred (200) feet from adjacent residential
properties.
[c] Commercial recreational facilities, provided that the building containing
such facility shall be at least two hundred (200) feet from adjacent
residential properties.
[d] Educational institutions.
[e] Offices, medical and dental.
[f] Offices, Professional.
[g] Parking garages and parking lots accessory to other permitted uses.
[h] Public parks and recreation areas.
[i] Public utility installations.
[j] Restaurants, excluding drive-in/drive-through restaurants, as defined
herein, provided that the building containing such facility shall be at least
two hundred (200) feet from adjacent residential properties.
[k] Retail sales and retail services, provided that such retail uses shall be
compatible with other permitted uses and shall not include supermarkets,
motor vehicle service stations or garages, motor vehicle sales areas or
buildings, or adult establishments, and further provided that:
[i] No single establishment shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square
feet in gross floor area; and
[ii] Aggregate total of retail sales and retail services shall not exceed
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or fifteen (15) percent of the
office park, whichever is less.
25-16
[l] Municipal uses.
[m] Uses, buildings and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any
permitted use, including, but not limited to, recreational areas.
(2) Maximum building height: (All structures are subject to Section 2208 and
Section 2214 of this ordinance.)
[a] Fifty (50) feet, provided that if the lot is adjacent to a residential district,
the minimum yard dimensions along the side contiguous with the
residential district shall be increased by two (2) feet for every foot of
building height over forty-five (45) feet. This increase shall be in addition
to all other minimum yard dimensions set forth in Subsection B.(3).(e)
below.
[b] Buildings located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential
district shall be limited to three (3) stories.
(3) Minimum requirements.
[a] Sewer and water. Both public sewer and public water service are required.
[b] Access. Proposed tract must abut and have access to a collector or arterial
street as identified by the Township.
[c] Minimum tract area: ten (10) contiguous acres, not divided by a public
right-of-way.
[d] Minimum lot area, width and depth: none, except as based upon required
minimum yard dimensions, minimum open area, minimum off-street
parking requirements, and other applicable standards contained within this
ordinance.
[e] Minimum yard dimensions (per lot) (all subject to Section 2213 of this
ordinance):
[i] Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet.
[ii] Side yard, each side: Ten (10) feet, provided that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the side yard shall be seventy (75) feet along
the side contiguous with the residential district.
[a] No minimum side yard shall be required on either side of the
common boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on
which two or more buildings are adjoined side by side if the
buildings are connected by passageways, corridors or common
areas; and corridors or common areas are provided by cross
easements for the benefit of the owners of all such buildings or
structures and their respective employees, clients and/or
visitors.
[b] In order to reduce the continuous appearance of the adjoining
25-17
buildings or structures, each of the adjoining and connected
buildings on the lots, not subject to the specified minimum side
yard dimensions, shall have a visual break in the building
facade at minimum distances of every sixty (60) feet. Such
visual breaks may consist of projections from the building,
angles of deflection of the building's center line, or variations
in the color or texture of the facade.
[iii] Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet, provided that if the lot is adjacent
to a residential district, the rear yard shall be seventy-five (75) feet
along the side contiguous with the residential district.
[a] No minimum rear yard shall be required on the common
boundary of two or more separate, adjoining lots on which two
or more buildings are adjoined to the rear if the buildings are
connected by passageways, corridors, or common areas; and
the use of such passageways, corridors or common areas is
provided by cross easements for the benefit of the owners of all
such buildings or structures and their respective employees,
clients and/or visitors.
[iv] Interior yards: open space between separate principal buildings on
the same lot.
[a] When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel
buildings shall have fifty (50) feet between faces of the
building. If the front or rear faces are obliquely aligned, the
above distance may be decreased by as much as ten (10) feet at
one end if increased by similar or greater distance at the other
end.
[b] An interior yard of fifty (50) feet is required between end walls
of buildings. If the buildings are at right angles to each other,
the distance between the corners of the end walls of the
building may be reduced to a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet.
[c] An interior yard of fifty (50) feet is required between end walls
and front or rear faces of buildings.
[v] Perimeter buffer, all sides: Ten (10) feet, provided that should offstreet
parking areas be shared between lot occupants, and cross lot
lines, no perimeter buffer shall be required at such contiguous lot
lines. If the lot is adjacent to a residential district, the perimeter
buffer shall be forty (40) feet along the side contiguous with the
residential district.
[f] Buffering/screening/landscaping/lighting. At a minimum, all buffering,
screening, landscaping and lighting shall be provided in accordance with
Section 2507.3, Section 2507.8, Section 2512 and Section 2513 herein.
25-18
[g] Minimum open area: Thirty-five (35) percent of total office park
development, of which up to fifty (50) percent of provided open space can
be located in stormwater and drainage easements.
[h] Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
Article XX herein.
[i] Other requirements. Office parks shall comply with provisions contained
within Section 2507 herein.
SECTION 2515. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
1. It is the purpose of this section to provide the opportunity to encourage and to
accommodate extended family living, without substantially altering existing neighborhood
character.
2. Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as a use by special exception in accordance
with the general standards as set forth in Section 2805.2 herein and specific criteria as set
forth below. Where said general standards and specific criteria overlap, the specific criteria
shall supersede the general standards.
A. The installation of an accessory dwelling unit in new and existing single-family
dwellings (hereinafter "principal dwellings") shall be subject to the following
development, design and owner-occupancy standards:
(1) All provisions of the zoning district shall apply, except the provisions regarding
the number of dwelling units permitted on a lot.
(2) The design and construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall conform to all
applicable standards in Manheim Township's building, plumbing, electrical, fire
and any other applicable codes.
(3) An accessory dwelling unit shall be contained in, or attached to, the principal
dwelling or be located above a detached garage.
(4) An accessory dwelling unit may be constructed in either an existing or a new
single-family dwelling.
(5) The addition of an accessory dwelling unit to the principal dwelling shall be
designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family
dwelling.
(6) The maximum size of an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed forty (40)
percent of the principal dwelling total floor area, nor more than one thousand
(1,000) square feet, nor have more than two (2) bedrooms.
(7) The property owner must occupy either the principal dwelling or the accessory
dwelling unit as their permanent residence.
(8) Occupancy of an accessory dwelling unit, or principal dwelling, shall be limited
to the property owner or those related by blood or marriage or adoption to the
property owner.
25-19
(9) Accessory dwelling units shall not be located in basements.
(10) Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted per principal dwelling.
(11) One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided for the accessory
dwelling unit.
(12) The principal dwelling and accessory dwelling unit must be served by public
sewer and public water service.
(13) Accessory dwelling units are permitted to be located on lots that are ninety (90)
percent or more of the zoning district's required minimum lot size.
(14) Restoration plan. A plan for the removal of the accessory dwelling unit that
identifies those structures, exterior and interior walls, electrical and plumbing
improvements and connections to public water and sewer services to be retained
and those to be removed upon termination of the accessory dwelling unit shall
be submitted with the application for an accessory dwelling unit permit. In
particular, it shall include a removal plan for the stove.
B. Accessory dwelling unit permits.
(1) In the event an application is approved, then an accessory dwelling unit permit
shall be issued to the applicant. The accessory dwelling unit permit shall be
deemed to be automatically revoked upon vacation of the accessory dwelling
unit, or principal dwelling unit, by the property owner or those related by blood
or marriage or adoption to the property owner.
(2) Any property owner with an existing accessory dwelling unit at the time of the
passage of this ordinance shall have a period of ninety (90) days from said date
to apply for an accessory dwelling unit permit, subject to the following:
[a] The applicant must provide adequate proof that he or she had an accessory
dwelling unit prior to the date this ordinance was adopted; and
[b] The applicant must provide adequate proof that a certificate of use and
occupancy has been issued for the area utilized as an accessory dwelling
unit.
(3) An accessory dwelling unit permit shall expire December 31 of each year and,
once granted, may be renewed without additional hearings, subject to the
provisions of this section, by completing the renewal form prescribed by the
Zoning Officer and paying the annual permit fee adopted by the Board of
Commissioners. Failure to apply for renewal and/or failure to pay for the annual
permit shall be grounds for revocation of a permit.
(4) The Zoning Officer, or designee, shall have the right, at any time, upon
reasonable request, to enter and inspect an accessory dwelling unit for which an
accessory dwelling unit permit has been issued.
(5) The permit holder shall notify the Zoning Officer in writing within ninety (90)
days once the accessory dwelling unit is no longer needed, the property is sold
25-20
or for some other reason the applicant no longer meets the requirements for
such use. Upon notification, the accessory dwelling unit permit shall be
terminated. The applicant shall then comply with the terms of the restoration
plan within ninety (90) days of the date of termination.
SECTION 2516. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to balance the interests of the residents of the
Township, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting
of telecommunications facilities within the Township so as to protect the health, safety and
integrity of residential neighborhoods through appropriate zoning and land use controls and
to provide a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not
unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless
services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal
wireless services. To that end, this section shall:
A. Provide for appropriate locations and development of telecommunications facilities in
the Township.
B. Protect the Township's developed and natural environment by promoting compatible
design standards for telecommunications facilities.
C. Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful
design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques.
D. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure through
engineering and careful siting to telecommunications tower structures and antennas.
E. Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize
the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout
the Township.
F. Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas
that are not zoned for residential use.
G. To allow for, and regulate, telecommunications facilities in accordance with the
Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
2. Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this ordinance:
A. Any tower and antenna less than eighty (85) feet in total height that is owned and
operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission.
B. Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals,
multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service.
C. Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the Township, provided a license or lease authorizing the
telecommunications facility has been approved by the Township.
3. Preferred location sites.
25-21
A. Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications tower currently being used for
transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal
wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred
location site, regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site; provided,
however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and
siting components of this ordinance.
B. Publicly used structures. Publicly used structures are preferred location sites
throughout the Township because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are
dispersed throughout the Township, and, due to their institutional or infrastructure
uses, are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for
telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less
noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial
or residential structures. Publicly used structures include, but are not limited to,
facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers,
courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flagpoles,
schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and houses of worship.
C. Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures,
such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, motor vehicle
service stations, and approved accessory buildings, shall be preferred location sites,
particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a
roofline can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications
facility.
4. General standards.
A. Permitted telecommunications facilities.
(1) Telecommunications tower requirements. Table 1 indicates, for each zoning
district, which type of telecommunications towers are permitted and whether the
tower is a use permitted and whether the tower is a use permitted by right,
special exception or condition. An "N" indicates that a telecommunications
tower is not permitted in that specific zoning district.
(2) Permitted number of carriers and height requirements. Table 2 indicates the
maximum permitted height of telecommunications towers in each zoning
district in relation to the number of users located on each tower.
B. There shall be no more than two (2) towers located on any one (1) parcel of property.
C. Radial spacing. Antenna towers eighty-five (85) feet or taller shall be located at least
2,640 feet from other antenna towers of eighty-five (85) feet or taller.
D. Compliance with other provisions.
(1) All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such
standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the
telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance shall bring such
25-22
telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the
standards or regulations.
(2) All proposed telecommunications facilities must complete the United States
Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration Form 7460-1 (1-
93) or its equivalent. A copy of the approved application shall be submitted to
the Township as part of the required information for application for permit.
(3) Owners of telecommunication facilities shall provide documentation showing
that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable
federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted
every 12 months.
E. A report from a qualified engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
shall be submitted for review in addition to all information required for a Manheim
Township Zoning Hearing Board application, conditional use applications, or
application for permit, documenting the following:
(1) Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical,
engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the
proposed design.
(2) Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure.
(3) Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and
demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris.
(4) A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and
whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity.
(5) Information demonstrating that the proposed facility would provide the needed
coverage or capacity.
(6) Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation,
including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated
telecommunications facility sites within the network; a description of the
distance between the telecommunications facility sites; a description of how this
service area fits into and is necessary for the service network.
(7) The applicant shall quantify any additional tower capacity anticipated, including
the approximate number and types of antennas. The applicant shall provide a
drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antenna locations. The
applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to
accommodate other users, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height,
frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical
options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical
options considered were not chosen to be incorporated.
F. A statement indicating whether or not the site is a preferred location site must be
submitted. If the site is not a preferred location site, the following information must
25-23
be provided:
(1) A list of publicly used buildings, co-location sites or other preferred location
sites located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with
lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings or
sites within the service area.
(2) A description of the good faith efforts and measures that were taken to secure
each of these preferred location sites.
(3 An explanation as to why each such site was not technologically, legally or
economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful.
(4) An explanation of how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service
demands for the geographic service area and Township-wide network.
G. If the proposed site is zoned A Agricultural, R-1 Residential District, R-2 Residential
District or R-3 Residential District, and there are alternative sites in the business
and/or industrial zoning districts of the Township, applicants must justify why those
alternate sites have not been proposed.
H. Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are
applications currently on file with the Zoning Officer for existing and proposed
telecommunications facilities. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space
on all suitable existing towers to co-locate the proposed antenna. If co-location on any
such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed
tower, the applicant must justify why such co-location is not being proposed.
I. In all zoning districts, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal
wireless communication service without the use of the proposed telecommunications
tower.
5. Design standards.
A. Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing
device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to
the telecommunications facility. Telecommunication towers shall be enclosed by
decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be
equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device
designed to prevent tower access.
B. Lighting. Antenna towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA
or other state or federal agency. If the FAA requires safety lighting, the use of red
beacons is preferred to flashing strobe lights. Security lighting on the site may be
mounted up to twenty (20) feet high and shall be directed towards the ground to
reduce light pollution, prevent off-site light spillage, and avoid illuminating the tower.
When incorporated into the approved design of the facility, light fixtures used to
illuminate sports fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be included in the facility.
C. Visual impact. Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel
finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or
25-24
state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the
existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
D. All telecommunications facilities shall provide one off-street parking space and mudfree
access to the site. The access drive and parking area must be covered with an allweather
material such as stone, asphalt, concrete or cement.
E. Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities shall be
screened from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the
surrounding structures or placed underground so as to be visually unobtrusive.
Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using
landscaping or shall be made of materials and painted colors consistent with the
surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. The
shelter or cabinet shall comply with the requirements of Article XXI, Accessory Uses.
F. Landscaping.
(1) Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest possible extent.
Disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such
disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area.
The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to
be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that loss.
(2) Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the shelter or
cabinet or other ground-level equipment from adjacent public ways, public
property and residential property. The applicant shall provide a detailed site
plan showing the proposed landscape screening.
G. Minimum lot area. The lot on which the telecommunications facility is to be located
on must meet all minimum lot area requirements for uses permitted by right in the
underlying zoning district in which the facility is proposed.
H. Setbacks. Telecommunications facilities shall be setback a distance equal to the
height of the tower from all property lines. Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities
shall meet the minimum zoning district setback requirements.
I. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities.
J. Antennas attached to existing structures.
(1) For antennas attached to the roof or to a support structure on a rooftop, a 1:1
setback ratio (example: ten (10) foot-high antenna and supporting structure
requires a ten (10) foot setback from edge of roof or structures) shall be
maintained, unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact.
(2) Telecommunications facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the
zoning district in which the existing structure is located; however, no antenna
shall extend a distance greater than ten (10) feet above the roofline, parapet or
top of the structure, whichever is of the lowest elevation.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and
associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is
25-25
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so
as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
(4) Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to
match existing air-conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other
background.
(5) Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above
or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in
camouflaging.
6. Co-location.
A. The applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies,
including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal
wireless technology to co-locate antennas, equipment and facilities on a
telecommunications facility, unless specific technical constraints prohibit said colocation.
The applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a
mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and
infrastructure.
B. Competitive conflict shall not be considered an adequate reason to preclude colocation.
C. Addition of equipment for co-location of additional users on existing antenna towers
and sites is not subject to the special exception or conditional use process, if the tower
height remains unchanged.
7. Removal of antennas and towers.
A. All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with Township
standards contained in the applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the
structural integrity of such facilities. If, upon inspection by the Zoning Officer or any
code official, any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with
the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then notice of such
lack of compliance shall be provided to the owner of the facility and, if the owner of
the property is different from the owner of the facility, to the owner of the property.
Such owner shall then have thirty (30) days to bring the facility into compliance or to
remove such facility.
B. Failure to bring such telecommunications facility into compliance or to have it
removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice shall constitute a violation of
this ordinance and of all other applicable Township codes and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto and of the First Class Township Code and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
8. Abandoned towers.
A. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the
facility is located shall remove any abandoned telecommunications facility within
25-26
thirty (30) days of abandonment. Any telecommunications facility that is not operated
for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. If the
telecommunications facility is not removed within thirty (30) days of abandonment,
the Township may notify the property owner and the owner of the
telecommunications facility to remove the telecommunications facility within thirty
(30) days of receipt of such notice. Failure to remove the telecommunications facility
pursuant to such notice shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and all other
applicable Township ordinances and regulations issued pursuant thereto and of the
First Class Township Code and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
B. If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower
or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet
all of the conditions of this ordinance as if such tower or antenna was a new tower or
antenna.
25-27
Township of Manheim
Requirements for Telecommunications Facilities
Table 1: Permitted Telecommunications Facilities
LEGEND:
Zoning districts – The abbreviation in the column headings represent
the zoning districts of Manheim Township as follows:
A – Agriculture
R-1 – Residential District
R-2 – Residential District
R-3 – Residential District
IN – Institutional District
B-1 – Business District
B-2 – Business District
B-3 – Business District
B-4 – Business District
I-1 – Industrial District
I-2 – Industrial District
I-3 – Industrial District
Other – The other abbreviations within the table are as follows:
R – Facility is a use permitted by right.
SE – Facility is a use permitted by special exception.
C – Facility is a use permitted by condition.
N – Facility is not permitted
NA – Application is not applicable.
Kind of Facility
Zoning Districts
A R-1 R-2 R-3 IN B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 I-3
Telecommunications
tower
SE N N N R SE SE R R R R R
Telecommunications
tower, attached
R C C C R R R R R R R R
25-27
Table 2: Permitted Telecommunications Facility Requirements
LEGEND:
Zoning districts – The abbreviation in the column headings represent the
zoning districts of Manheim Township as follows:
A – Agriculture
R-1 – Residential District
R-2 – Residential District
R-3 – Residential District
IN – Institutional District
B-1 – Business District
B-2 – Business District
B-3 – Business District
B-4 – Business District
I-1 – Industrial District
I-2 – Industrial District
I-3 – Industrial District
Other – The other abbreviations within the table are as follows:
NA – application is not applicable.
Zoning District
A R-1 R-2 R-3 IN B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2 I-3
Telecommunications Tower
Maximum height:
one user (feet)
85 NS NA NA 85 85 85 85 85 105 105 105
Maximum height:
two users (feet)
85 NA NA NA 85 105 105 105 105 125 125 125
Maximum height:
three users (feet)
85 NA NA NA 85 105 105 105 105 145 145 145
25-28
SECTION 2517. TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES
Temporary retail sales uses shall comply with the following requirements:
1. There may be five (5) temporary retail sales events per year per lot.
2. Only one (1) temporary retail sales event may take place on a lot at any given time.
3. Temporary retail sales events must obtain a temporary sales permit. The permit will be
valid for a maximum of ten (10) consecutive days, whether or not the temporary sales event
is held on consecutive days.
4. No more than ten (10) percent of the required parking area for the existing uses on the lot
may be used for temporary retail sales.
5. Temporary retail sales areas shall have a maximum sales area of eight hundred (800)
square feet, with a maximum width of twenty (20) feet and a maximum depth of forty (40)
feet.
6. Temporary retail sales hours of operation will be limited to the hours of operation of the
principal use on the lot.
7. Temporary retail sales areas are limited to designated parking areas on the lot.
8. Temporary retail sales shall not disrupt the daily operations of the principal business
located on the lot.
9. No temporary retail sales shall be located within any designated clear sight triangle.
10. No temporary retail sales shall adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the
Township.
11. Any signage shall comply with Article XVIII, Sign Regulations. No signage maybe
displayed until a temporary retail sales permit is obtained.
12. All temporary retail sales shall comply with the applicable building, fire, and electrical
codes of the Township.
SECTION 2518. HOLIDAY TREE SALES
Holiday tree sales uses shall comply with the following requirements:
1. There shall be one (1) holiday tree sales event per year per lot.
2. Only one (1) holiday tree sales event may take place on a lot at any given time.
3. Holiday tree sales events must obtain a temporary sales permit. The permit will be valid
between the dates of November 15 and December 26.
4. All holiday trees, temporary structures, signage, and accessories to the holiday tree sale
must be removed from the property by December 27.
5. No more than ten (10) percent of the required parking area for the existing uses on the lot
may be used for the holiday tree sales area.
25-29
6. Holiday tree sales hours of operation will be limited to the hours of operation of the
principal use on the lot.
7. Holiday tree sales areas are limited to designated parking areas on the lot.
8. Holiday tree sales shall not disrupt the daily operations of the principal business located on
the lot.
9. No holiday tree sales shall be located within any designated clear sight triangle.
10. No holiday tree sales shall adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the
Township.
11. Any signage shall comply with the provisions of Article XVIII. No signage may be
displayed until a temporary retail sales permit is obtained.
12. All holiday tree sales shall comply with applicable building, fire, and electrical codes of the
Township.
SECTION 2519. THEATER CHURCHES
Within the I-1 and I-3 Industrial Districts in which a theater church is permitted by special
exception, a theater church shall comply with the following standards and criteria in addition to
such other reasonable conditions and safeguards as the Zoning Hearing Board may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this ordinance:
1. The theater church shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the
property as an existing movie theater.
2. The theater church shall be conducted entirely within the existing movie theater.
3. The theater church shall be limited to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the floor area
of an existing movie theater.
4. The movie theater shall not be used as a theater church for more than fifteen (15) hours per
week.
5. Plans identifying the location of the proposed theater church within the movie theater and
such other plans and information which establish the means of ingress and egress and
compliance with all applicable fire and safety codes for the theater church shall be
submitted to and approved by the Township Department of Code Compliance.
6. The hours of operation for the theater church shall not conflict with the normal operating
hours and movie schedule of the movie theater.
7. The parking associated with the theater church shall not conflict with or create a shortfall
of the parking required for the movie theater.
8. The use of the theater church shall be limited to religious and/or spiritual worship.
9. Any signs for the theater church shall comply with Article XVIII, Signs, of this ordinance.
10. The theater church shall not generate waste projects or materials of a quality or quantity not
normally associated with the movie theater.
25-30
11. The theater church shall not increase water consumption or sewage discharge so that either
is more than the amount generated by the movie theater.
12. The appearance of the movie theater shall not be altered in a manner which would cause
the premises to differ from its principal use and character as a movie theater.
SECTION 2520. COMMUNITY CLUBS
Within the I-3 Industrial District in which a community club is permitted in an existing movie
theater by special exception, a community club shall comply with the following standards and
criteria in addition to such other reasonable conditions and safeguards the Zoning Hearing Board
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this
ordinance:
1. The community club shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of the
property as an existing movie theater.
2. The community club shall be conducted entirely within the movie theater.
3. The community club shall be limited to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the floor area
of an existing movie theater.
4. The community club shall not be used as a community club for more than fifteen (15)
hours per week.
5. Plans identifying the location of the proposed community club within the movie theater and
such other plans and information which establish the means of ingress and egress and
compliance with all applicable fire and safety codes for the community club shall be
submitted to and approved by the Township Department of Code Compliance.
6. The hours of operation for the community club shall not conflict with the normal operating
hours and movie schedule of the movie theater.
7. The parking associated with the community club will not conflict with or create a shortfall
of the parking required for the movie theater.
8. Any signs for the community club shall comply with Article XVIII, Signs, of this
ordinance.
9. The community club shall not generate waste products or materials of a quality or quantity
not normally associated with the movie theater.
10. The community club shall not increase water consumption or sewage discharge so that
either is more than the amount generated by the movie theater.
11. The appearance of the movie theater shall not be altered in a manner which would cause
the premises to differ from its principal use and character as a movie theater.
SECTION 2521. AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING ACTIVITIES
All agricultural composting activities shall comply with the following:
1. Lot size and setbacks. The following lot size and setbacks shall apply:
25-31
A. Minimum lot size on which any agricultural composting facility may be located shall
be at least fifty (50) acres and the composting operation area being limited to five (5)
acres. The fifty (50) acres must be contiguous and must be held in common
ownership or by entities owned or controlled by predominantly the same persons.
B. Unless the regulations or established guidelines of the PADEP or other agency having
jurisdiction over the operation require a greater setback, all locations where incoming
materials and/or finished compost are stored, composted, or otherwise handled or
processed shall not be located:
(1) Within the one-hundred (100) year floodplain.
(2) In or within three hundred (300) feet of an exceptional value wetland.
(3) In or within one hundred (100) feet of a wetland other than an exceptional value
wetland.
(4) Within one hundred (100) feet of any sinkhole, area draining into a sinkhole,
closed depressions or disappearing streams; within fifty (50) feet from any
lineaments or fracture traces; or within twenty-five (25) feet from surface or
identified subsurface pinnacles.
(5) Within three hundred (300) feet from an existing occupied dwelling.
(6) Within fifty (50) feet of the boundary of any property not owned by the owner
of the property containing the agricultural composting facility.
(7) Within five hundred (500) feet of a boundary of any nonagricultural zoning
district.
(8) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a school or Township park, playground,
houses of worship, child-care facility, community center, community facility,
library, recreation area, or recreation center, whether such use is a principal or
accessory use.
2. Other wastes. Wastes that cannot be composted or are removed from the compost prior to
its use as a soil component or similar uses must be stored and disposed of in accordance
with the regulations and guidelines of the PADEP or Township code or any other state or
federal agency regulations having jurisdiction over the storage or disposal of these other
wastes.
3. Operations of agricultural composting facility.
A. Permitting. Prior to the start of operations of the agricultural composting facility, the
facility shall have a general or individual permit from the PADEP. A copy of this
permit must be given to the Township thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of
composting operations. Any changes to the permit must be supplied to the Township
within thirty (30) days after such a change is made.
B. The owner of the property must comply with all federal and state regulations,
including all permit conditions, applicable to the operation of the agricultural
composting facility.
25-32
C. All stormwater that comes into contact with any of the compost or the composting
pad shall be contained on the site and may not be discharged into the waters of the
commonwealth. The agricultural composting facility must comply with all applicable
stormwater management requirements of the Township.
D. The operator of the agricultural composting facility shall not permit odors, noise, or
other public nuisances greater than those found in normal farming operations. The
operator of the facility, prior to the commencement of composting activities, must
present a plan to the Township that describes how the facility will discourage the
attraction, harborage or breeding of vectors.
E. Storage. Storage of active or finished compost must be in a manner that prevents the
dispersal of waste or compost by wind or runoff and minimizes the risk of fire or
explosion. Compost may not be stored in a manner that causes groundwater or surface
water contamination. The storage of finished compost must be under roof.
F. The operator of the agricultural composting facility shall comply with all of the
emergency response and notification provisions provided by PADEP regulations or
guidelines, or any other federal or state agency having jurisdiction over the operation.
G. Other ordinances. The owner of the property containing the agricultural composting
facility shall comply with all other applicable ordinances and requirements of the
Township, including without limitation this ordinance, the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, the Stormwater Management Ordinance, Chapter 265,
Floodplain Management, and building codes of the Township, as well as all other
ordinances or regulations.
H. Recordkeeping. The operator of the agricultural composting facility shall maintain
records detailing the source of compost material in the sale or transfer of finished
compost from the facility. These records must be kept for five (5) years and shall be
made available to the Township upon request.
I. Employees. The agricultural composting facility may have no more than six (6)
employees who are not residents of the farm present at the property at any time. This
limit shall exclude employees or contractors necessary for the intermittent
construction or repair of structures or other items required by the agricultural
composting operation.
J. Screening. The agricultural composting facility shall be screened as required by
Section 2512. All outside storage, parking or display of products, equipment or
supplies shall be screened by a landscape screen or other visual barrier approved by
the Township.
K. Signs. All signs for the agricultural composting facility shall comply with
requirements of Article XVIII, Sign Regulations.
L. Off-street parking. The agricultural composting facility shall provide one off-street
parking space for each employee present. The agricultural composting facility shall
provide adequate parking or other spaces so that trucks accessing the facility may pull
completely on the lot before loading or unloading materials.
25-33
M. Direct sales to residents. Direct sales of finished compost to individuals is prohibited.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the delivery of compost from the agricultural
composting facility to any property.
4. Traffic.
A. An agricultural composting facility must have direct access to a collector or arterial
street.
B. The access drive to the agricultural composting facility must be paved with asphalt,
gravel or a similar material. The access drive must be maintained to minimize dust
and to prevent or minimize the tracking of mud or materials off site.
C. A gate or other barrier must be maintained across the access road to block
unauthorized access to the agricultural composting facility.
D. The applicant shall provide an analysis of any impacts on traffic caused by the
agricultural composting facility. The area of the analysis and the method used to show
traffic impacts shall be as approved by the Township. The traffic analysis shall
include any proposed improvements to roads within the approved analysis area. The
Township may, but shall not be required to, in its reasonable discretion, require the
traffic analysis to be performed by a qualified traffic engineer, as may be required on
account of the project trip levels caused by the agricultural composting operation or
the existing traffic conditions in the analysis area.
E. Access drives. The access drive shall be designed in accordance with Township
regulations and/or PennDOT standards if it intersects with a state highway. The
applicant must demonstrate that the proposed driveway access to the agricultural
composting facility is sufficient to accommodate the vehicles that will enter and exit
the facility.
5. The owner of the property shall be responsible for any and all violations of this ordinance,
as well as violations of state and federal laws and regulations to the extent permitted by
those regulations.
SECTION 2522. WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of
wind energy and to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied energy as an
accessory use while protecting the health, safety and welfare of adjacent and surrounding
land uses through appropriate zoning and land use controls. Wind energy systems shall be
permitted in the agricultural zoning district as an accessory use by conditional use with the
general standards as set forth in Section 2810.3 herein and with specific criteria as set forth
in this section. This section is intended to accomplish the following:
A. To provide for appropriate locations and development of wind energy systems in
Manheim Township.
B. To protect Manheim Township's natural environment by promoting wind energy
systems and reducing the use of fossil fuels.
C. To minimize adverse nuisance and visual impacts of wind energy systems through
25-34
careful design and siting techniques.
D. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties through engineering and careful
siting for wind energy systems.
E. To encourage and promote the location of wind energy systems in areas not
immediately adjacent or adversely effecting residential uses.
2. Modifications.
A. The Board of Commissioners may, by conditional use approval, permit the
modification of the provisions of this section, including but not limited to provisions
related to the number of turbines and associated appurtenances per lot, the height of
the system and the minimum yard dimensions in order to encourage the use of wind
energy systems. An applicant desiring to obtain conditional use approval shall, when
making application for conditional use under this section, also make application for
modifications simultaneously. However, granting of a modification shall not have the
effect of making null and void the intent and purpose of the article. Any conditional
use to permit a modification of the requirements of this section shall be subject to the
following standards:
(1) The design and improvement shall be in harmony with the purpose and intent of
this section.
(2) The design and improvement shall not have an adverse impact on the
surrounding neighbors.
(3) The proposed modification shall not result in any danger to the public health,
safety or welfare.
(4) The landowner shall demonstrate that the proposed modification will allow
equal or better results and represents the minimum modification necessary.
(5) The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of
Commissioners that, with respect to each request for a modification, literal
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance is unreasonable; causes undue
hardship because of unique or unusual conditions pertaining to the subject
property but meets the purpose and intent of this ordinance; and is unnecessary
because an alternate standard can be demonstrated to provide equal or better
results.
B. If the Board of Commissioners determines that the landowner has met his burden, it
may grant a modification of the requirements of this section. In granting
modifications, the Board of Commissioners may impose such conditions as will, in its
judgment; secure the objectives and purposes of this section.
3. General standards. Where said general standards and specific criteria overlap, the specific
criteria shall supersede the general standards. The installation and construction of a wind
energy system shall be subject to the following development and design standards:
A. A wind energy system is permitted in the Agricultural District as an accessory use by
conditional use.
25-35
B. A wind energy system shall provide power for the principal use and/or accessory uses
of the property on which the wind energy system is located and shall not be used for
the generation of power for the sale of energy to other users, although this provision
shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from time to
time to the local utility company.
C. A wind energy system connected to the utility grid shall provide written authorization
from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection.
D. The maximum number of towers in a wind energy system is one per lot.
E. The maximum wind energy system height is eighty-five (85) feet. The height shall be
measured from the ground surface of the wind energy system tower to the highest
point of the extended blade tip or the highest point of the wind energy system. The
permitted height limits are also subject to applicable Federal Aviation Administration
regulations regarding objects affecting navigable airspace. The applicant shall provide
acknowledgement from the Federal Aviation Administration or from a representative
from the Lancaster Airport Authority authorized to acknowledge such request
indicating that the height of the wind energy system does not adversely affect the
airspace of the airport.
F. Setbacks from the wind energy system shall be as follows:
(1) Setback from property line. The minimum wind energy system setback distance
from the nearest property line shall be a distance equal to or greater than the
distance from the wind energy system tower base to the tip of the blade or the
highest point of the wind energy system.
(2) Setback from residential dwellings.
[a] The minimum wind energy system setback distance from any residential
dwelling, excluding the dwelling situated on the property where the wind
energy system will be located, shall be five hundred (500) feet from the
property line and one thousand (1,000) feet from the residential dwelling.
The distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the extended tip
of the blade or nearest point of the wind energy system to the residential
dwelling.
[b] Upon written notice and approval from the adjacent property owner, a less
restrictive setback may be accepted by the Board of Commissioners. Any
such written acknowledgement shall include a protection zone extending
and covering the area a distance equal to the height of the wind energy
system such that no building may be constructed within this protection
zone.
(3) The minimum wind energy system setback distance from all aboveground
utility lines, radio, television or telecommunication towers shall be a distance
equal to or greater than the distance from the wind energy system tower base to
the tip of the blade or the nearest point from the wind energy system to the
aboveground utility lines, radio, television or telecommunication towers.
25-36
(4) The minimum distance from guy wires, accessory structure, and other
appurtenances of the wind energy system shall be ten (10) feet from the
property lines.
(5) Wind energy systems shall not be located within the required front yard setback.
G. The distance between the ground and any part of the rotor or blade system shall be no
less than fifteen (15) feet.
H. Wind energy systems shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or
other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the wind energy
system. Such anti-climbing device shall be installed to a minimum height of fifteen
(15) feet from the ground or roof if the wind energy system is situated on the roof.
Access doors to wind energy systems and electrical equipment shall be locked to
prevent entry by nonauthorized persons.
I. All power transmission lines from the wind energy system to any building or other
structure shall be located underground. There shall be no exposed wiring.
J. Wind energy systems shall be a neutral nonobtrusive color such as white, off-white,
gray, brown or an earth tone shade unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other regulatory agency to be otherwise.
K. Audible sound from a wind energy system shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels, as
measured at the exterior of any occupied building on the adjacent parcels.
L. All wind energy systems shall be designed with an automatic brake to prevent
overspeeding and excessive pressure on the wind energy system tower structure.
M. Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other applicable regulatory authority. If the Federal
Aviation Administration requires safety lighting, the use of red beacons is preferred
to flashing strobe lights. Illumination of the wind energy system shall be avoided.
N. Wind energy systems shall not be used to display advertising, including signage,
streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or
similar materials. The manufacturer's or installer's identification and any appropriate
warning signs and placards may be displayed on the wind energy system, provided
they comply with the prevailing sign regulations.
O. Mechanical equipment associated with the use of the wind energy system shall
comply with the following:
(1) Any mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the operation of
the wind energy system that is not enclosed within the wind energy tower or
within an accessory structure on the property shall comply with the following:
[a] Mechanical equipment shall be screened from any adjacent property that is
residentially zoned or used for residential purposes. The screen shall
consist of shrubbery, trees, or other plant materials which provide a visual
screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a decorative fence meeting the
requirements of this ordinance may be used.
25-37
[b] Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the minimum front yard
setback of the underlying zoning district.
[c] Mechanical equipment shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear
and side property lines.
P. A site plan including the following information shall be included:
(1) Overall site boundary with sufficient information to show the location of the
property in proximity to adjacent properties and existing features located within
five hundred (500) feet of the subject property boundaries.
(2) Identification of adjacent property owners.
(3) Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the property and
proximity to structures on adjacent lots within five hundred (500) feet of the
subject wind energy system.
(4) Location and dimension of driveways, roadways and significant features within
and adjacent to the subject property within five hundred (500) feet of the subject
property boundaries.
(5) Location of the proposed wind energy system, foundations, guy anchors and
associated equipment.
(6) Setback requirements as outlined in this ordinance and proposed setbacks.
(7) The location of any rights-of-way, easements, floodplains, or other covenants
restricting the use of the property.
(8) The location of any overhead utility lines, radio transmission lines, cable lines
or other overhead lines within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property
boundaries.
(9) The location of any telecommunications towers within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the subject property.
(10) Wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer, model, rotor
diameter, tower height, and tower type.
Q. A report from a qualified engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
documenting the following shall be submitted for review:
(1) Description of the wind energy system, including overview, project location, the
rated capacity for the on-site user, type and height of facility, including
generating capacity, dimensions and respective manufacturers and a description
of the ancillary facilities. Description should include technical, engineering,
economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed
design.
(2) Evidence of structural integrity of each tower structure.
(3) Structural failure characteristics of each tower structure and demonstration that
25-38
the site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris.
(4) Information demonstrating that the proposed wind energy system is for the sole
purpose of generating energy for the user of the property, with the exception of
the excess energy that may be generated from time to time and sold to the local
utility company.
(5) Identification of the nearest wind energy system, telecommunications tower and
residential homes.
(6) The applicant shall describe the technical options available and reasons why the
technical option selected was chosen over the other options.
(7) Provide make, model, picture and manufacturer's specifications.
R. Visual impact: demonstrations, including before and after photosimulations and
elevation drawings showing the height, design, color, night lighting and proposed
location of the facility as viewed from neighboring areas. The applicant shall
demonstrate through project site planning and proposed mitigation that the wind
energy system's visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the
community. This may include, but is not limited to, information regarding site
selection, turbine design or appearance, buffering and screening of mechanical
equipment.
(1) Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the wind energy system.
S. Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as may be reasonably
requested by the Township to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
T. Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved or that the
applicant, if he is a tenant of the property, has written permission of the owner to
make such application.
U. Permitting. A wind energy system shall not be constructed until a building permit has
been approved and issued.
(1) The design of the wind energy system shall conform to applicable industry
standards. A building permit shall be obtained for wind energy systems per the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC). All wiring shall comply with
the applicable version of the National Electric Code (NEC). The local utility
provider (PPL) shall be contacted to determine grid interconnection and net
metering policies. The applicant shall submit certificates of design compliance
obtained by the equipment manufacturers from a certifying organization, and
any such design shall be certified by an engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) The wind energy systems shall comply with all applicable Township ordinances
and codes.
V. Maintenance. All wind energy systems shall be maintained in compliance with
Township standards contained in the applicable codes and ordinances so as to ensure
25-39
the structural integrity of such facilities. If, upon inspection by the Zoning Officer or
any code official, any such facility is determined not to comply with the applicable
codes and ordinances or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then notice of
such lack of compliance shall be provided to the owner of the property. Failure to
bring such facility into compliance shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(1) Before any construction can commence on any wind energy systems, the
property owner must acknowledge that he/she is the responsible party for
owning and maintaining the wind energy system. If the wind energy system is
abandoned or is in a state of disrepair, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to remove or maintain the wind energy system.
(2) Any earth disturbance as a result of the removal of the ground-mounted wind
energy system shall be graded and reseeded.
SECTION 2523. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
1. Solar energy systems as an accessory use. It is the purpose of this section to promote the
safe, effective and efficient use of solar energy systems installed to reduce the on-site
consumption of utility supplied energy and/or hot water as an accessory use while
protecting health, safety and welfare of adjacent and surrounding land uses through
appropriate zoning and land use controls. A solar energy system shall be permitted in any
zoning district as an accessory use, and specific criteria is set forth below:
A. A solar energy system is permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory use.
B. A solar energy system shall provide power for the principal use and/or accessory use
of the property on which the solar energy system is located and shall not be used for
the generation of power for the sale of energy to other users, although this provision
shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from time to
time to the local utility company.
C. A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall provide written authorization
from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection.
D. To the greatest extent feasible, accessory solar energy systems shall be roof-mounted
or located on an existing impervious surface. The applicant must demonstrate that
roof mounting is infeasible prior to any application for a ground-mounted system.
E. A roof-mounted system may be mounted on a principal building or accessory
building. A roof-mounted system, whether mounted on the principal building or
accessory building, may not exceed the maximum building height or accessory
building height specified for the building type in the underlying zoning district. In no
instance shall any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the edge of the roof.
F. A roof-mounted system shall be setback from the edge of the building roof in order to
establish a clear perimeter area. Access pathways shall also be provided between
solar panels if applicable. The clear perimeter area and access pathways shall be
reviewed by the Manheim Township Fire Chief and the Township Code Compliance
Department to ensure adequate accessibility for emergency service personnel.
25-40
G. A ground-mounted system shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
H. The surface area of a ground-mounted system, regardless of the mounted angle, shall
be calculated as part of the overall lot coverage. Of the allowable lot coverage, the
surface area of a ground-mounted system shall not constitute more than two (2)
percent of the allowable lot coverage or 360 square feet, whichever is less.
I. A ground-mounted system or system attached to an accessory building shall not be located
within the required front yard setback.
J. The minimum solar energy system setback distance from the property lines shall be
equivalent to the building setback or accessory building setback requirement of the
underlying zoning district.
K. The number of solar panels and supporting equipment shall be considered as one
solar energy system.
L. All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the operation of the solar
energy system shall comply with the following:
(1) Mechanical equipment shall be screened from adjacent property. The screen
shall consist of shrubbery, trees, or other plant materials which provide a visual
screen.
(2) Mechanical equipment shall not be located within the minimum front yard
setback of the underlying zoning district.
(3) Mechanical equipment shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear and
side property lines.
M. Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of the airport in a manner that would
interfere with airport flight patterns. Acknowledgement from the Federal Aviation
Administration may be necessary.
N. All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted solar energy system to any
building or other structure shall be located underground.
O. Before any construction can commence on any solar energy system, the property
owner must acknowledge that he/she is the responsible party for owning and
maintaining the solar energy system. If the solar energy system is abandoned or is in a
state of disrepair, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove or
maintain the solar energy system.
P. All solar energy systems shall meet the general requirements in Section 2523.2
below.
2. General requirements.
A. Solar panels shall be located in a manner that will prevent glare toward adjacent
properties, occupied structures, and roadways.
B. The design of the solar energy system shall conform to applicable industry standards.
A building permit shall be obtained for a solar energy system per the Pennsylvania
25-41
Uniform Construction Code (UCC). All wiring shall comply with the applicable
version of the National Electric Code (NEC). As applicable, the applicant shall
submit certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturers
from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), Institute of Electronics and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE), Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC), ETL Testing
Laboratories, Florida Solar Energy Center (FSEC), or other similar certifying
organization.
C. Where applicable, the local utility provider (i.e. PPL) shall be contacted to determine
grid interconnection and net metering policies. The applicant shall submit certificates
of design compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturers from a certifying
organization, and any such design shall be certified by an engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. The solar energy system shall comply with all applicable Township ordinances and
codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such solar energy system.
E. Decommissioning of solar energy system. The applicant shall sign an agreement
stating that when all reasonable uses of the panels are no longer necessary, they will
be promptly removed at the applicant's expense. The agreement shall be written in
language acceptable to the Township Solicitor and shall, at the request of the
Township, include a bond for estimated expenses of removal. Decommissioning shall
include removal of all systems, equipment, buildings, cabling, electrical components,
foundations, and other associated facilities and equipment.
F. A solar energy system shall not be used to display advertising, including signage,
streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or
similar materials. The manufacturer's or installer's identification and any appropriate
warning signs and placards may be displayed on the solar energy system, provided
they comply with the prevailing sign regulations.
G. A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a building permit has been
approved and issued.
H. No signage or advertising shall be permitted on any part of the accessory solar energy
system.
SECTION 2524. GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS
Geothermal heat pumps are permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory use under the
following conditions:
1. Open-loop systems shall not be permitted.
2. The design and installation of geothermal energy systems shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those of the International Ground Source Heat Pump
Association (IGSHPA) standards, as amended, and found in Appendix 1 of the PA DEP
Ground Source Heat Pump Manual of 2001, or the most current manual.
3. Manufacturer specifications shall be submitted as part of any building or zoning
application.
25-42
4. All systems shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or
right-of-way line and a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any potable water supply
wells.
5. Circulating fluids used in any closed-loop system shall use only nontoxic, biodegradable
fluids such as food-grade propylene glycol.
SECTION 2525. DWELLING UNITS IN COMBINATION WITH OFFICES OR COMMERCIAL
USES
1. No dwelling unit shall be located on a floor below an office or commercial use.
2. Dwelling units shall have a separate entrance from the principal commercial uses.
3. A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of open space or balcony area shall be
provided per unit.
4. Parking spaces for dwelling units shall be provided at a rate of one and one-half (1.5)
spaces per unit and clearly demarcated.
SECTION 2526. OUTDOOR DINING
Restaurant uses shall be permitted to operate outdoor cafes on sidewalks, including areas within
the public right-of-way, and in courtyards, provided pedestrian circulation or access to store
entrances shall not be impaired. The following standards and guidelines are applicable:
1. To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of five (5) feet of sidewalk along the curb
and leading to the entrance to the establishment shall be maintained free of tables or other
encumbrances.
2. Planters, posts with ropes or other removable fencing with a maximum height of forty-two
(42) inches shall be used as a way of defining the area occupied by the cafe.
3. Extended awnings, canopies or large umbrellas shall be permitted and located to provide
shade. Colors shall complement building colors.
4. Outdoor cafes shall be required to provide additional decorative outdoor trash receptacles.
5. Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles and other elements of street furniture shall be
compatible with the architectural character of the building where the establishment is
located.
6. Outdoor cafes shall not be entitled to additional signage over and beyond what is permitted
for this type of establishment.
7. The operators of outdoor cafes shall be responsible for maintaining a clean, litter-free and
well-kept appearance within the area of their activities.
SECTION 2527. SIDEWALK DISPLAYS
Commercial uses shall be permitted to have sidewalk displays of retail merchandise that is
regularly sold at their establishments, subject to the following:
1. Sidewalk displays are permitted directly in front of an establishment, subject to the
25-43
following: a minimum of five (5) feet of clearance is maintained at the storefront entrance,
or wider if needed for adequate and uncluttered pedestrian access; the displays are located
along the building wall and not more than two (2) feet deep; and the display area does not
exceed fifty (50) of the length of the storefront.
2. Displays shall be permitted only during normal business hours, shall consist of
merchandise regularly sold by the establishment, and shall be removed at the end of the
business day. Cardboard boxes shall not be used for sidewalk displays.
3. Sidewalk displays shall maintain a clean, litter-free and well-kept appearance at all times
and shall be compatible with the colors and character of the storefront from which the
business operates.
SECTION 2528. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
Any development approved and constructed under the cluster development provisions of the
prior Ordinance shall continue to be governed by those provisions. Such development may be
permitted to expand, so long as such expansion is in accordance with the prior cluster
development provisions.
SECTION 2529. SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES AND FACILITIES
Solid Waste Management Services and Facilities shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Operations of a solid waste management facility shall at all times be in full compliance
with the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the provisions of this
ordinance. In the event that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are less restrictive than
any present or future rules or regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the more restrictive regulations shall supersede and control.
2. Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the solid waste management
facility site and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be submitted to the Township.
3. The entire waste transfer process, which includes unloading, compaction and loading onto
transfer trucks shall occur inside a building. Unloading of materials shall be continuously
supervised by a facility operator.
4. The principal access to the solid waste management facility site shall be from a collector or
arterial road, as designated in Appendix I of the Manheim Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and Section 2209 of this ordinance.
5. Access to any outdoor area used for solid waste management services shall be limited to
those posted times when an attendant is on duty, provided, however, that this limitation
shall not apply to CNG service stations that operate twenty-four hours per day, seven days
per week and are accessed only via electronic means. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, any outdoor area used for solid waste
management services shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other means
designated to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or locations
25-44
6. If a solid waste management facility includes CNG service stations, sufficient stacking
lanes shall be provided so that vehicles waiting to refuel do not back up onto public roads.
7. Depending on the route of entry to the solid waste management facility and the adequacy
and carrying capacity of the roadways along such route of entry, the Township may require
that a traffic study be performed to determine the number of trucks traversing that area of
the Township and issues related to safety through populated areas. The Township also may
require the posting of a bond for road maintenance for heavily traveled routes associated
with the solid waste management service.
SECTION 2530. CONVERSION OF LARGE NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING
1. Purpose - It is the purpose of this section to provide for the creative redevelopment or reuse
of large nonresidential buildings within the R-2 Residential Zoning District by permitting a
variety of commercial, restaurant, entertainment, and office uses by special exception.
Large nonresidential buildings in this district often house (d) community oriented uses
permitted under the Zoning Ordinance. However, due to changes in the community,
ownership and the fashion in which community services are provided, there is a risk that
these large buildings will become underutilized or unusable if zoning regulations
applicable to such buildings in an R-2 Residential Zoning District are applied to their use.
This section is intended to provide economically viable uses for such existing buildings in
excess of 10,000 square feet of net floor area but no larger than 45,000 square feet of net
floor area and within the R-2 Residential Zoning District.
2. Conversion - The conversion of a large nonresidential building shall be permitted within
the R-2 Residential District by special exception in accordance with the standards set forth
below.
3. Uses Permitted by Special Exception - Subject to the requirements set forth in Subsection
2530.4, one or more of the following uses may be established with a Conversion of a Large
Nonresidential Building:
A. For lots with primary vehicular access to and from any road defined as a collector
roadway as specified in Appendix I of the Manheim Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance:
(1) Professional Offices.
(2) Medical and/or dental offices.
B. For Lots with primary vehicular access to and from an arterial road, limited access
highway or major collector road as identified in Section 2209 of this ordinance:
(1) Professional Offices.
(2) Medical and/or dental offices.
25-45
(3) Conference/Event Centers including separate restaurant, café and/or
commercial recreation facility component(s) that is (are) secondary to the
Conference/Event Center.
(4) Veterinary Offices.
4. Specific Conditions.
A. Professional Offices, Medical/Dental Offices and Veterinary Offices: Hours of
operation shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00 am and 10:00 pm.
B. Conference/Event Center.
(1) Outdoor events shall not be held before 7:00 am or after 10.00 pm.
(2) Alcohol sales and service shall be permitted pursuant to applicable laws and as
an accessory use to the Conference/Event Center.
(3) Restaurants and Cafes as a separate secondary use to the Conference/Event
Center shall be permitted, subject to the following restrictions:
[a] Drive through or Drive in service shall not be permitted.
[b] Seating area for restaurant shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
[c] Outdoor dining shall comply with Section 2526.
[d] Restaurant or café shall be permitted to sell/serve alcohol pursuant to
applicable laws as an accessory use.
[e] Restaurant or café may have hours of operation independent from
Conference/Event Center but the restaurant or café may only be open to
the public between 7:00 am to 10:00 pm each day.
(4) Commercial Recreational Facilities.
[a] Outdoor operations shall be restricted to the hours between 7:00 am and
10:00 pm.
[b] Outdoor operations shall not interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of
neighboring properties
C. Off-street parking for any uses shall be in accordance with Article XX. Parking.
D. Parking areas and access drives shall be adequately lit and all lighting shall include
full cut off fixtures and shall not direct light onto adjacent properties.
E. Refuse collection areas, if provided, shall be conveniently located for all uses. The
collection area shall be properly screened from view from all property lines and the
trash receptacles shall be covered.
5. Permissible Expansion of Existing Building and Parking.
25-46
A. Buildings with vehicular access from a collector roadway:
(1) No extension or expansion shall be permitted to the existing building, except as
may be required for access or safety which includes handicapped accessibility.
Extension or expansion to increase building capacity shall not be permissible.
(2) Existing open space to the greatest extent possible shall be left in its existing
condition or improved so as to be appropriate in size, shape, dimension,
location, and character to assure its proper functioning as an amenity for both
the site and the surrounding area.
B. Buildings with vehicular access from an arterial legislative route: up to 25% increase
in the building footprint subject to the requirements set forth in Subsection 806.2.G.
and other applicable Township ordinances.
C. Parking Lots may be expanded subject to the requirements set forth in the applicable
Township ordinances.
6. Signs - Signs shall be governed by Article XVIII of this ordinance, provided applicant shall
be permitted to maintain, repair or re-erect the existing signage. Notwithstanding the
foregoing sentence, the applicant shall not be required to remove or decrease the square
footage of any legally existing sign(s) as the result of a conversion.
7. Access to the Site - There shall be adequate, safe access to the site for pedestrians and
vehicles.
8. Utilities - The site shall be served by public sanitary sewer and public water.
9. Sidewalks and Streetscapes.
A. Sidewalk shall be provided along all street frontages, or alternatively, a connection to
or extension of a Township pathway system shall be provided.
B. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width and shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the Manheim Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
C. Connection to or extension of a Township pathway system shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the Manheim Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
D. Handicap ramps and crosswalks shall be provided at all street and access drive
crossings.
E. All pedestrian amenities shall meet ADA guidelines.
F. Streetscapes shall be provided and/or improved as required by the applicable
Appendices of this ordinance.
25-47
26-1
ARTICLE XXVI. TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR)
SECTION 2601. PURPOSE
Within the Township, there are certain areas that, because of their unique natural, agricultural,
cultural, and scenic resources, make them worthy of special protection. The purpose of this
article is to assist in permanently protecting this vital natural resource: farmlands and prime
agricultural soils. In accordance with Sections 603(c)(2.2), 605(4), and 619.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code, a transferable development rights program is established in the
Township, and the Township designates the Agricultural District as the sending area, and all
other residential and nonresidential districts located within the designated growth area, including
properties developed under planned residential development regulations, as the receiving areas.
The purpose of the transfer of development rights program is to preserve the prime agricultural
soils and agricultural character of the lands in the Agricultural District by shifting development
from that area to the receiving areas of the Township.
SECTION 2602. CONCEPT
1. The transfer of development rights is a voluntary agreement under the terms of this
ordinance between a willing buyer and a willing seller. The rights shall be transferred to a
person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity or the Township. The development
rights may be held by the purchaser for future use or sale or may be immediately attached
to a specific parcel of land within the Township. The development rights shall be
considered a separate estate in land and may be transferred subject to the limitations of this
ordinance. Once the development rights are attached to a specific parcel of land, those
rights shall run with that specific parcel in perpetuity.
2. A purchaser of development rights who attaches those rights to a tract of land in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this ordinance is permitted to develop a tract
within the receiving area with an increase in density, building height, building length, or lot
coverage in accordance with the terms specified in Section 2606 herein. The seller of the
development rights receives compensation from the sale, plus the right to retain the land for
agricultural use. A deed restriction against future development is placed upon the
agricultural land in the designated sending area from which the development rights have
been severed. The price of the development rights will be determined by the willing buyer
and willing seller. To facilitate the transfer between willing buyer and willing seller, the
Township maintains a list of available transferable development rights and interested
parties.
3. The deed restriction will not affect the landowner's ability to sell the land after the
development rights have been severed, although such land cannot be sold for development
purposes. The deed restriction on the land from which the development rights have been
severed shall run in favor of the Township or an approved conservation organization.
4. The owner of the tract in the sending area from which the development rights are severed
or any subsequent purchaser or purchasers of the development rights may hold the
development rights or may resell the development rights. The only use which may be made
of the development rights is the ultimate transfer to a developer with a tract in the receiving
26-2
area. The Township shall have no obligation to purchase the development rights which
have been severed from a tract in the sending area.
SECTION 2603. RECOGNITION OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
1. The Township hereby recognizes the severability and transferability of development rights
from certain lands within the Township, to be transferred and used in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
2. The Township, in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 2604, Apportionment of
development rights, shall determine the eligibility of each tract of land within the
Agricultural District for allocation of transferable development rights. The Township has
no obligation, however, to determine the specific number of such rights apportioned to
each tract, nor to give any formal notice to the landowner other than by the passage of this
ordinance, until such time as an application to utilize transferable development rights is
made in accordance with Section 2604, Apportionment of development rights, and Section
2605, Transfer and use of transferable development rights, of this ordinance.
3. The Township reserves the right to amend this ordinance in the future, and the Township
expressly reserves the right to change the manner in which the number of development
rights shall be apportioned to a tract in the sending area, the manner in which development
rights may be attached to land within the receiving area, the locations of the sending area
and the receiving areas and the procedure by which development rights can be conveyed.
The Township further expressly reserves the right to terminate its transferable development
rights program at any time. No owner of land or owner of development rights shall have
any claim against the Township for damages resulting from a change in this ordinance
relating to the regulations governing the apportionment, transfer and use of development
rights or the abolition of the transferable development rights program. If the transferable
development rights program is abolished by the Township, no developer may attach
development rights to any tract in the receiving area after the effective date of this
ordinance abolishing the transferable development rights program unless an application in
conformity with the provisions of Section 2607 herein was filed prior to the effective date
of such ordinance.
SECTION 2604. APPORTIONMENT OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
1. Development rights shall be apportioned to tracts of land within the designated sending
area of the Township based on the following criteria:
A. The tract of land shall be located within the Agricultural District.
B. The tract of land shall not be less than ten (10) acres in size.
C. Tracts of land or portions thereof owned by or subject to easements (including, but
not limited to, easements of roads, railroads, electrical transmission lines, and water,
gas or petroleum pipelines) in favor of governmental agencies, utilities, and nonprofit
corporations shall not be eligible for transferable development rights.
D. Land restricted against development by covenant, easement or deed restriction shall
not be eligible for transferable development rights unless and until such time as said
covenant, restriction or easement is dissolved or rescinded. In the event said
26-3
covenant, restriction or easement is dissolved or rescinded, such land shall be eligible
for issuance of transferable development rights.
E. Land utilized for uses other than agriculture shall not be eligible for transferable
development rights.
F. The portion of the parcel which will not be restricted shall be usable under the use,
area, dimensional, performance and other standards of this ordinance.
2. The number of transferable development rights apportioned to an eligible tract shall be
established by multiplying the number of acres qualifying, as defined by the above criteria,
by 0.73, and subtracting therefrom the number of dwelling units then existing on the
eligible tract. When the computation to determine the number of development rights
apportioned results in a fractional number, any fraction shall be equal to one (1)
development right.
3. The owner of any tract of land eligible for development rights shall not be restricted from
developing said tract in accordance with Article VI, Agricultural District A, of this
ordinance. In the event of a residential subdivision or land development of any such tract
eligible for development rights, the number of development rights apportioned shall be
reduced by the number of residential lots and/or units subdivided or developed.
4. The determination of the precise number of development rights which shall be apportioned
to a tract in the sending area shall be computed in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Section 2604 through Section 2607 if the development rights shall be transferred to a
developer who shall immediately attach them to land within the receiving area. If the
development rights shall be held by the owner of the sending tract after they are severed or
shall be transferred in gross to the Township or another person, the procedure to be
followed shall be that set forth in Section 2605 and Section 2607.1 through 6.
SECTION 2605. TRANSFER AND USE OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
1. Transferable development rights which have been apportioned shall be conveyed and
severed by a deed of transferable development rights duly recorded in the office of the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds. The deed of transferable development rights shall
specify the tract of land within the receiving district to which the rights shall be
permanently attached or that the rights shall be transferred to Manheim Township, retained
by the owner of the sending tract, or another person in gross. The deed of transferable
development rights which severs the development rights from the sending tract shall be
accompanied by a declaration of restriction of development, which shall permanently
restrict development of the sending tract and which shall be recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds at the same time as or prior to the deed of transferable development
rights. All deeds of transferable development rights shall be endorsed by the Township
prior to recording.
2. Transferable development rights which have been apportioned shall only be permitted to
attach to tracts of land to be developed in accordance with the provisions of Section 2606
or to be transferred to the Township in accordance with Section 2608.
SECTION 2606. USE OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS IN RECEIVING
26-4
AREAS
1. Residential receiving areas. Transferable development rights severed from sending area
tracts in the Agricultural District may be transferred and received to increase density for
development on tracts in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts, as specified within the
applicable zoning district or T-Zone Overlays, and in accordance with the following:
A. Density increases.
(1) The maximum development capacity for residential development when the
developer acquires additional development rights in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be as follows:
Residential District
Maximum
DU/Acre
R-1 District
Conventional development 2.2
Conventional development with TDRs 2.9
PRD 2.9
R-2 District
Conventional development 2.9
Conventional development with TDRs 4.3
Conventional development within the T-5 Neffsville Village
Overlay
4.3
PRD 7.0
R-3 District
Conventional development within the T-5 Neffsville Village
Overlay
5.0
PRD and development within the T-5 Oregon Village Overlay
Master Site Plan, as specified.
6-10
(2) For each additional dwelling unit or portion thereof in excess of the number
permitted by the base density of the underlying Residential District R-1, R-2, or
R-3, the developer shall acquire one (1) development right in accordance with
this ordinance.
(3) If the proposed development is to be constructed in phases, no phase shall be
developed at a density which, when combined with the density or densities of
all the previous phases, will result in a density greater than the gross density of
the entire development.
B. Building height increases. For each apartment dwelling unit or portion thereof above
26-5
a height of thirty-five (35) feet in the Residential District R-3 developed under the
conventional development provisions, the developer shall acquire one (1)
development right in accordance with this ordinance.
C. Building height increases. For each apartment dwelling unit or portion thereof above
the height of forty (40) feet in the Residential District R-3 developed under the
Planned Residential Development provisions, the developer shall acquire one (1)
development right in accordance with this ordinance.
2. Nonresidential receiving areas. Transferable development rights severed from sending area
tracts in the Agricultural District may be transferred and received on tracts located within
the T-4, T-5, T-6, D-R, D-A, or D-C Overlays, as specified within the applicable T-Zone
Overlays, and in accordance with the following:
A. Building height increases.
(1) Building height increases shall be permitted in accordance with the T-4, T-5, T-
6, D-R, D-C, and D-A T-Zone Overlays.
(2) For each three thousand (3,000) square feet of nonresidential space or portion
thereof, and/or each apartment dwelling unit or portion thereof above the
permitted base height, the developer shall acquire one (1) transferable
development right in accordance with this ordinance.
B. Building length increases.
(1) Building length increases shall be permitted in accordance with the T-4, T-6, DR,
D-C, and D-A T-Zone Overlays.
(2) For every five thousand (5,000) square feet or portion thereof located beyond
the permitted building length, the developer shall acquire one (1) transferable
development right in accordance with this ordinance.
C. Master site planned development (T-5 Oregon Village Overlay). For every three (3)
gross acres included within a master site planned development, one (1) transferable
development right shall be acquired.
SECTION 2607. PLAN SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW PROCESS
1. A sketch plan prepared in accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, and the underlying zoning district regulations shall be submitted to the
Township to determine the base permitted density, building height, building length, or lot
coverage of the property to be developed.
2. A request to utilize transferable development rights on a property shall be in the form of a
preliminary subdivision plan of the proposed development using the transferable
development rights prepared in accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. The preliminary plan submitted shall indicate the base density, building height,
building length, or lot coverage of the property, the proposed increase in the applicable area
and bulk regulations of the development, the number of additional development rights
transferred or to be transferred to the property, and whether the tract to be developed is
located within an overlay district.
26-6
3. In addition to the preliminary subdivision plan, an application shall include the following:
A. Application for apportionment and transfer of development rights on the form
provided by the Township for such application. Such application shall be signed by
both the transferor and the transferee. If the development rights which shall be used
by the developer have previously been apportioned to and severed from the sending
tract, a copy of the deed of transferable development rights which has been recorded
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds indicating the number of development rights
available and a title search demonstrating that such development rights are still held
by such person and setting forth all liens placed against them shall be included.
B. An agreement of sale for the development rights between the owner of the tract to
which development rights have been requested to be apportioned or the owner of
development rights which have been previously severed from a tract in the sending
area as evidenced by a recorded deed of transferable development rights and the
owner of the tract proposed to be developed as a residential development. The
agreement may be contingent upon conditional use approval or approval of a final
subdivision or land development plan for residential development of the tract to
which the development rights are to be transferred.
C. A metes and bounds description of the property of the owner of the land from which
the rights will be transferred and a plot plan or survey thereof, showing total acreage
of the selling owner's property, areas of land or portions thereof subject to easements
in favor of governmental agencies, utilities, and nonprofit corporations, land
restricted against development by covenant, easement or deed restriction, and land
utilized for nonagricultural use. If the development rights have previously been
apportioned to and severed from a tract in the sending area, a copy of the recorded
deed of transferable development rights shall be submitted.
D. If the agreement of sale of development rights would entail less than an entire parcel,
the portion of the parcel involved in the proposed sale of development rights shall
meet the following criteria:
(1) The portion to be deed restricted shall contain at least fifty (50) percent prime
agricultural soils;
(2) The acreage to be restricted shall be contiguous and be of a general, regular
configuration approved by the Board of Commissioners; and
(3) The portion of the parcel which will not be restricted shall be usable under the
use, area, dimensional, performance and other standards of this ordinance.
E. If the agreement of sale of development rights would entail less than an entire parcel,
the portion of the parcel from which the development rights are transferred shall be
clearly identified on a plan of the entire parcel, drawn to scale, the accuracy of which
shall be satisfactory to the Township. Such plan shall also include a notation of the
number of development rights applicable to the entire parcel, the number of
development rights applicable to the identified portion of the parcel from which the
development rights are to be transferred, and the number of development rights which
remain available to the remaining portion of the parcel.
26-7
F. If the agreement of sale of development rights would entail less than the entire
number of development rights represented by a recorded deed of transferable
development rights, the applicant shall indicate the disposition of the remaining
development rights.
G. A copy of the proposed deed of transferable development rights and declaration of
restriction of development.
H. A title search of the tract from which the transferable development rights will be
transferred sufficient to determine all owners of the tract and all lienholders. If the
development rights have previously been apportioned and severed from the tract in
the sending area, a title search of the rights set forth in the deed of transferable
development rights sufficient to determine all of the owners of the development rights
and all lienholders shall be furnished to the Township.
4. The owner of a tract in the sending area from which the development rights are to be
severed shall, by a declaration of restriction of development, totally and permanently
restrict the future development of the tract or designated portion thereof from which the
development rights are severed. The declaration of restriction of development shall be in a
form approved by the Township Solicitor. If the development rights are to be severed from
less than the entire parcel, the plan prepared in accordance with Subsection 3.E. above shall
be attached to and recorded with the declaration of restriction of development. All owners
of the tract from which development rights are severed shall execute the declaration of
restriction of development. All lienholders of the tract from which development rights are
severed shall execute a joinder and/or consent to the declaration of restriction of
development.
A. The said declaration of restriction of development shall designate the Township as a
third-party beneficiary of the restrictions imposed on the land from which the
development rights are severed, and said restrictions shall be enforceable by the
Township as such third-party beneficiary. The Township shall hold the rights granted
by the declaration of restriction of development as trustee for all of the residents of
the Township, in recognition of the right of the people to the preservation of the
natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic values of the Township and in further
recognition of the fact that these resources are the common property of all of the
residents of the Township, including generations yet to come.
B. Land from which development rights have been severed shall be permanently
restricted against development, shall continue to be owned subject to said restrictions
by the landowner, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns, and
may be continued to be used for agriculture and other uses specified in Article VI,
Agricultural District A, of this ordinance.
5. The Zoning Officer shall determine the number of development rights which shall be
permitted to be severed from the sending tract. The Zoning Officer shall also determine,
with the advice of the Township Solicitor and/or the Township Engineer, the sufficiency of
the plan indicating the portion of the sending tract restricted from future development if the
development rights from less than the entire tract shall be transferred, the declaration of
restriction of development and the deed of transferable development rights. The Zoning
26-8
Officer shall inform the owner or owners of the land from which the development rights
will be severed, and, if applicable, the developer, of his determination in writing. Any
appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer shall be filed in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code.
6. Upon receipt of a determination by the Zoning Officer, the owner or owners of the land
from which the development rights will be severed, and, if applicable, the developer or
other entity who will purchase the development rights, may present the Township with the
deed of transferable development rights for endorsement as required by Municipalities
Planning Code Section 619.1(c). No deed of transferable development rights shall be so
endorsed until the Township is presented with evidence that the declaration of restriction of
development has been approved by the Township and has been recorded with the Lancaster
County Recorder of Deeds. In lieu of presentation of proof of recording the declaration of
restriction of development, the fully executed declaration may be presented to the
Township when the deed of transferable development rights is presented for endorsement,
and the Township, at the applicant's expense, shall record both documents.
7. If the development rights shall be immediately attached to a tract in the receiving area, no
deed of transferable development rights shall be recorded before preliminary plan approval
for the development utilizing the development rights has been obtained. If the development
rights are to be retained by the owner of the sending tract from which they have been
severed or are to be transferred in gross, the deed of transferable development rights may
be recorded at any time after the recording of the declaration of restriction of development.
8. No final plan for any subdivision or land development which utilizes transferable
development rights shall be executed on behalf of the Township until the Township has
been presented with a copy of the recorded deed of transferable development rights and the
recorded declaration of restriction of development with the customary recording
information of the office of Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County clearly
endorsed thereon. In lieu of presentation of proof of recording the declaration of restriction
of development and the deed of transferable development rights, the fully executed
declaration of restriction of development may be presented to the Township with the deed
of transferable development rights for endorsement, and the Township, at the applicant's
expense, shall record both documents and then shall execute and, if applicant so desires, at
applicant's expense, shall record the final plan.
SECTION 2608. PUBLIC ACQUISITION
Manheim Township may purchase development rights and may accept ownership of
development rights through transfer by gift. Any such purchase or gift shall be accompanied by a
declaration of restriction of development as specified in Section 2605, Transfer and use of
transferable development rights. All such development rights may be resold or retired by the
Township. If transferable development rights are not available under private sale, the Board of
Commissioners may consider selling transferable development rights. Any such sale will be
based on the average cost of the last three (3) private sales.
The Township may but shall not be required to, approve an alternate method for preserving
farmland and prime agricultural soils, provided the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction
26-9
of the Board of Commissioners that the alternative method will provide equal or better results in
achieving the goal of preserving farmland and prime agricultural soils.
27-1
ARTICLE XXVII. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 2701. ZONING OFFICER
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by a Zoning Officer and any
assistants or subordinates who shall be appointed by the Township. He may be provided with the
assistance of such persons as the Township may direct. The compensation shall be determined by
the Board of Commissioners upon the recommendation of the Township Manager-Secretary.
SECTION 2702. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ZONING OFFICER
1. General. The Zoning Officer shall administer this ordinance in accordance with its legal
terms and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any change of use which
does not conform to this ordinance and to other applicable ordinances of the Township of
Manheim and to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2. Application and permits. He shall receive applications and issue permits and/or certificates
of use and occupancy for the erection, construction, alteration, repair, extension,
replacement, relocation, conversion and/or use and occupancy of any building, structure,
sign, or land in the Township.
3. Inspections. Before issuing any permit, the Zoning Officer may, at his discretion, examine
or cause to be examined all buildings, structures, signs, or land and portions thereof for
which an application has been filed for the erection, construction, alteration, repair,
extension, replacement, relocation, conversion, and/or use. Thereafter, he may make such
inspections during the completion of work for which a permit has been issued. Upon
completion of such work and before issuing a certificate of use and occupancy, a final
inspection shall be made and all violations of approved plans or permits shall be noted, and
the holder of the permit shall be notified of the discrepancies.
4. Complaints regarding violations. The Zoning Officer may, and, when in receipt of a signed
written complaint stating fully the cause and basis thereof, shall, investigate alleged
violations of this ordinance. If a signed written complaint is received, said investigation
shall be completed within thirty (30) days of said complaint. A written report of
investigation of this ordinance shall be prepared and maintained on file, with copies
provided to the Board of Commissioners and the Township Manager-Secretary.
5. Official records. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to maintain and be responsible
for all pertinent records on zoning matters in the Township. These records shall include,
but not be limited to, all applications received, copies of all permits and certificates issued,
copies of orders and findings of the Zoning Hearing Board, written complaints of alleged
violations, records of all inspections made, a current copy of this ordinance and all
amending ordinances, the official Zoning Map, and all other pertinent information. The
records of his office shall be available for the use of the Township government and for
inspection of any interested party during normal office hours. The Zoning Officer shall at
least annually submit to the Board of Commissioners a written statement of all permits and
certificates of use and occupancy issued and violations and stop-work orders recommended
or promulgated.
27-2
6. Registration of nonconforming uses. The Zoning Officer shall identify and register
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures.
SECTION 2703. PERMITS
1. Requirements. Until a permit has been obtained from the Zoning Officer, it shall be
unlawful to excavate; store material, machinery, or equipment on a lot in connection with
the erection, construction, placement, reconstruction, alteration, repair, extension,
replacement, restoration, or conversion of any structure, building, or sign; or change the
use, area of use, percentage of use or open area or displace the use of any land, structure,
building, sign, or portion thereof in the Township.
2. Form of application. The application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the
Zoning Officer may prescribe and shall be accompanied by the required fee as prescribed.
Application for a permit shall be made by a landowner or developer. The full names and
addresses of the landowner or developer and of the responsible officers, if the landowner or
developer is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
3. Description of work. The application shall contain a general description of the proposed
work and/or use and occupancy of all parts of the building, structure, or sign and such
additional information as may be required by the Zoning Officer. The application for the
permit shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed building structure or sign,
drawn to scale, with sufficient clarity to show the nature and character of the work to be
performed, including off-street parking and loading space if required, the location of new
and existing construction, and the distances of the same from the existing lot lines and
street right-of-way lines.
4. Time limit for application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be
deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing, unless, during that
six (6) month period, a permit shall have been issued, provided that reasonable extensions
of time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each may be granted at the
discretion of the Zoning Officer.
5. Issuance of permit. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning Officer shall examine the
same within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or plans do not conform to the
provisions of all pertinent laws, he shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. He shall inform the applicant of his right of appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board in the event such application is rejected. If satisfied that the proposed work or use
conforms to the provisions of this ordinance and all other pertinent laws and ordinances,
and that the certificate of use and occupancy as required herein has been properly applied
for, he shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practical.
6. Suspension of permit. The permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. Any
permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six (6)
months after issuance of the permit or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for
a period of six (6) months after the time of commencing the work.
7. Revocation of permit. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit or approval issued under
the provisions of this ordinance in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact
in the application or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based, or if it is
27-3
found that the work performed or the use to which the property is put is not in conformance
with the application, approved plans, or provisions of all pertinent laws.
8. Posting of permit. A true copy of the permit shall be kept on the site of operations and open
to inspection by the Zoning Officer during the entire time of prosecution of the work and
until the completion of same as defined in the application.
SECTION 2704. CONDITIONS OF PERMIT
1. Payment of fees. No permit shall be issued until the fees required therefor prescribed by the
Board of Commissioners pursuant to resolution shall be paid to the Township. The
payment of fees under this section shall not relieve the applicant or holder of said permit
from payment of other fees that may be required by this ordinance or by any other
ordinances or laws.
2. Compliance with ordinance. The permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and
should not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, or set aside any of the provisions of
this ordinance.
3. Compliance with permit and site plan. All work or uses shall conform to the approved
application and plans for which the permit has been issued, as well as the approved site
plan.
SECTION 2705. CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
1. When required. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure, building, land, or
portion thereof until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by the Township.
Such certificate shall not be issued unless the Township has inspected said structure,
building, or land and has determined that all provisions of this ordinance and other
pertinent ordinances and laws have been satisfied. The provisions of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance, shall not be considered to be satisfied unless all stormwater
management facilities serving the lot have been installed, inspected, and approved by the
Township or financial security to guarantee the installation of such facilities have been
posted with the Township.
2. Form of application. The application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be in such
form as the Township may prescribe and shall be made at the same time as the application
for a permit is filed with the Zoning Officer.
3. Description of use and occupancy. The application shall contain a description of the
intended use and occupancy of any structure, building, sign, or land or portion thereof for
which a permit is required herein.
4. Action upon application. The Zoning Officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected any
structure, building, sign, and/or land within 15 days after notification that the proposed
work that was listed under the permit has been completed. If he is satisfied that the work is
in conformity and in compliance with the work listed in the issued permit and all other
pertinent laws, he shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy for the intended use listed
in the approved application. If he finds that the work has not been performed in accordance
with the approved application or that the prerequisite for the issuance of the Certificate of
Use and Occupancy in Section 2705.1 have not been met, the Zoning Officer shall refuse to
27-4
issue the certificate of use and occupancy and shall, in writing, give the reasons therefor
and inform the permit holder of his right of appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
5. Availability of certificate. The certificate of use and occupancy for conforming and
nonconforming uses, or a true copy thereof, shall be kept available for inspection by the
Zoning Officer at all times.
6. Temporary certificate of use and occupancy. Upon request of a holder of a permit, the
Zoning Officer may issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for a structure,
building, sign, or land or portion thereof before the entire work covered by the permit shall
have been completed, provided that such portion or portions may be used or occupied
safely prior to full completion of the work without endangering life or public welfare. The
Zoning Officer may also issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for such
temporary uses as tents, trailers, and buildings on construction sites; use of land for
religious or other public or semipublic purposes; and similar temporary use or occupancy.
Such temporary certificates shall be for a period of time to be determined by the Zoning
Officer; however, in no case shall it be for a period exceeding six (6) months.
SECTION 2706. ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
1. General. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce this ordinance.
2. Violation. The construction, alteration, or use of any structure, building, sign, or land or the
change of use, area of use, percentage of use or displacement of the use of any structure,
building, sign, or land without first obtaining a permit; the use of any building, structure,
sign, or land without receipt of a certificate of use and occupancy; the failure to obey
and/or comply with any order, decree, or decision of either the Zoning Hearing Board,
Zoning Officer, or Board of Commissioners; or the failure to comply with any other
provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be violations of this ordinance.
3. Enforcement notice. If it appears that a violation of this ordinance or any prior ordinance
still in effect has occurred, the Zoning Officer shall send a written enforcement notice to
the owner of record of the premises on which the violation has occurred, to any person who
has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding those premises, and to
any other person who has been requested in writing by the owner of record to receive
enforcement notices. No person so served shall abandon the premises in such a condition as
to create a hazard or menace to the public safety, health, morals or welfare. Such person or
persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for restoring the premises to such
condition as the Zoning Officer may direct to avoid or abate such a hazard or menace. The
enforcement notice shall contain the following:
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the Township
intends to take action.
B. The location of the property in violation.
C. The specific violation or violations, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met and with citations in each instance to the applicable provisions of
this ordinance.
D. The date before which steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
27-5
which such steps must be completed.
E. Notice that the recipient has the right to appeal to the Manheim Township Zoning
Hearing Board within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein.
F. That failure to comply with the enforcement notice within the time specified, unless
extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation of this
ordinance and subjects the violator to the sanctions hereinafter described.
4. Enforcement remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the
violation of the provisions of this ordinance or any prior ordinance still in effect shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
Manheim Township or its duly designated representatives, pay a judgment of up to
five hundred (500) dollars, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by Manheim Township, as a result of seeking such enforcement.
B. Civil enforcement proceedings shall be commenced before any Magisterial District
Judge. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge.
C. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating this ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation. In such
event, there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. Thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
D. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, Manheim Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the violation of this
ordinance shall be paid over to Manheim Township.
E. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to grant any other person
or entity other than Manheim Township the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this section.
5. Abatement of violation.
A. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this
ordinance or any prior ordinance still in effect, Manheim Township or its duly
approved representatives or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who
shows that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of Manheim
Township any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate
such building, structure, landscaping or land or to prevent, in and about such
27-6
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
B. When any such action is instituted by a landlord, landowner or tenant, notice of that
action shall be served upon Manheim Township at least thirty (30) days prior to the
time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on Manheim Township.
No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
28-1
ARTICLE XXVIII. ZONING HEARING BOARD; ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS
SECTION 2801. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING HEARING BOARD; MEMBERSHIP;
TERMS; VACANCIES
There is hereby created a Zoning Hearing Board which shall, for the purpose of this ordinance,
be referred to as the "Board." The membership of the Board shall consist of five (5) residents of
the Township appointed by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Members of the Board
shall hold no other office in the Township. The terms of office of the Board members shall be
five (5) years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one (1) member of the Board shall
expire each year. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term.
SECTION 2802. ORGANIZATION OF ZONING HEARING BOARD
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations to govern its procedures as it may deem
necessary. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual
terms as such and may succeed themselves. Meetings of the Board shall be at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence,
the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of
all the members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the
Board. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact. The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which shall be
the property of the Township, and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of
Commissioners once a year.
SECTION 2803. HEARINGS
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning
Officer, and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall
be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Board. In
addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one (1) week prior to the hearing.
2. The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant's request,
unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
3. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may appoint any member as a
hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made
by the Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive the decision or findings by the
Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
28-2
4. The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected by the application
who has made timely appearance of record before the Board, and any other person,
including civic or community organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board
shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
5. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents
requested by the parties.
6. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the
opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse
witnesses on all relevant issues.
7. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious
evidence may be excluded.
8. The Board or hearing officer, as the case may be, shall record the proceedings
stenographically; however, stenographic recording of the proceedings may be waived by
written consent of all parties, in which case the proceedings shall be taken by a mechanical
recording device. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the
applicant and the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the person
appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and, in either event, the
cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In
other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
9. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any
party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their Solicitor, unless the
parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect
the site or its surroundings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given
an opportunity to be present.
10. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or,
when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within forty-five
(45) days after the last hearing before the Board or hearing officer. Each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons
therefore, when required by law. Conclusions based on any provisions of law or of any
ordinance, rule, or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the
reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the
hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision
or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the
parties within forty (45) days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the
Board's decision shall be entered no later than thirty (30) days after the report of the
hearing officer.
28-3
11. When the Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this section, or
fails to hold the required hearing within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant's
request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of
time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of
the Board to meet or render a decision as herein provided, the Board shall give public
notice of said decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a
decision in the same manner as provided in Section 2803.1. If the Board shall fail to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the
right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
12. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than five (5) days following
its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice
of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
SECTION 2804. JURISDICTION OF ZONING HEARING BOARD
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in the following matters:
1. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought
before the Board of Commissioners pursuant to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).
2. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged
defects in the process of enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within thirty (30) days after the effective date of said ordinance.
3. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not limited to the
granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefore, the issuance
of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure, or lot.
4. Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the Zoning Officer with
reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance.
5. Applications for variances from the terms of this ordinance and flood hazard ordinance or
such provisions within a land use ordinance.
6. Applications for special exceptions under this ordinance or floodplain or flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
7. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration of
any transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of this ordinance.
8. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section 916.2 of Act 247, as
28-4
amended.
9. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate
to development not involving applications of Articles V or VII of Act 247, as amended.
10. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to give the Zoning Hearing Board jurisdiction
to hear appeals from the decisions of the Board of Commissioners.
SECTION 2805. VARIANCES; SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
1. Variances.
A. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of
this ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board may by
rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application to the
Zoning Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property,
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this
ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore
necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property,
nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will
afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation
in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this ordinance. In
rendering its decision, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the following.
2. Special exceptions.
A. Where the Township Commissioners, in this ordinance, have stated special
exceptions to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to
expressed standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide requests for such
28-5
special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria.
B. The applicant shall have the burden of proving compliance with the following:
(1) The suitability of the property for the use desired.
(2) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect upon congestion
of streets and highways or upon traffic levels of service or any hazards arising
therefrom. The Board may require the applicant to submit a traffic study
prepared by a qualified traffic engineer to satisfy this requirement.
(3) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on the
availability of parking in the immediate area.
(4) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on existing or
proposed public water, public sewer, public transportation, police and fire
protection, public recreation, school facilities, and other public organizations
and systems.
(5) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on the health
and safety of the citizens of the Township when such use may present a danger
from fire, explosion, electrocution, pollution, asphyxiation, or other similar
dangers.
(6) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect upon adjacent
properties. Among any other effects on adjacent properties, proposed uses shall
not injure or detract from the use or enjoyment or value of the adjacent
properties.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with the appearance and general
character of the immediate vicinity.
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(9) The proposed use shall be in the best interest of the Township and for the
convenience of the community and shall not adversely affect the general
welfare of the community.
C. The Board shall impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to effect the
intent and purpose of this ordinance and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the Township, especially those citizens most directly affected by the
proposed use. These conditions may include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Any promises or representations by the applicant with respect to its use or
development of the property involved.
(2) Hours of operation.
(3) Special or additional screening or buffering, including that for solid waste
storage areas.
(4) The design and location of buildings and other structures.
28-6
(5) Restrictions on noise levels, lighting levels, odor, and other potentially noxious
effects.
(6) Restrictions on the distances of the proposed use from adjacent properties and
between buildings and structures.
(7) Restrictions on parking with respect to both number and location of vehicles or
spaces.
(8) Public safety.
(9) Safeguarding of uses on adjacent properties.
(10) Health and sanitation.
(11) Hours for loading and unloading.
(12) Traffic, street and highway improvements and controls.
SECTION 2806. PARTIES APPELLANT BEFORE BOARD
1. Appeals may be filed with the Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Township, or any person aggrieved.
2. Requests for a variance and for special exception may be filed with the Board by any
landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
SECTION 2807. TIME LIMITATIONS
1. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later than thirty (30) days
after an application for development, preliminary or final, which is within the jurisdiction
of the Board as set forth in Section 2804 hereof, has been approved by an appropriate
Township officer, agency, or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to
limit the approval in any manner, unless such person alleges and proves that he had no
notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval had been given. If such person
has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an
adverse decision on a tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a
challenge to the validity of this ordinance or the map shall preclude an appeal from a final
approval, except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
2. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be filed by the landowner
within thirty (30) days after notice of the determination is issued.
SECTION 2808. EFFECT OF BOARD'S DECISION
1. If the variance or special exception is granted or the issuance of a permit is finally
approved, or other action by the appellant is authorized, the necessary permit shall be
secured and the authorized action begun within one (1) year after the date when the
variance or special exception is finally approved or the other action by the appellant is
authorized, and the building or alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed within
two (2) years of said date. For good cause, the Board may, upon application in writing
28-7
stating the reasons therefore, extend either the one (1) year or two (2) year period.
2. Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary permits within said one (1)
year period or, having obtained the permit, should he fail to commence work thereunder
within such one (1) year period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his appeal or his application, and all
provisions, variances, and permits granted to him shall be deemed automatically rescinded
by the Board.
3. Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or alteration within said one (1)
year period but fail to complete such construction or alteration within said two (2) year
period, the Board may, upon ten (10) days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the granted
variance or the issuance of the permit or permits or any other action authorized to the
appellant or applicant, if the Board finds that no good cause appears for the failure to
complete such construction or alteration within said two (2) year period and if the Board
further finds that conditions have so altered or changed in the interval since the granting of
the variance, permit, or action that revocation or recession of the action is justified.
SECTION 2809. STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
1. Upon filing of any proceeding and during its pendency before the Board, all land
development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer
or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless the
Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals,
on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When
an application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and
proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings
before the Board.
2. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the
appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It
shall be the burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the appeal is frivolous,
it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition the court to order the appellants to
post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an
appeal is taken from a final decision of the court.
3. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the amount of the bond
shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An order denying a petition for bond shall
be interlocutory. An order directing the responding party to post a bond shall be
interlocutory.
4. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an order of the court
dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and the appellate court sustains the
28-8
order of the court below to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon
motion of the petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals,
shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses, and attorney fees incurred by the
petitioner.
SECTION 2810. JURISDICTION OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
The Board of Commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in the following matters:
1. All applications for approvals of planned residential developments.
2. All applications for approval of subdivisions or land developments. Any provision in a
subdivision and land development ordinance requiring that final action concerning
subdivision and land development applications be taken by a planning agency rather than
the Board of Commissioners shall vest exclusive jurisdiction in the planning agency in lieu
of the Board of Commissioners for purposes of the provisions of this subsection.
3. Applications for conditional uses.
A. Where the Board of Commissioners has stated conditional uses to be granted or
denied pursuant to expressed standards and criteria, the Board shall hold hearings on
and decide requests for such conditional uses in accordance with such standards and
criteria.
B. The applicant shall have the burden of proving compliance with the following:
(1) The suitability of the property for the use desired.
(2) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect upon congestion
of streets and highways or upon traffic levels of service or any hazards arising
therefrom. The Board may require the applicant to submit a traffic study
prepared by a qualified traffic engineer to satisfy this requirement.
(3) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on the
availability of parking in the immediate area.
(4) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on existing or
proposed public water, public sewer, public transportation, police and fire
protection, public recreation, school facilities, and other public organizations
and systems.
(5) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on the health
and safety of the citizens of the Township when such use may present a danger
from fire, explosion, electrocution, pollution, asphyxiation, or other similar
dangers.
(6) That the proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect upon adjacent
properties. Among any other effects on adjacent properties, proposed uses shall
not injure or detract from the use or enjoyment or value of the adjacent
properties.
28-9
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with the appearance and general
character of the immediate vicinity.
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with the Township Comprehensive Plan.
(9) The proposed use shall be in the best interest of the Township and for the
convenience of the community and shall not adversely affect the general
welfare of the community.
C. The Board shall impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to effect the
intent and purpose of this ordinance and to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Township, especially those citizens most directly affected by the
proposed use. These conditions may include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Any promise or representations by the applicant with respect to its use or
development of the property involved.
(2) Hours of operation.
(3) Special or additional screening or buffering, including solid waste storage areas.
(4) The design and location of buildings and other structures.
(5) Restrictions on noise levels, lighting levels, odor, and other potentially noxious
effects.
(6) Restrictions on distances of the proposed use from adjacent properties and
between buildings and other structures.
(7) Restrictions on parking with respect to both number and location of vehicles or
spaces.
(8) Public safety.
(9) Safeguarding of uses on adjacent properties.
(10) Health and sanitation.
(11) Hours for loading and unloading.
(12) Traffic, street, and highway improvements and controls.
4. Applications for curative amendments to this ordinance.
5. All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances. Any action on such petitions shall be
deemed legislative acts, provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed
to enlarge or diminish existing law with reference to appeals to court.
6. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the Township Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate
to application for land development. Where the applicable land use ordinance vests
jurisdiction for final administration of subdivision and land development applications in the
planning agency, all appeals from determinations under this subsection shall be to the
28-10
planning agency and all appeals from the decision of the planning agency shall be to court.
SECTION 2811. CHALLENGES TO VALIDITY OF ORDINANCE
1. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the validity of this
ordinance or the map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest shall submit the challenge either to the
Zoning Hearing Board or to the Board of Commissioners, together with a request for a
curative amendment.
2. Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of another by this
ordinance or the map, or any provision thereof, who desire to challenge its validity on
substantive grounds shall first submit their challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a
decision thereon.
3. The submissions referred to in Section 2811.1 and Section 2811.2 shall be governed by the
following:
A. In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging party shall make a
written request to the Board that it hold a hearing on its challenge. The request shall
contain the reasons for the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge the
validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by curative amendment, his
application to the Board of Commissioners shall contain, in addition to the
requirements of the written request hereof, the plans and explanatory materials
describing the use or development proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or
development permitted by the challenged ordinance or map. Such plans or other
materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary,
tentative, or final approval or for the issuance of a permit, so long as they provide
reasonable notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for
evaluating the challenged ordinance or map in light thereof. Nothing herein contained
shall preclude the landowner from first seeking a final approval before submitting his
challenge.
B. If the submission is made by the landowner to the Board of Commissioners, the
request also shall be accompanied by an amendment or amendments to this ordinance
proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
C. If the submission is made to the Board of Commissioners, the Township Solicitor
shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings.
D. The Board of Commissioners may retain an independent attorney to present the
defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its behalf and to present witnesses on
its behalf.
E. Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the Board of
Commissioners or the Zoning Board, as the case may be, shall determine whether the
challenged ordinance or map is defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge
heard by the Board of Commissioners is found to have merit, the Board of
Commissioners shall proceed. If a challenge heard by a Zoning Hearing Board is
found to have merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include
28-11
recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance which will cure the defects
found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the
amendments, plans, and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall
also consider the following:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools,
and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional
housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units
of a type actually available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of this ordinance or map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils,
slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other
natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, natural resources, and natural features, the degree to which these
are protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development, and
any adverse environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land
uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
F. The Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be, shall
render its decision within 45 days after the conclusion of the last hearing.
G. If the Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Board, as the case may be, fails to act
on the landowner's request within the time limits, a denial of the request is deemed to
have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing.
4. The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case may be, shall
commence its hearings within sixty (60) days after the request is filed, unless the
landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
5. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of this ordinance or map is
in question and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of the request,
including any plans, explanatory material, or proposed amendments, may be examined by
the public.
6. The challenge shall be deemed denied when one of the following occurs:
A. The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case may be, fails to
commence the hearing within the time limits set forth.
B. The Board of Commissioners notifies the landowner that it will not adopt the curative
amendment.
C. The Board of Commissioners adopts another curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner.
28-12
D. The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case may be, fails to
act on the request forty (45) days after the close of the last hearing on the request,
unless the time is extended by mutual consent by the landowner and municipality.
7. Where a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a curative amendment
application by the Board of Commissioners or a validity challenge is sustained by the
Zoning Hearing Board or the court acts finally on appeal from denial of a curative
amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and the proposal or challenge so approved
requires a further application for subdivision or land development, the developer shall have
two years from the date of such approval to file an application for preliminary or tentative
approval. Within the two (2) year period, no subsequent change or amendment in the
zoning, subdivision, or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or
the sustained validity challenge. Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment
application or the validity challenge is approved but does not require further application
under any subdivision or land development ordinance, the developer shall have one (1)
year within which to file for a building permit. Within the one (1) year period, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision, or other governing ordinance
or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as
granted in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During these
protected periods, the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding
such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
SECTION 2812. PROCEDURE TO OBTAIN PRELIMINARY OPINION
In order not to delay unreasonably the time when a landowner may secure assurance that this
ordinance or map under which he proposes to build is free from challenge, and recognizing that
the procedure for preliminary approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be
unavailable, the landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge to this
ordinance or map will run by the following procedure:
1. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his proposed use or
development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary opinion as to their compliance with
the applicable ordinances and maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to
meet the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative, or final approval or for the
issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use
or development and a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
2. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or development complies with
this ordinance or map, notice thereof shall be published once each week for two (2)
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. Such notice shall include a general
description of the proposed use or development and its location, by some readily
identifiable directive, and the place and times where the plans and other materials may be
examined by the public. The favorable preliminary approval and the time therein specified
for commencing a proceeding with the Board shall run from the time when the second
notice thereof has been published.
SECTION 2813. APPEALS TO COURT
All appeals from all land use decisions rendered pursuant to any proceeding under this ordinance
28-13
shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County and shall be filed within thirty
(30) days after entry of the decision or, in the case of a deemed decision, within thirty (30) days
after the date upon which notice of said deemed decision is given.
SECTION 2814. AMENDMENTS
The Board of Commissioners may from time to time, after public notice and hearing as
hereinafter prescribed, amend, supplement, change, or repeal this ordinance, including the
Zoning Map. Any amendment, supplement, change, or repeal may be initiated by the Township
Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners, or by a petition to the Board of
Commissioners. Such amendment, supplement, change, or repeal shall be submitted to the
Township Planning Commission for its recommendations and shall be specifically found by the
Board of Commissioners to be in accordance with the spirit and intent of the formally adopted
portions of the Comprehensive Plan before final action shall be taken by the Board of
Commissioners.
1. Amendments initiated by the Township Planning Commission. When an amendment,
supplement, change, or repeal is initiated by the Township Planning Commission, the
proposal shall be presented to the Board of Commissioners, who shall then proceed in the
same manner as with a petition to the Board of Commissioners, which has already been
reviewed by the Township Planning Commission.
2. Amendment initiated by the Board of Commissioners. When an amendment, supplement,
change, or repeal is initiated by the Board of Commissioners, it shall submit the proposal to
the Township Planning Commission for review and recommendations.
3. Procedure for petition. The petition for amendment, supplement, change, or repeal shall
contain as fully as possible all the information requested by the Zoning Officer and shall be
signed by at least one record owner of the property in question, whose signature shall be
notarized, attesting to the truth and correctness of all the facts and information presented in
the petition. A fee to be established by the Board of Commissioners shall be paid upon the
filing of such petition for change and for the purpose of defraying the costs of the
proceedings prescribed herein.
4. Referral to Township and Lancaster County Planning Commissions.
A. After receipt of the petition by the Board of Commissioners, said petition shall be
presented to the Township Planning Commission for review and recommendations at
least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing. A report of said review, together
with any recommendations, shall be given to the Board of Commissioners in writing
within thirty (30) days from the date of said referral. If the Township Planning
Commission shall fail to file such a report within the time and manner specified, it
shall be conclusively presumed that the Township Planning Commission has
approved the proposed amendment, supplement, change, or repeal.
B. The proposed ordinance shall also be referred to the Lancaster County Planning
Commission for recommendations in accordance with Section 609 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
5. Public hearing.
28-14
A. The Board of Commissioners shall fix a time and place for a public hearing at which
parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be published in one newspaper of general
circulation in the Township once each week for two (2) successive weeks, not more
than sixty (60) days and not less than seven (7) days prior to the date of said hearings.
B. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of said
public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Township at points deemed
sufficient by the Township along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one (1) week
prior to the date of the hearing.
6. Action by the Board of Commissioners.
A. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is
changed substantially, or is revised, to include land previously not affected by it, the
governing body shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice. Notice of
the proposed amendment must also be published at least ten (10) days prior to
enactment.
B. Within thirty (30) days of enactment, a copy of the amendment shall be forwarded to
the Lancaster County Planning Commission.
7. Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there has been a change in the boundary
of a zoning district or a reclassification of the zoning district adopted in accordance with
the above, the change on the Official Map shall be made and shall be duly certified by the
Township Manager-Secretary and shall thereafter be refiled as part of the permanent
records of the Township.
29-1
ARTICLE XXIX. VALIDITY AND SEVERANCE
If any article, section, sub-section, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence,
clause, phrase, or word in the Zoning Ordinance is declared for any reason to be illegal,
unconstitutional, or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
or impair the validity of the Zoning Ordinance as a whole, or any other article, section, subsection,
provision, regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, work, or remaining
portion of the Zoning Ordinance. The Board of Commissioners hereby declares that it would
have adopted the Zoning Ordinance and each article, section, sub-section, provision, regulations,
limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, and worked thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more of the articles, sections, sub-sections, provisions, regulations, limitations,
restrictions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words may be declared illegal, unconstitutional, or
invalid.
ARTICLE XXX. REPEALER
Any Resolution, Ordinance or part of any Resolution or Ordinance inconsistent herewith
and any amendments thereof, are hereby expressly repealed.
ARTICLE XXXI. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Zoning Ordinance shall take effect and be in force immediately upon adoption by the Board
of Commissioners of the Township of Manheim.
Duly Ordained this _______ day of ________________________, _______
ATTEST: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Township of Manheim
By
____________________________________ __________________________________
Sean P. Molchany, Secretary (Vice) Chairman, Board of Commissioners
A-i
Appendix A: Form-based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township- Lancaster County, PA
Index and Applicability
Design Element
District/Development Option
PRD T-4 T-5 T-6 D-R D-C D-A
1. Overall Goals X X X X X X X
2 Blocks X X X X X
3 Building Height X X X X X X X
4 Building Location X X X X X X
5 Common Open Space X X
- Greens, Squares and
Plazas
X X
6 Dwelling Unit Mix X
7 Garages, Private X X X X
8 Main Street X
9 Anchor Store Lot
Diagram
X X X X
10 Commercial with Drive
through Lot Diagram
X X X X X X
11 Convenience Store with
Gas Station Lot Diagram
X X X X X X
12 Parking Structures/Decks X X X X
13 Parking Location X X X X
14 Pedestrian Circulation
and Connectivity
X X X X X X X
15 Streets, Alleys & Blocks X X X X X X X
16 Streetscape and Street
Wall
X X X X X X X
X = Design Standards shall apply where the design element is proposed (i.e., if a
parking structure is not proposed as part of the PRD, the design standards are not
applicable.
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A - Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Overall Goals
1.5 This Manual shall be applied to the T-4, T-5,
T-6, and D-R Overlay Districts as well as the
PRD development option, as specified in the
applicability chart and within each district.
1.6 This Manual shall be utilized to plan, design,
construct and maintain buildings, structures,
streetscapes, and other landscapes.
1.7 The Form-Based Concepts depicted in the
places, spaces, buildings, and streetscapes
shown in this Manual shall be emulated.
1.8 This Manual shall be used in conjunction with
the full text of this Chapter and that of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
1.2 This Manual is intended to comply with Section
708-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code entitled: Manual of Written and
Graphic Design Guidelines.
1.3 This Manual is intended to help protect and
enhance the character of Manheim Township
and promote preferred development types.
1.4 This Manual is intended to depict and illustrate
the Form-Based concepts listed under
Applicability.
Precedent: Eagleview, Uwchlan Township, PA, to inspire PRD
development.
Precedent: Eagleview, Uwchlan Township, PA, to inspire the T-4 Overlay
Precedent: Main Street at Exton, West Whiteland Township, PA,
to inspire the D-R Overlay District.
A-1
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Blocks
2.1 Blocks are intended to be short, generally
rectilinear in shape, and formed by Streets and
Alleys.
2.2 A maximum perimeter length for blocks shall be
provided by T-Zone Overlay Districts or the PRD
provisions.
2.3 Where it is infeasible for block compliance
with these dimensional requirements due to
natural resource constraints or existing street
alignments, a mid-block walkway shall be
provided to connect streets which form the
block’s perimeter.
A-2
Wyndcrest, Sandy Spring, MD. A precedent for the T-3 District.
The Kentlands, Gaithersburg, MD. A precedent for the T-4 District.
Lantern Hill, Doylestown Borough, PA. A precedent for the T-5 District.
Eagleview, Uwchlan, PA. A precedent for the T-5 District.
PRD
T-4
T-4/T-5
T-5/T-6
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Building Height
3.1 Building Height is intended to vary by T-Zone
Overlay District.
3.2 Higher building heights are intended to
induce more efficient land use while providing
opportunities for a mix of uses, and providing
incentives for Transferable Development Rights
(TDRs).
3.3 Minimum building heights along Build-to Lines
are intended to define clearly recognizable
Streetscape edges.
3.4 A minimum Principal Building Height of 20 feet
or two stories shall be provided in the T-4, T-5,
T-6 and D-R Overlay Districts.
3.5 Maximum Principal Building Heights, including
those heights permitted through the purchase
of Transfer of Development Rights, shall be as
follows:
•T-4: 36 to 50 feet
•T-5 Neffsville: 36 to 50 feet
•T-5 Oregon: 55 feet
•T-6: 45 to 64 feet
•D-R: 45 to 64 feet
•D-A: 35 to 55 feet
•D-C: 45 - 55 feet
3.6 All buildings within the Airport Hazard Area shall
comply with the specific height requirements of
this District.
In the 1960’s, a 3-story mixed-use structure formerly located
in Neffsville (above) was replaced with a 1-story structure (below)
which is incapable of defining a public streetscape edge
3-story mixed-use structures successfully define a
Streetscape at Richmond Square
A 6-story structure at College Row, Lancaster City, incorporates
mixed uses and efficient land utilization
A-3
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Building Location
4.3 New buildings shall be placed at Build-to Lines
in accordance with T-Zone Overlay Districts.
Build-to lines shall be established by block and
shall fall within the following ranges:
•T-4: 10 to 25 feet •D-A: 15 to 25 feet
•T-5: 10 to 20 feet •D-R: 15 to 25 feet
•T-6: 8 to 15 feet •D-C: 15 to 25 feet
4.4 New buildings on corner lots shall be placed
along both Build-to Lines unless an approved
Green, Plaza, or Square is provided at the same
street corner.
4.5 At least 60% of an individual building facade
shall be located along the Build-To Line. Up to
40% of the facade may be offset from the Buildto
Line by a maximum of four (4) feet in order
to provide architectural recesses, projections, or
open space, and to provide visual diversity and
architectural enhancement.
4.6 Where a building is constructed at a Build-to
Line, but does not extend the full length of a
lot, a Street Edge Treatment shall complete the
remainder of the Build-to Line otherwise formed
by a facade, except where access lanes and
walkways shall exist.
4.7 To further induce visual diversity, up to 10%
of buildings on a block may be offset from the
Build-to Line a maximum of two (2) feet in either
direction.
4.1 Buildings are intended to be located close to
sidewalks and in general alignment with other
buildings on a block.
4.2 Defining a pedestrian friendly Streetscape,
buildings located along a Build-to Line are
intended to form a Street Wall.
Buildings in Alignment along Build-to Lines in the Village of Neffsville
Buildings located at Build-to Line near the Village of Eden (c. 1920)
A-4
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Common Open Space
Overview
5.1 Common Open Space is intended to be in the
form of the following Open Space types:
• Plazas;
• Greens or Squares;
• Mini-Parks or Play Areas; and
• Neighborhood Parks.
5.2 Provide Common Open Spaces throughout
proposed neighborhoods and revitalized areas
of Manheim Towhship.
Common Open Spaces shall be sized as
follows:
• Plaza: 1,000 square feet or larger
• Green or Square: 3,000 square feet or
larger
• Mini-Park or Play Area: 10,000 square
feet or larger; and
• Neighborhood Park: 2 acres or larger.
5.3 There shall be at least one (1) open space type
located within 1,500 feet of 90% of all dwelling
units within a new neighborhood.
5.4 Active recreation shall be provided within one
or more of these open space types at a rate of
5% of the total required open space or 1 acre,
whichever is greater.
Plaza
Green/Square
Mini-Park/Play Area
Neighborhood Park
A-5
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Common Open Space
5.5 A plaza is intended to be a predominantly
paved space located in a neighborhood center
or Main Street Area.
5.6 Plazas which are approximately 1,000 to 3,000
square feet in size shall be created.
5.7 Plazas shall be paved with brick, flagstone, or
like materials.
5.8 Plazas shall be embellished with benches,
plantings, lighting, and civic art.
Plazas
Plaza located at former Neffsville Post Office (c. 1940)
Plaza located in State College, PA
Plaza located at Kentlands in Gaithersburg, MD
A-5.1
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Common Open Space
Greens and Squares
5.9 A Green or Square is intended to be a primarily
rectilinear open space physically defined by
walkways, streets, and architectural edges.
5.10 Greens and Squares which are approximately
3,000 to 10,000 square feet in size shall be
created.
5.11 Greens and Squares shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained as predominantly
level areas (less than 5% slope).
5.12 Greens and Squares shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained as combined
paved and landscaped spaces.
5.13 Greens and Squares shall be embellished with
benches, pavilions, lighting, plantings, and the
like.
Neffsville’s former Green located in front of the original high
school (c. 1931)
Residential Green located in Glen Mills, PA
Legacy Village Green located in Cleveland, OH
A-5.2
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Common Open Space
Mini-Parks and Play Areas
5.14 Mini-Parks and Play Areas are intended to
provide both active and passive recreational
opportunities.
Former Mini-Park consisting of wading pool and pavilion located in
Grandview Heights (c. 1930)
Mini-Park located at Kissel Hill Commons
Play Area located at 6th Ward Memorial Park, Lancaster City
5.15 Mini-Parks and Play Areas which are
approximately 10,000 square feet to two (2)
acres in size shall be created.
5.16 Mini-Parks and Play Areas with benches, play
equipment, lighting, shade trees, other plantings
gazebos and/or pavilions shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained.
5.17 Existing natural and cultural resources present
at sites of proposed Mini-Parks and Play Areas
shall be preserved.
A-5.3
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Common Open Space
Neighborhood Parks
5.18 Neighborhood Parks are intended to be
diversified open space amenities accessible
from each proposed and existing Manheim
Township neighborhood.
5.19 Neighborhood Parks which are approximately
two (2) or more acres in size shall be created.
5.20 Neighborhood Parks shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance
with National Recreation and Park Association
(NRPA) Standards and Guidelines (http://www.
nrpa.org).
5.21 Existing natural and cultural resources present
at sites of proposed Neighborhood Parks shall
be preserved.
Jaycee Park includes 2.4 acres dedicated to both passive and
active recreation
A Neighborhood Park located in Exton, PA
Perelman Park includes 5.1 acres dedicated to passive recreation
and riverfront access
Former Paper Mill located at the present site of Perelman
Park and adjacent to the Conestoga River
A-5.4
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Dwelling Unit Mix
6.1 A diverse mix of Dwelling Unit types is intended
to be provided in each neighborhood.
6.2 Dwelling Units of various types are intended
to be intermingled rather than isolated into
separate Neighborhood sections.
6.3 New Neighborhoods shall include a minimum
of two (2) Dwelling Unit types, where each
type comprises a minimum of 40% of the total
unit mix. Single family detached units are not
required.
6.4 Where (3) three or more Dwelling Unit types
are proposed, there shall be a 40% maximum
of any one type, and no minimum.
6.5 A minimum of 10% of neighborhood blocks
shall include at least two (2) Dwelling Unit
types.
6.6 Dwelling unit types shall be intermingled
throughout the development, and where
applicable, mixed into the commercial core, so
that no type is isolated in a particular area of
the development.
A-6
Mixed-use “Live-Work” buildings adjacent to a residential
neighborhood at Eagleview, Uwchlan Township, PA.
Intermingled Dwelling Units, Lantern Hill TND
Larger Manor House, Lantern Hill TND.
Attached units surrounded by single-family detached and semidetached
dwellings, Weatherstone TND.
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Private Garages
7.1 A Garage is intended to be either an accessory
structure or a portion of a structure, incidental to
a principal dwelling, and less visually prominent
than a principal dwelling.
7.2 Garages, whether attached or detached, are
intended to be set back from the primary facade
of a Dwelling Unit and, to the greatest extent
feasible, accessed via alleys in order to minimize
disruption to the Streetscape and pedestrian
network.
7.3 Attached, front-loaded Garages shall be set
back a minimum of 15 feet from a primary
facade’s vertical plane.
7.4 Detached, front-loaded Garages shall be set
back a minimum of 40 feet from a street rightof-
way.
7.5 Rear-loaded Garages shall be set back a
minimum of 8 feet from an alley.
A-7
Detached, Rear-loaded Garages in Grandview Heights
Attached, Rear-loaded Garages at Brighton
Front loaded garages at Worthington
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Main Street Environment
8.1 A Main Street type environment is intended to
serve as the focal point of a neighborhood.
8.2 Main Street is intended to comprised of a mix
of commercial, residential and public and semipublic
uses in a pedestrian friendly setting.
8.3 The blocks that comprise Main Street shall be
designed for a mix of commercial, residential
and public and semi-public uses set in a series
of attached and detached buildings located
along the build-to line.
8.4 At least 25% of the buildings along Main Street
shall have a minimum of two stories; all buildings
shall have a minimum height of 20 feet.
8.5 Buildings and/or fences/walls shall line the entire
length of the Street Wall along Main Street,
except along curb cuts.
8.6 Off-street parking is prohibited to be located
along the corners of Main Street.
8.7 Main Street shall provide on-street parking
with off-street parking to the sides and rear of
buildings.
8.8 Main Street shall provide opportunities for
second floor apartments or offices located above
commercial.
8.9 When large format commercial, commercial
with drive-through service, or convenience
stores with fueling stations are located along
Main Street, the buildings shall comply with lot
diagram concepts shown on the following pages.
A-8
Main Street Environment in Exton, PA
Appendix A - Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Main Street Environment
Large format Retail
Anchor Store along Main Street
A-9
Appendix A - Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Main Street Environment
Commercial with Drive-through (Corner location)
Drive-thru Restaurant or Bank on a Corner
(Building “Anchors” Corner)
A-10
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Convenience Store with Gas Station
A-11
Convenience Store with Fuel Pumps
(Building “Anchors” Corner)
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Parking Structures/Decks
A-12
Structured parking with liner uses maintains build-to line.
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Parking Location
13.1 Off-Street Parking is intended to be located to
the rear of buildings, or to the side of buildings,
where necessary.
13.2 Off-street parking is intended to be accessed via
Alleys to the greatest extent feasible to minimize
curb cuts and preserve the streetscape.
13.3 On-Street Parking is intended to provide
necessary parking spaces, while buffering
pedestrians from passing vehicular traffic.
13.4 Off-Street Parking shall be located to the rear of
buildings, or behind the Build-to Line if side yard
location is necessary due to site configuration.
13.5 Off-Street Parking lots shall not be located at
street corners along designated Main Streets.
13.6 Off-Street Parking lots and garages shall be
accessed via Alleys, unless Alley construction is
not feasible due to site configuration.
13.7 On-Street Parking shall be provided where
feasible, and where necessary to meet parking
needs of adjoining land uses.
Parked vehicles buffer pedestrians from vehicular traffic in Lititz, PA
Off-Street Garage Parking Areas in Glen Mills, PA
Access drives to hidden rear Parking Areas located in the Village of Neffsville
A-13
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Pedestrian Circulation & Connectivity
14.1 Sidewalks, crosswalks, walkways, and linear
trails are intended to create a viable network for
walking as an alternative to vehicular travel, and
as a form of recreation.
14.2 A continuous pedestrian network is intended to
link community facilities, shopping areas, new
and existing neighborhoods, parks, recreation
areas and other open spaces.
14.3 Sidewalks shall be at least five (5) feet in width in
residential areas, and a minimum of ten (10) feet
in width in non-residential or mixed-use areas.
14.4 Sidewalks and walkways shall be installed along
a minimum of one side of all streets in T-Zone
Overlay Districts, and both sides of all streets
where feasible in terms of natural resource
constraints or site conditions.
14.5 At least five (5) feet of clear pedestrian walkway
shall be maintained where outdoor dining is
proposed.
14.6 Sidewalk paving materials designed to
accommodate both pedestrian and motorists
shall extend across driveway/accessway
aprons.
14.7 Sidewalks shall be connected using crosswalks
where appropriate.
14.8 Crosswalks shall be six (6) to ten (10) feet in
width.
A-14
Pedestrian Crosswalk in Lancaster, PA
Generously proportioned Sidewalk in Lititz, PA
An informal trail through Open Space
Walkway at Overlook Park
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Streets, Alleys & Blocks
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
15.1 Blocks are intended to be the principal organizing
feature of a neighborhood.
15.2 Streets and Alleys are intended to form blocks.
15.3 An interconnected network of Streets and Alleys
is intended to enhance pedestrian and vehicular
circulation.
15.4 Neighborhoods shall be created with a
Traditional Block pattern formed by Streets and
Alleys.
15.5 An interconnected network of Streets and Alleys,
that extends existing streets and alleys where
possible, shall be provided and maintained.
15.6 Proposed developments in the T-4, T-5, T-6,
and D-R, D-C and D-A Overlay Districts shall
connect to the existing street network in at least
two (2) locations.
15.7 Proposed Streets and Alleys shall preserve and
connect to the traditional, existing Street and
Alley Network in T-6 Overlay District.
A-15
Traditional Netowrk of Streets and Alleys form blocks in Grandview Heights
Legislative Intent
Design Standards
Appendix A: Form Based Code
General Manual of Written and Graphic Design Standards
Manheim Township - Lancaster County - Pennsylvania
Streetscape & Street Walls
16.1 The Streetscape is intended to be defined by
buildings, street trees, sidewalks, and/or Street
Edge Treatments that form Street Walls near
sidewalks.
16.2 The Streetscape is intended to be enhanced
with such features as street trees, street lights,
sidewalks, porches, fences, and like-type
amenities.
16.3 Street Walls, with buildings located in alignment
and close to the sidewalk, shall be established
and maintained.
16.4 Where existing buildings do not form a Street
Wall, a Street Edge Treatment, such as a fence,
hedge, piers, or a low, free-standing wall shall be
installed and maintained along the Build-to Line.
16.5 The Streetscape shall be embellished with street
trees, street lights, porches, fences, and/or other
front yard amenities.
16.6 Streetscape width shall range in size from 60
feet to 110 feet.
A Streetscape physically defined by Buildings, Street Trees, Sidewalks, and Cartway
Buildings and Fences defined the Streetscape Edge in the
Village of Neffsville (c. 1900)
Streetscape Edge Treatments including Walls and Fences defined
the Streetscape Edge in the Village of Oregon (c. 1800’s)
Street Wall created by aligned homes Lititz, PA
A-16








D-1
T-3 Zone: Weatherstone
West Vincent Township - Chester County, PA
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Weatherstone is a 300-acre tract with 195 acres in
permanent Open Space, and 105 acres designated
for a compact, walkable neighborhood.
1.
Total Acres: 300.0
Residential: 273 Single-Family Units
Neighborhood Core: 240,000 SF
Open Space: 195.0 Acres
Residential Lot Area: 7,200 -11,700 SF
D-2
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
The neighborhood center is home to the Henrietta
Hankin Library, and a future commercial core
(awaiting the anchor/grocery store tenant).
Single-family detached homes have rear
garages, many accessed off alleys. Front
porches serve as an attractive element along the
Streetscape.
A variety of small plazas and greens are
dispersed throughout the neighborhood near
Rts. 100 & 401.
2.
3.
4.
T-3 Zone: Weatherstone
West Vincent Township - Chester County, PA
D-3
T-4 Zone: Lantern Hill TND Doylestown Borough - Bucks County, PA
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Total Acres: 19.0
Residential: 117 Townhomes
Office/Retail: 72,000 Square Feet
Open Space: Approx. 3.5 Acres
Residential Lot Area: 4,200 -7,000 SF
Greens and neighborhood open spaces provide
scenic amenities and serve as gathering areas
for special events.
Lantern Hill was enabled by a TND-1 Zoning
Ordinance Amendment.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Rear alleys encourage a pedestrian-oriented
Streetscape. As garages are located behind
homes, curb cuts are minimized, and the
aesthetics of the neighborhood are improved.
Building types, such as Duplexes, Townhomes
and a few Single-Family Detached Units, are
emblematic of Doylestown Borough.
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
T-4 Zone: Lantern Hill TND
Doylestown Borough - Bucks County, PA
D-4
On-street parking provides additional spaces
for guests, creates a “buffer” for pedestrians,
and increases safety along the sidewalk.
An interconnected network of streets,
sidewalks and paths improves circulation, and
provides safe pedestrian access to nearby
destinations.
A mix of nearby commercial uses, such as
a bank, retail shops, and offices, provides
amenities and destinations within walking
distance of residences.
Sidewalks, street trees, pedestrian-scale
lighting, and porches located close to the
sidewalk create a cohesive Streetscape and
give homes a charming curb appeal.
5.
6.
7.
8.
D-5
T-5 Village Zone: Eagleview
Uwchlan Township - Chester County, PA
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Eagleview is a diverse mixed-use
development with a variety of residential
neighborhoods, offices, retail shops, and
civic amenities.
Each neighborhood has its own character,
and offers a different housing type, such as
Townhome, Apartment, Duplex, or Single-
Family Detached Unit.
1.
2.
Total Acres: Approx. 800
Residential: Approx. 600 Units
Commercial: 535 Acres
D-6
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Lots with a minimum of 6,500 SF are permitted
for single-family dwellings, and one-way alleys
are permitted to be 12 feet wide in residential
neighborhoods.
Open Space consists of preserved areas, plazas,
outdoor dining and gathering areas, and active
and passive recreation areas.
Parking is either located to the rear of buildings,
or recessed away from the road; buildings with
attractive front porches are located close to the
street. These elements combine to create vibrant
Streetscapes uninterrupted by curb cuts or gaps
in the building line.
3.
5.
4.
T-5 Village Zone: Eagleview
Uwchlan Township - Chester County, PA
D-7
T-6 Zone: Urban Villages- City of St. Paul, Minnesota
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Six brownfield sites along the Mississippi River
were rezoned to permit traditional neighborhood
development and encourage infill.
A minimum building height of two stories helped
to establish the street wall and create an “outdoor
room”. Vertical integration of uses was encouraged
through permitted building heights of four to six
stories.
1.
2.
Ground floor commercial uses with residential
or office uses above are a more effective use of
land and infrastructure and help to create the village
feel.
3.
D-8
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Liner shops along the ground floor maintain
the pedestrian friendly streetscape.
The Bicentennial Parking Garage demonstrates
how parking structures can be attractively
integrated into an existing streetscape by:
- maintaining the established build-to line; and
- emulating the architectural massing and details
of surrounding buildings, including bay widths,
size and rhythm of window openings, cornices,
and varied roof lines.
T-6/D-Retrofit Zone: Bicentennial Garage
West Chester Borough - Chester County, PA
2.
1.
D-9
D- Retrofit Zone: Main Street at Exton
West Whiteland Township - Chester County, PA
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Total Acres: 143.0
Commercial:Approx. 800,000 SF
Residential: 165 Apartments (Approved)
Main Street at Exton is a compact, mixeduse,
walkable destination consisting of retail
shops, restaurants, and open space. Approved
residential units, and potential live-work units
lining the main corridor will complete the Town
Center concept.
1.
D-10
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Numerous outdoor spaces provide opportunities
for dining, gathering, and play. Attention to
Streetscape details such as lighting, bollards,
and paving creates an attractive, comfortable
space with distinctive character.
Preservation of historic buildings, heirloom trees,
and large areas of open space maintain the fabric
of the local landscape and provide a meaningful
context for the site.
The well-designed Streetscape consists of an
intact “Street Wall” with 2-story buildings located
close to the sidewalk, on-street parking, and
narrow streets.
D- Retrofit Zone: Main Street at Exton
West Whiteland Township - Chester County, PA
2.
3.
4.
D-11
T-6/D- Retrofit Zone: Sharples Works
West Chester Borough- Chester County, PA
Appendix D - Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance
Nestled among residential neighborhoods,
Sharples Works originally housed a cream
separator for the dairy industry. The complex
dating from the 1890’s has been adaptively
reused as a unique, upscale apartment complex
with 155 units.
In addition to the residential units, several
original buildings are maintained to
accommodate the required onsite parking.
1.
2.

i
FLOODPLAIN
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS ....................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 101. TITLE ................................................................................................. 1-1
SECTION 102. PURPOSE ........................................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 103. ENACTMENT AUTHORITY AND RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING
ORDINANCE ..................................................................................... 1-2
SECTION 104. COMPATIBILITY WITH PERMITS AND OTHER PROVISIONS1-2
SECTION 105. SEVERABILITY ............................................................................... 1-2
SECTION 106. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY ................................................................. 1-3
SECTION 107. REPEALS AND CONTINUATION OF PRIOR REGULATIONS .. 1-3
ARTICLE II. TERMINOLOGY ...................................................................................... 2-1
SECTION 201. INTERPRETATION AND WORD USAGE ..................................... 2-1
SECTION 202. SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES ............................................... 2-1
ARTICLE III. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS ............................................................ 3-1
SECTION 301. IDENTIFICATION OF ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR
FLOODPLAIN AREAS ..................................................................... 3-1
SECTION 302. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES AND VARIANCES ........................ 3-2
SECTION 303. PERMITTED USES ........................................................................... 3-4
SECTION 304. USES ALLOWED BY CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL BY THE
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ...................................................... 3-5
SECTION 305. PROHIBITED USES .......................................................................... 3-9
SECTION 306. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES IN FLOODPLAIN
AREA ............................................................................................... 3-12
SECTION 307. DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS .......................... 3-13
ARTICLE IV. ADMINSTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ........................................ 4-1
SECTION 401. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR ................................................. 4-1
SECTION 402. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN
ADMINISTRATOR ........................................................................... 4-1
SECTION 403. PERMIT ............................................................................................. 4-2
SECTION 404. ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY, AND REMEDY ............................. 4-5
SECTION 405. EFFECTIVE DATE ........................................................................... 4-5
1-1
FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE
OF
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP – 2015
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING RULES, REGULATIONS AND
STANDARDS, GOVERNING FLOODPLAINS WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP
OF MANHEIM, SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURES TO BE
FOLLOWED BY THE OFFICIALS OF THE TOWNSHIP IN APPLYING
AND ADMINSTERING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS AND
STANDARDS AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION
THEREOF.
BE AND HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of
COMMISSIONERS of Manheim TOWNSHIP, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania as follows:
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101. TITLE
This ORDINANCE shall be known and shall be cited as "The FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE of
Manheim TOWNSHIP, as amended”.
SECTION 102. PURPOSE
The FLOODPLAIN regulations are enacted to reflect the policy goals of Manheim TOWNSHIP,
as set forth in the Manheim TOWNSHIP COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The FLOODPLAIN
regulations are enacted for the following purposes.
1. To promote, protect, and facilitate the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the residents of the TOWNSHIP.
2. To control accelerated RUNOFF and EROSION and sedimentation problems at their
source by regulating activities which cause such problems.
3. To utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems within the
TOWNSHIP.
4. To maintain the existing flows and quality of WATERCOURSES in the TOWNSHIP and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
5. To preserve and restore the FLOOD carrying capacity of WATERCOURSES.
1-2
6. To regulate uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENT which, acting alone or in combination
with other existing or future uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENT, will cause
unacceptable increases in FLOOD heights, velocities and frequencies.
7. To restrict or prohibit certain uses, activities and DEVELOPMENTS that do occur in
FLOOD-prone AREAS to be protected or FLOODPROOFED against FLOODING and
FLOOD damage.
8. To protect individuals from buying lands and STRUCTURES which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of FLOOD hazards.
SECTION 103. ENACTMENT AUTHORITY AND RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING
ORDINANCE
1. This ORDINANCE is enacted under the authority of the Flood Plain Management Act,
of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, as amended, 32 P.S. §679.101 et seq., and the
Pennsylvania MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC), Act of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted, 53 P.S. §10101 et seq.
2. This ORDINANCE shall be considered a supplement to the Zoning Ordinance of
Manheim Township, as amended, and shall incorporate all provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance which are not expressly varied by the specific terms and requirements of this
ORDINANCE, including but not limited to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
governing permits, administration, enforcement and remedies.
SECTION 104. COMPATIBILITY WITH PERMITS AND OTHER PROVISIONS
Approvals issued pursuant to this ORDINANCE do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility
to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act or ordinance. If more stringent requirements concerning regulation of the ONE-HUNDRED
(100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN are contained in these permits or approvals, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
SECTION 105. SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ORDINANCE are severable, and if any section, sentence, clause, part or
provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, any such decision of such court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections,
sentences, clauses, parts or provisions of this ORDINANCE; and it is hereby declared to be the
intention of the COMMISSIONERS that this ORDINANCE would have been enacted as if such
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part of provision had not been
included herein.
1-3
SECTION 106. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
The granting of a permit or the making of any other administrative decision under this
ORDINANCE, shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by
Manheim TOWNSHIP or by any official, agent, or employee thereof, of the practicability or
safety of any STRUCTURE, use, or other plan proposed with respect to damage from FLOOD
or otherwise, and shall create no liability upon, or a cause of action against, such public body,
official, agent or employee for any FLOOD damage that may result pursuant thereto or as a result
of reliance on this ORDINANCE. There is also no assurance that lands not included in the
FLOODPLAIN Zone are now or ever will be free from FLOODING or FLOOD damage.
SECTION 107. REPEALS AND CONTINUATION OF PRIOR REGULATIONS
Except as otherwise required by this ORDINANCE, it is intended as a continuation of, and not a
repeal of, existing regulations governing the subject matter. To the extent that this ORDINANCE
restates regulations contained in ordinances previously enacted by the COMMISSIONERS, this
ORDINANCE shall be considered a restatement and not a repeal of such regulations. It is the
specific intent of the COMMISSIONERS that all provisions of this ORDINANCE shall be
considered in full force and effect as of the date such regulations were initially enacted. All
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this ORDINANCE are
hereby repealed. It is expressly provided that the provisions of this ORDINANCE shall not affect
any act done, contract executed, or liability incurred prior to its effective date, or affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any rights, rules, regulations, or ordinances,
or part thereof, or to punish any VIOLATION which occurred under any prior regulation or
ordinance. In the event any VIOLATION has occurred under any prior ordinance governing the
subject matter, prosecution may be initiated against the alleged offender pursuant to the
provisions of said prior ordinance, and the provisions and penalties provided in said ordinance
shall remain effective as to such VIOLATION.
2-1
ARTICLE II. TERMINOLOGY
SECTION 201. INTERPRETATION AND WORD USAGE
1. Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be interpreted and
construed throughout this ORDINANCE to have the meaning herein indicated. Terms
not herein defined and defined in the Subdivision and Land DEVELOPMENT Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance, or STORMWATER MANAGEMENT Ordinance shall have the
meanings assigned in such ordinances.
2. The following rules of CONSTRUCTION and interpretation shall be used in this
ORDINANCE.
A. Words in the present tense may imply the future tense.
B. Words used in singular imply the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
C. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter genders.
D. The word “person” includes a partnership, firm, association, corporation,
organization, trust, estate, company or any other legally recognized entity as well
as an individual and the officers of any corporation and the members of any
partnership and shall include both singular and plural.
E. The word “shall” or “must” is to be interpreted as mandatory; the word “may” is
discretionary.
F. References to codes, ordinances, resolutions, plans, maps, governmental bodies,
commissions or agencies or officials are to codes, ordinances, resolutions, plans,
maps, governmental bodies, commissions or agencies or officials of the
TOWNSHIP or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as in effect or office from
time to time including amendments thereto or revisions or successors thereof,
unless the text indicates another reference is intended.
G. Terms not defined in this ORDINANCE, in such other ordinances, or in § 107 of
the MPC shall have the meaning assigned to them in the most recent edition of
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary.
SECTION 202. SPECIFIC WORDS AND PHRASES
Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be interpreted and construed
throughout this ORDINANCE to have the meaning herein indicated.
ACCESS DRIVE - A private drive providing pedestrian and vehicular access between a public
or private street and a PARKING AREA(S) within a land DEVELOPMENT and any
DRIVEWAY servicing two or more units of occupancy on a single lot or contiguous lots. The
2-2
ACCESS DRIVE is not intended to include any portion of the travel lane abutting PARKING
AREAS.
ACT - The Flood Plain Management Act, Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, as amended,
32 P.S. §679.101 et. seq., and all regulations promulgated thereunder.
AGRICULTURE - The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry, horticulture, and
gardening, including the keeping or raising of livestock including the sale of crops and
agricultural, dairy and horticultural farm products incidental to the operation of a farm.
APPROVED - Approved by the recognized authoritative agency or official as specified in the
respective regulations.
AREA - The extent of surface contained within the boundaries or extremities of land or
BUILDING.
BASEMENT - That portion of a BUILDING that is partly or completely below GRADE.
BASE FLOOD - A FLOOD which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. See also ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation shown on the FLOOD INSURANCE RATE
MAP (FIRM) for Zones AE and AH that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a
FLOOD that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BIKE PATH - A PATHWAY that is exclusively used by bicyclists, where a separate, parallel
path is provided for pedestrians and other wheeled users. Most PATHWAYS are shared between
bicyclists and other users. See also PATHWAYS.
BRIDGE - An enclosed water carrying STRUCTURE of one (1) or more openings having a
combined span of eight (8) feet or greater.
BUILDING - Any STRUCTURE used for a resident, business, industry, or other public or private
purpose, or accessory thereto, and including porches, greenhouses, stables, garages, roadside
stands, MOBILE HOMES and similar STRUCTURES, whether stationary or movable, but
excluding fences and walls which are part of the landscaping, signs and awnings.
CHANNEL - A natural or artificial WATERCOURSE with a definite bed and banks which
confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
COMMISSIONERS - The Board of Commissioners of the TOWNSHIP of Manheim, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
2-3
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE - A space which will remain totally dry during FLOODING; the
STRUCTURE is designed and constructed to prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
[Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17].
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The Comprehensive Plan for Manheim Township March 2010, and
any amendments thereto, indicating the general locations recommended for circulation facilities,
community IMPROVEMENTS and land uses.
CONSERVATION PLAN - A plan for AGRICULTURE land that includes maps and narrative
and includes at a minimum an EROSION and Sedimentation Control Plan as required by Chapter
102 of DEP regulations and APPROVED by the Lancaster County Conservation District.
CONSTRUCTION - The Construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion,
alteration, or relocation of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE, including the placement of MOBILE
HOMES.
CULVERT - An enclosed water carrying STRUCTURE of one (1) or more openings having a
combined span including spacing between openings equal to or less than twenty (20) feet.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA (DCED) - The Department of Community and
Economic Development of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any agency successor thereto.
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (DHUD) – The Department
of Housing and Urban Development or any agency successor thereto.
DEVELOPER - Any LANDOWNER, agent of such LANDOWNER or tenant with the
permission of such LANDOWNER, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a
land DEVELOPMENT, or other activities covered by this ORDINANCE.
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but
not limited to BUILDINGS or other STRUCTURES, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations, and the storage of material or equipment. This includes
redevelopment.
DRIVEWAY - An improved private cartway designed and constructed to provide vehicular and
pedestrian movement between a public or private road and a tract of land.
DWELLING - A BUILDING permanently erected on and attached to a foundation, having a
fixed location on the ground, and used for residential occupancy, which BUILDING when so
erected and attached, shall, in the normal frame of referenced, be immobile. Hospitals, hotels,
boarding, rooming and lodging houses, institutional homes, motels, tourist courts, and the like,
offering overnight accommodations for guests or patients, shall not be considered DWELLINGS
within the meaning of this ORDINANCE. In addition, in order to qualify as a DWELLING, all
of the following standards and conditions must be complied with:
2-4
A. The foundation for the DWELLING shall be an entire perimeter wall, either of concrete
or masonry CONSTRUCTION, extending from below the frost line to the underside of
the DWELLING;
B. The DWELLING must be attached to the foundation wall by anchor bolts or similar
attachments APPROVED by the TOWNSHIP as contrasted with the mere setting of the
DWELLING unit on the foundation wall system;
C. In the event the DWELLING formerly was a MOBILE HOME as defined herein, the
entire running gear, as contrasted with just the wheels, must be removed, and;
D. Any towing hitch must be removed from the DWELLING.
ENGINEER - A professional ENGINEER registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION - The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind
or chemical action.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE - A space which will remain dry during FLOODING, except for
the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the STRUCTURE is substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. [Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17].
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) - The United States Federal
Emergency Management Agency or any agency successor thereto.
FILL - Material placed or deposited so as to form an embankment or raise the surface elevation
of the land, including but not limited to levees, bulkheads, dikes, jetties, embankments, and
causeways.
FLOOD, FLOODED, OR FLOODING - A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land AREAS from the overflow of a WATERCOURSE or
other body of surface water, or from the unusual and rapid accumulation or RUNOFF of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - The official map on which the FEDERAL
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY has delineated both the AREAS of SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARDS and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) - The official report provided by the FEDERAL
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY that includes FLOOD profiles, the FLOOD
INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM), the FLOOD Boundary and FLOODWAY map, and the
water surface elevation of the BASE FLOOD.
FLOODPLAIN - An AREA of land adjacent to the CHANNEL of a WATERCOURSE which
has been or is likely to be FLOODED, or any AREA subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation or RUNOFF of surface waters from any source, or as defined by FEMA.
2-5
FLOODPROOF, FLOODPROOFED, OR FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural
and nonstructural provisions, additions, changes or adjustments to STRUCTURES or contents
which are designed or adapted primarily to reduce or eliminate FLOOD damage to those
STRUCTURES or contents.
FLOODWAY - FEMA regulated term within a CHANNEL of a river or other WATERCOURSE
and the adjacent land AREAS that must be reserved per FEMA regulations in order to discharge
the BASE FLOOD without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
(1) foot.
GRADE - A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the
BUILDING at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior
walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the AREA between the
BUILDING and the lot line or, when the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the BUILDING,
between the BUILDING and a point six (6) feet from the BUILDING. Also, the slope of a road
CHANNEL or natural ground specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE - The process by which water from above the ground surface
is added to the saturated zone of an aquifer, either directly or indirectly.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL - Materials which are identified and listed in the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 40, Part 261, latest edition, and RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL. Also included
are floatable materials with the potential to cause physical damage, such as logs, storage tanks
and large containers.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Any STRUCTURE that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been APPROVED by the Secretary of Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(1) By an APPROVED state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior
or
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without APPROVED programs.
2-6
IMPROVEMENT - Physical changes to the land, including, but not limited to BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES, grading, paving, curbs, gutters, STORM SEWERS and drains,
IMPROVEMENTS to existing WATERCOURSES, sidewalks, street, signs, monuments, water
supply facilities and sewage disposal facilities.
LANDOWNER - The legal, beneficial or equitable owner or owners of land including the holder
of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee if authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the LANDOWNER, or
other persons having a proprietary interest in land.
LOWEST FLOOR - The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed AREA (including
BASEMENT). An unfinished or FLOOD resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of
vehicles, BUILDING access or storage in an AREA other than a BASEMENT AREA is not
considered a BUILDING’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the STRUCTURE, in VIOLATION of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this ORDINANCE.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A fully pre-fabricated transportable, single-family detached
DWELLING unit intended for household occupancy contained in one (1) or more units designed
to be joined into one (1) integral unit, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and household furnishings.
It shall be constructed as required by the UCC and shall be placed on a permanent foundation
with the same, or equivalent, electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities as for a conventional
stick-built single-family detached DWELLING. A MANUFACTURED HOME includes any
addition or accessory STRUCTURE such as porches, sheds, or decks, which are attached to it.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a MOBILE HOME or
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more MANUFACTURED HOME lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL - The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, using the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988.
MOBILE HOME - A transportable, single family DWELLING intended for permanent occupancy,
contained in one (1) unit, or in two (2) or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so
that it may be used without a permanent foundation. MOBILE HOMES do not include
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES or MANUFACTURED HOMES.
MOBILE HOME PARK - A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of MOBILE HOMES for non-transient use,
consisting of two (2) or more MOBILE HOME lots for rent or sale.
2-7
MODIFICATION - A change; alteration or amendment which introduces new elements into the
details, or cancels some of them, but leaves the general purpose and effect of the subject-matter
intact.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) - The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, as amended and reenacted, 53 P.S. §10101 et seq.
NEW CONSTRUCTION - STRUCTURES for which the START OF CONSTRUCTION
commenced on or after the effective date of this ORDINANCE, and includes any subsequent
IMPROVEMENTS thereto. [Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17]. Any CONSTRUCTION
started after June 24, 1968 and before the effective date of this ORDINANCE is subject to the
regulations in effect at the time the permit is issued, provided the START OF CONSTRUCTION
is within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - A MANUFACTURED HOME
PARK or subdivision for which the CONSTRUCTION of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the MANUFACTURED HOMES are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the CONSTRUCTION of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of FLOODPLAIN
management regulations adopted by a community.
OBSTRUCTION - Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
refuse, FILL, STRUCTURES, or other matter in, along, across or projecting into any
CHANNEL, WATERCOURSE, or FLOODPLAIN, which may impede, retard, or change the
direction of the flow of water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same
downstream to cause damage to life or property.
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD - A FLOOD which is likely to be equaled or exceeded
once every one-hundred (100) years (i.e. that has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year). See also BASE FLOOD.
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION - The water surface elevations of the
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD.
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN - Any land AREA susceptible to a general and
temporary condition of partial or complete inundation by the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR
FLOOD due to overflow of inland waters, or to the unusual and rapid accumulation or RUNOFF
of surface waters from any source. See also SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
ORDINANCE - The FLOODPLAIN Ordinance of Manheim Township, as amended.
PARKING LOT - An accessory use provided on a lot for the use of the general public designated
for short-term parking of vehicles. Vehicles shall be limited to currently registered and inspected
vehicles.
2-8
PATHWAYS - A path intended for use by pedestrians and bicyclists, but not by unauthorized
motorized vehicles. It is a path that may run parallel to the street, but is separated from it. See
also BIKE PATH.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) - The
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or any agency successor thereto.
PESTICIDE - Any substance or mixture of substances intended for use in preventing, destroying,
repelling, sterilizing, or mitigating any insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory animals, fungi,
weeds or other forms of plant or animal life.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE - A STRUCTURE for which CONSTRUCTION or
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT occurred after Manheim TOWNSHIP’s initial FIRM, dated
August 15, 1979, and, as such would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National FLOOD Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE - A STRUCTURE for which CONSTRUCTION or SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT occurred on or before August 15, 1979, and, as such would not be required to
be complaint with the regulations of the National FLOOD Insurance Program.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL - Any natural or artificially produced substance which emits
radiation spontaneously.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) not more
than four-hundred (400) square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed
to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (d) not designed for use as
a permanent DWELLING but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
RIPARIAN BUFFER - Undisturbed riparian land adjacent to a natural WATERCOURSE and other
bodies of water for the purpose of stabilizing banks, filtering pollutants from RUNOFF and for
providing habitat for a variety of wildlife. This is not intended to include man-made SWALES or
detention facilities utilized solely for STORMWATER MANAGEMENT from the project site.
RUNOFF - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT - Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported,
or has been moved from its site of origin by water.
SOLID WASTE - Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including, but not limited to,
solid and liquid waste materials resulting from municipal, industrial, commercial, agricultural
and residential activities. Such wastes shall not include biological excrement nor hazardous waste
materials as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Chapter 1, Part 261, dated July
1, 1984, or as amended.
2-9
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) - An AREA in the FLOODPLAIN subject to a
one (1) percent or greater chance of FLOODING in any given year. The SFHA is shown on the
FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A-30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION - Includes SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT and other
proposed new DEVELOPMENT and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual
START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other IMPROVEMENT was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means
either the first placement or permanent CONSTRUCTION or a STRUCTURE on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the CONSTRUCTION of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a MANUFACTURED HOME on
a foundation. Permanent CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a BASEMENT, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory BUILDINGS, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as DWELLING units or not part of the main STRUCTURE. For a
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first,
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a BUILDING, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the BUILDING.
STORM SEWER - A system of pipes, conduits, SWALES or other similar STRUCTURES
including appurtenant works which carries intercepted RUNOFF, and other drainage, but
excludes domestic sewage and industrial waste.
STORMWATER - Drainage RUNOFF from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation
or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT - A program of controls and measures designed to regulate
the quantity and quality of STORMWATER RUNOFF from a DEVELOPMENT while
promoting the protection and conservation of Groundwater and GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES - Those controls and measures used to effect
a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT program.
STRUCTURE - Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land
or water, whether or not affixed to the land. A walled and roofed BUILDING, including a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a MANUFACTURED HOME or
a MOBILE HOME.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage from any cause sustained by a STRUCTURE whereby
the cost of restoring the STRUCTURE to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed
fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the STRUCTURE before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other IMPROVEMENT of a STRUCTURE, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent
2-10
of the market value of the STRUCTURE before the START OF CONSTRUCTION of the
IMPROVEMENT. This term includes STRUCTURES which have incurred SUBSTANTIAL
DAMAGE, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however include
either: [Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17].
A. Any project for IMPROVEMENT of a STRUCTURE to correct existing VIOLATIONS
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified
by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or;
B. Any alteration of a HISTORIC STRUCTURE, provided that the alteration will preclude
the STRUCTURE’s continued designation as a HISTORIC STRUCTURES.
SWALE - A wide shallow ditch which carries surface water RUNOFF.
TOWNSHIP - The TOWNSHIP of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER - A duly registered professional ENGINEER, licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, employed by the TOWNSHIP or engaged as a consultant
thereto and appointed as the ENGINEER for the TOWNSHIP.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) - The state wide BUILDING code adopted by the
Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to New CONSTRUCTION all municipalities
whether administered by the MUNICIPALITY, a third party or the Department of Labor and
Industry. For residential and commercial BUILDINGS, the UCC adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International BUILDING Code (IBC), by reference, as the
CONSTRUCTION standard applicable within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
FLOODPLAIN CONSTRUCTION. For coordination purposes, references to the UCC are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC. [Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-
17].
VIOLATION - A VIOLATION means the failure of a STRUCTURE or other DEVELOPMENT
to be fully compliant with the TOWNSHIP’s FLOODPLAIN management regulations. A
STRUCTURE or other DEVELOPMENT without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance within or required in 44 CFR §60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation
is provided.
WATERCOURSE - A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, CHANNEL,
SWALE, pond, lake or other body of surface water, carrying or holding surface water, whether
natural or artificial.
WATERSHED - All the land from which water drains into a particular WATERCOURSE.
WETLAND BUFFER - An AREA of land immediately adjacent to a WETLAND that is set aside
for naturally occurring vegetation or the reestablishment of native plant species and as a transition
2-11
zone to protect the WETLAND from impact caused by DEVELOPMENT of adjacent upland
AREAS.
WETLANDS - Those AREAS that are inundated or saturated by surface or Groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support,
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar AREAS.
ZONING HEARING BOARD - Manheim TOWNSHIP ZONING HEARING BOARD.
3-1
ARTICLE III. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
SECTION 301. IDENTIFICATION OF ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN
AREAS
1. For the purpose of this ORDINANCE, a ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN
shall be delineated and regulated by this ORDINANCE for the following lands within the
TOWNSHIP having any of the following characteristics:
A. A drainage AREA equal to or exceeding 150 acres. The measurement of the
drainage AREA shall be calculated from the lowest elevation of the
WATERCOURSE within the property. If any section of the WATERCOURSE
equals or exceeds the 150 acres of drainage AREA the entire length of the
WATERCOURSE within the property shall be regulated.
B. The WATERCOURSE has been studied and mapped by FEMA. Any FEMA
identified FLOODPLAIN AREAS of the TOWNSHIP, classified as SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHAs) in the FIS and the accompanying FIRMs
dated April 19, 2005 or the most recent revision thereof, and issued by the FEMA,
including all digital data developed as part of the FIS.
The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments are
hereby adopted by the TOWNSHIP and declared to be part of this ORDINANCE.
2. The ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN boundaries and ONE-HUNDRED
(100) YEAR FLOOD ELEVATIONS shall be determined by a licensed professional
registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The study must be prepared in
accordance with this ORDINANCE and be reviewed and APPROVED by the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. Calculation of the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD
peak flows must be independently calculated for the specific site under consideration. If
the peak flow rate calculated for the site is equal to or less than ten (10) percent of FEMA
study results at comparable geographic locations, information from FEMA FIS may be
incorporated into the study.
3. All studies submitted to the TOWNSHIP shall include a computer disk with the data used
to establish the FLOODPLAIN.
4. If any physical change is contemplated which would change the FLOODPLAIN AREA,
designated by DHUD or FEMA in the FIS dated April 19, 2005 including latest revisions,
it may be modified by the TOWNSHIP where studies or information is provided by a
qualified professional ENGINEER in accordance with this ORDINANCE. However,
prior to any such change to the SFHA, approval must be obtained from FEMA for
compliance with the rules and regulations of the National FLOOD Insurance Program.
As soon as practical, but not later than six (6) months after the date that such information
becomes available, the TOWNSHIP shall notify FEMA of the changes to the SFHA by
submitting technical or scientific data provided by the DEVELOPER.
3-2
5. No encroachment, alteration, or IMPROVEMENT of any kind shall be made to any
WATERCOURSE until all municipalities immediately adjacent to the encroachment,
alteration, or IMPROVEMENT have been notified by the TOWNSHIP, and until all
required permits or approvals have been first obtained from DEP, Bureau of Waterways
Engineering and the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers.
In addition, FEMA and DCED shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of
any WATERCOURSE.
6. Within any FLOODPLAIN AREA, no encroachments, including FILL, NEW
CONSTRUCTION, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS, or other DEVELOPMENT
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in FLOOD levels within the community
during the occurrence of the BASE FLOOD discharge.
SECTION 302. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES AND VARIANCES
1. The ZONING HEARING BOARD shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals from a
determination concerning the identification of any FLOODPLAIN AREA and from an
initial determination made by the TOWNSHIP Zoning Officer or the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER, either of whom may consult with other TOWNSHIP staff or appropriate
persons in making this determination. The ZONING HEARING BOARD shall also have
jurisdiction to hear applications for variances.
2. Proceedings on such appeals or variances and the proceedings shall be in accordance with
the Zoning Ordinance. Upon receipt of such appeal or application for variance, the
ZONING HEARING BOARD shall set a time and place for the hearing in accordance
with the requirements of the MPC. Notice of the time and place of the hearing on the
appeal or application for variance shall be given to all parties. The burden of proof shall
be on the appellant/applicant.
3. Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the ZONING HEARING BOARD may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4. The ZONING HEARING BOARD shall hear and decide applications for variances in
accordance with the following requirements in addition to the criteria for variances as set
forth in the MPC:
A. No variance shall be granted for any CONSTRUCTION, DEVELOPMENT,
IMPROVEMENT, use or activity within any FLOODWAY AREA.
B. Except for a possible MODIFICATION of the regulatory ONE-HUNDRED
(100) YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION requirement involved, no variance shall be
granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
3-3
DEVELOPMENT proscribed by Prohibited Activities or to DEVELOPMENT
which may endanger human life.
C. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least MODIFICATION necessary to
provide relief.
D. In granting any variance, the ZONING HEARING BOARD shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of
this ORDINANCE.
E. In reviewing any request for a variance, the ZONING HEARING BOARD shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Not result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in FLOOD
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense.
(b) Not create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or
conflict with any other applicable state or local laws, ordinances
or regulations.
F. Wherever a variance is granted, the ZONING HEARING BOARD shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for
FLOOD insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained
by the TOWNSHIP. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year
shall be included in the annual report to DCED or FEMA.
3-4
SECTION 303. PERMITTED USES
The following uses are permitted in the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN and they
are permitted only if done under and in accordance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law
of Pennsylvania, Act 394 of 1937, as amended, DEP Rules and Regulations , all other applicable
provisions of this ORDINANCE and other applicable ordinances and do not impact adjacent
properties:
1. AGRICULTURE, horticulture, forestry, vegetated best management practices and
RIPARIAN BUFFERS, all if done in accordance with an APPROVED
CONSERVATION PLAN, all excluding any STRUCTURES, and excluding any grading
or filling which would cause any increase in FLOOD heights or frequency.
2. EROSION and sedimentation control measures excluding any grading or filling which
would cause any increase in FLOOD heights or frequency.
3. Public and private recreational uses such as parks, swimming AREAS (excluding
swimming pools), play AREAS, day camps, campgrounds (excluding campsites for
overnight camping), picnic groves, lawns, gardens, golf courses, driving ranges, archery
ranges, game farms, AREAS or clubs for hunting, fishing, or boating (including marker
or anchor buoys), paved BIKE PATHS, PATHWAYS and hiking and horseback riding
trails, all excluding any STRUCTURES, and excluding any grading or filling which
would cause any increase in FLOOD heights or frequency.
4. Harvesting of any wild crop, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, berries, tree fruits and seeds,
or wild rice.
5. Activities related to the preservation of natural amenities, including wildlife sanctuaries,
nature preserves, woodland preserves, botanical gardens and arboretums, excluding any
activity which would cause any increase in FLOOD heights or frequency.
6. Stream IMPROVEMENTS whose sole purpose is to improve aquatic life habitat or
stabilize an EROSION problem, and which are reviewed by the applicable permitting
agencies, excluding any activity which would cause any increase in FLOOD heights or
frequency.
7. Blinds for the shooting or observation of wildlife, provided that such blinds may only be
placed, erected, and maintained during the open season established by the Pennsylvania
Game Commission or other governmental entity having jurisdiction thereof for the taking
of migratory waterfowl and the three weeks immediately preceding and three weeks
immediately following that open season. Blinds must be removed during all other times
of the year.
3-5
8. Ponds that do not create any increase in FLOODING and are APPROVED by the
applicable permitting agencies. [Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17].
9. Public utility facilities (except BUILDINGS) under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or utility facilities which are operated, owned
or maintained by a municipality or a municipal authority organized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to provide public water service, public sewer service or
similar service, subject to the provisions of Section 307.17 of this ORDINANCE.
10. Marker buoys.
11. All projects undertaken by the TOWNSHIP.
SECTION 304. USES ALLOWED BY CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL BY THE
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
1. Consideration for approval or disapproval for a conditional use request shall be vested
solely with the COMMISSIONERS as set forth in the procedure outlined in this Section.
2. This Section shall not be constructed to mean the DEVELOPER can by right merely meet
the standards set forth herein. These standards and requirements are minimum standards
only. The COMMISSIONERS may require more stringent standards, based on the
specific and unique nature and condition of the site, and surrounding AREAS, in order to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the TOWNSHIP.
3. The following uses are permitted in the designated ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR
FLOODPLAIN AREAS when conditional use approval is granted by the
COMMISSIONERS through the conditional use process as outlined in Section 2810.3 of
The Zoning Ordinance of Manheim TOWNSHIP, as amended and when done under and
in accordance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law of Pennsylvania, 35 P.S.
§691.1et seq.; DEP Rules and Regulations; and all other provisions of this ORDINANCE
and other applicable ordinances or regulations:
A. PARKING LOTS, loading AREAS, DRIVEWAYS, and aircraft landing strips
and taxiways, if they are consistent with the provisions of Section 304.3.L. of
this ORDINANCE and its subparagraphs and are not identified as prohibited
uses.
B. Water oriented uses such as docks, piers, wharves, marinas, boat liveries, and
boat launching ramps.
C. Utility facilities not under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission nor operated, owned or maintained by a MUNICIPALITY
or a municipal authority organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania providing water service, sewer service or similar service, subject
3-6
to the conditions and restrictions set forth in Section 304.3.L. of this
ORDINANCE.
D. Fish hatcheries, including uncovered ponds and raceways, which do not increase
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD heights or frequency, and which are
APPROVED by the Pennsylvania Fish Commission, but excluding other
STRUCTURES.
E. Water monitoring devices which do not increase ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR
FLOOD heights or frequency.
F. Picnic pavilions, picnic tables, park benches, fireplaces and grills, and
playground equipment, if anchored to prevent floatation, excluding any grading
or filling which would cause any increase in heights or frequency.
G. CULVERTS, BRIDGES, approaches to public and private CULVERTS and
BRIDGES, and FLOOD hazard reduction STRUCTURES for the purpose of
protecting only lawfully existing nonconforming STRUCTURES, provided that
all necessary approvals have been obtained from all other governmental
agencies.
H. Extraction of sand, gravel, and other mineral resources, excluding topsoil
provided that all necessary approvals have been obtained from all other
governmental agencies.
I. High tensile wire strand fences of not more than three wire strands for enclosing
large animals.
J. Other uses similar to the above, provided the use is not prohibited under Section
305 of this ORDINANCE.
K. FLOODPROOFING to protect only lawfully existing nonconforming
STRUCTURES and lawfully existing nonconforming uses within
STRUCTURES.
L. Placing of FILL to raise a portion of a lot above the ONE-HUNDRED (100)
YEAR FLOODPLAIN ELEVATION, provided the same meets all of the
following: [Added 10-29-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-10].
(1) The surface AREA and volume of the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-
, and ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN must be greater than
or equal to the existing surface AREA and volume of the corresponding
FLOODPLAIN, measured within the lot upon which the FILL is placed.
(2) No FILL shall be placed within a designated FEMA ONE-HUNDRED
(100) YEAR FLOODWAY.
3-7
(3) No excavation or FILL shall be permissible within 200 feet of any existing
occupied or occupiable STRUCTURE unless it is demonstrated that the
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN will have no adverse
impact.
(4) Review and approval by all applicable regulatory agencies.
4. Standards and Criteria for Conditional Use approval: In deciding upon the allowance of
conditional use permitted by Section 304.3 of this ORDINANCE, the
COMMISSIONERS shall determine that, in addition to all other requirements, the
following standards and criteria have been complied with:
A. The proposed project must be designed in such a way as to contain all upstream
and downstream changes in water surface elevation to the property on which the
proposed project is located. In AREAS which have FEMA ONE-HUNDRED
(100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN delineated by the latest revisions of the FIS for the
TOWNSHIP, any changes in ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR water surface
elevations or boundaries must be shown on the plans and APPROVED by FEMA.
B. That no increase of the surface elevation of the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR
FLOODS, or frequency of the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODS except
as described in Section 304.4.A.
C. That the possibility of disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions is
minimized.
D. That the proposed use is compatible with existing and anticipated
DEVELOPMENT.
E. That the proposed use is consistent with the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and any
FLOODPLAIN management program for the AREA.
F. That the safety of access to the property in times of FLOODING for ordinary and
emergency vehicles will be assured.
G. That the proposed activity will not unduly alter natural water flow or water
temperature.
H. That archeological or HISTORIC sites and STRUCTURES, endangered or
threatened species of animals or plants, high quality wildlife habitats, scarce
vegetation types, and other irreplaceable land uses will not be degraded or
destroyed.
I. That the natural, scenic, and aesthetic values at the proposed site will be
conserved.
3-8
J. That any proposal straddling a municipal boundary shall be submitted to each
municipality’s planning commission and governing body for review and
comment, prior to any decision by the COMMISSIONERS.
K. That the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its content to FLOOD damage,
the effect of such damage on the individual owners, and the need for and effect
of FLOODPROOFING, are minimized.
L. That the grant of the conditional use shall not cause:
(1) Additional threats to public safety.
(2) Extraordinary public expense.
(3) Creation of nuisances.
(4) Conflict with local laws or ordinances.
M. That STRUCTURES will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement and that BUILDING materials are FLOOD-resistant.
5. The burden of proof in the determination of allowance of a conditional use shall be on
the applicant. The COMMISSIONERS may require the applicant to submit such plans,
specifications, cross-sections, calculations, and other information as it may deem
necessary.
6. The COMMISSIONERS may, through the conditional use process, permit
MODIFICATIONS of provisions of this Section. An applicant desiring to obtain such
MODIFICATION shall, when making application for conditional use approval for
conditional use, also make application for MODIFICATIONS under this Section. The
COMMISSIONERS shall consider an application for MODIFICATIONS by conditional
use as part of the application. However, the granting of a MODIFICATION shall not
have the effect of making null and void the intent and purpose of this ORDINANCE.
Any conditional use to permit a MODIFICATION of the requirements of this
ORDINANCE shall be subject to the following standards:
A. The proposed MODIFICATION shall not result in any danger to the public health,
safety or welfare by increasing the FLOOD heights, velocities, and frequencies.
B. The design and IMPROVEMENT shall not have an adverse impact on the natural
drainage systems of the TOWNSHIP.
3-9
C. The design and IMPROVEMENT shall maintain the existing flows and quality
of the WATERCOURSES in the TOWNSHIP and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
D. The design and IMPROVEMENT shall maintain the FLOOD carrying capacity
of WATERCOURSES.
E. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed MODIFICATION will allow
for equal or better results and represents the minimum MODIFICATION
necessary.
F. The proposed MODIFICATION shall meet the relevant criteria set forth in
Section 60.3 of Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations or any future
corresponding federal regulation for FLOOD-prone AREAS.
If the COMMISSIONERS determine that the applicant has met this burden, it may grant
a MODIFICATION of the requirements of this ORDINANCE. In granting
MODIFICATIONS, the COMMISSIONERS may impose such conditions, in its
judgment; secure the objectives and purposes of this ORDINANCE.
SECTION 305. PROHIBITED USES
1. The following OBSTRUCTIONS, activities and uses are prohibited in the designated
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN AREA:
A. All uses prohibited either expressly or implicitly in the underlying zoning district
for the land in question.
B. All new STRUCTURES, or any expansion, enlargement or addition to an existing
STRUCTURES with the exception of those specifically allowed in Section 303
and Section 304 of this ORDINANCE.
C. Sanitary landfills, dumps, junk and salvage yards, and outdoor storage of vehicles
or materials.
D. Placing, depositing and dumping any spoil, FILL, or SOLID WASTE except such
grading, filling or depositing necessary to accomplish and carry out the permitted
uses in Section 303 of this ORDINANCE and uses by conditional use specified
in Section 304 of this ORDINANCE.
E. Removal of topsoil, except such removal of topsoil as is necessary to accomplish
and carry out the permitted uses in Section 303 and uses by conditional use
specified in Section 304 of this ORDINANCE.
3-10
F. Damming of any WATERCOURSE, except as provided for in Section 303 and
Section 304 of this ORDINANCE.
G. Any parts of any on-site sewage disposal systems or manure handling systems.
H. Swimming pools.
I. Stockpiling, storage, or disposal of buoyant materials, logging slash, herbicides,
PESTICIDES, domestic or industrial waste, RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS,
petroleum or other flammable materials, explosives, poisonous materials,
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL, or other materials which, if FLOODED, would
pollute the WATERCOURSE or be injurious to human, animal, or plant life.
J. The following list of materials and substances, which are considered dangerous
to human life are prohibited to be produced or stored in any FLOODPLAIN
AREA:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celloulide.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) PESTICIDES (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated.
K. Cemeteries for humans or animals.
L. Zoo, menagerie, wild animal farm or domestic or farm animal enclosures which
will not allow all animals to escape FLOOD waters of maximum FLOOD
elevation without human intervention while remaining safely confined.
M. Any activity or use which may, whether alone or in combination with others,
except where specifically authorized elsewhere in this ORDINANCE:
3-11
(1) Endanger human life.
(2) Obstruct, impede, retard, change, or increase the velocity, direction, or
flow of FLOOD waters.
(3) Increase the surface elevation of FLOODS, or the frequency of FLOODS.
(4) Catch or collect debris carried by FLOOD waters.
(5) Be placed where the natural flow of the stream or FLOOD waters would
carry it downstream to the damage or detriment of property within or
adjacent to the FLOODPLAIN AREA.
(6) Degrade the water carrying capacity of any WATERCOURSE,
CHANNEL, or FLOODPLAIN.
(7) Increase the rate of local RUNOFF, EROSION, or sedimentation.
(8) Degrade the quality of surface water or the quality or quantity of
groundwater.
(9) Be susceptible to flotation and subsequent movement which would cause
damage to other property.
(10) Create unhealthful ponding or other sanitary conditions;
(11) Not be in harmony with the intent and purpose of this ORDINANCE as
set forth in Section 102 of this ORDINANCE.
N. PARKING AREAS designed or used for storage and PARKING AREAS for
hotels, motels and other transient lodgings.
2. The following OBSTRUCTIONS, activities, and uses shall be prohibited within
identified FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
A. Hospitals, public or private,
B. Nursing Homes, public or private,
C. Jails,
D. New MOBILE HOME PARKS and MOBILE HOME subdivisions, and
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS to such existing parks and subdivisions,
E. MANUFACTURED HOMES, and
3-12
F. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
3. No variance shall be granted which would allow any of these prohibited activities or
STRUCTURES to locate, expand, or enlarge, in any designated ONE-HUNDRED (100)
YEAR FLOODPLAIN AREA.
SECTION 306. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES IN THE
FLOODPLAIN AREA
1. All uses or STRUCTURES in the designated FLOODPLAIN AREA lawfully existing on
the effective date of this ORDINANCE which are not in conformity with the provisions
of this ORDINANCE shall be deemed nonconforming uses or STRUCTURES. Such
nonconforming uses or STRUCTURES may be continued, maintained, repaired, and
FLOODPROOFED, except as otherwise provided for in this ORDINANCE. However,
such nonconforming uses or STRUCTURES may at any time be improved to comply
with existing Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or Manheim TOWNSHIP health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
2. Nonconforming uses or STRUCTURES which have been discontinued or vacated for
twelve (12) consecutive months shall be considered abandoned. Vacation of land or
STRUCTURES or the non-operative status of the use normally carried on by the property
shall be evidence of discontinuance. The COMMISSIONERS may require the removal
of any abandoned nonconforming use or STRUCTURE upon proper notice to the owner
of the property on which an abandoned nonconforming use or STRUCTURE exists. If
the owner has not completely removed the abandoned use or STRUCTURE within a time
not to exceed nine (9) months, the COMMISSIONERS shall have the authority to itself
cause the removal to be accomplished, the costs of such removal to be paid by the
property owner.
3. A nonconforming use or STRUCTURE may not be expanded or modified in any manner
which would increase or aggravate FLOODING or FLOOD hazards. Nothing shall be
done which would otherwise violate any of the provisions of this ORDINANCE. No
nonconforming use or STRUCTURE shall be expanded, enlarged, or altered in any way
which increases its nonconformity with respect to height, AREA, yard, and other
requirements established in the TOWNSHIP Zoning Ordinance, or in any way which
causes it to occupy more space within the FLOODPLAIN AREA than was occupied by
it on the date on which the TOWNSHIP first enacted FLOODPLAIN regulations (June
24, 1968).
4. A nonconforming use or STRUCTURE may be replaced, repaired, or rebuilt if it is
damaged or destroyed by any means, including FLOODS, to the extent of less than fifty
(50) percent of its fair market value at the time of its damage or destruction. In such a
case, however, the nonconformity of the new use or STRUCTURES, with respect to
requirements as expressed in provisions of this ORDINANCE, shall not exceed that of
the original use or STRUCTURE which was damaged or destroyed. Nothing shall be
done which would otherwise violate any of the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
3-13
5. A nonconforming use or STRUCTURE which has been damaged or destroyed by any
means, including FLOODS, to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its fair market
value at the time of its damage or destruction may not be replaced, restored, repaired,
reconstructed, improved, or rebuilt in any way other than in complete conformity and full
compliance with the provisions of this ORDINANCE, the TOWNSHIP Zoning
Ordinance and all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.
6. The Zoning Officer or the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall have the initial responsibility
of determining the percent of damage or destruction and the fair market value of the
damaged or destroyed use or STRUCTURE at the time of its damage or destruction, and
may call on any experts or authorities, including the Building Code Official, they may
deem necessary to arrive at a fair and impartial determination. Appeals of the
determination of the Zoning Officer or the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER may be made to the
ZONING HEARING BOARD in accordance with Section 302 of this ORDINANCE.
7. HISTORIC STRUCTURES undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT as defined in this ORDINANCE, must comply with
all ORDINANCE requirements that do not preclude the STRUCTURE’s continued
designation as a HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Documentation that a specific
ORDINANCE requirement will cause removal of the STRUCTURE from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained
from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from the ORDINANCE requirements will be the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the STRUCTURE. The COMMISSIONERS
shall have the right to waive any of the requirements of this ORDINANCE, based on the
above, for the repair or rehabilitation of any HISTORIC STRUCTURE or resource in
accordance with applicable state and federal standards.
SECTION 307. DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. Unless otherwise specified in this ORDINANCE, the standards and criteria included in
this Section are to be used, together with the provisions of the ACT and all other
TOWNSHIP ordinances in administration of this ORDINANCE. Except as specifically
provided otherwise in this ORDINANCE, nothing contained in this ORDINANCE shall
be construed to affect the other ordinances of the TOWNSHIP.
2. Where applicable and where possible, all necessary permits or other written approvals
must be obtained from all other agencies before any approvals of plans or permits may
be granted by TOWNSHIP or its agencies, officials, or employees.
3. RIPARIAN BUFFERS and riparian forest buffers shall be in compliance with the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of Manheim TOWNSHIP, as amended and the
Stormwater Management Ordinance of Manheim TOWNSHIP, as amended.
3-14
4. Where necessary permits or written approvals from other agencies cannot be obtained
prior to action by TOWNSHIP or its agencies, officials, or employees, permits shall be
conditioned upon receiving such other agencies permits or written approval.
5. No regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania governing WATERCOURSES are
amended or repealed by this ORDINANCE.
6. No encroachment, alteration, or IMPROVEMENT of any kind shall be made to any
WATERCOURSE until all municipalities immediately adjacent to the encroachment,
alteration or IMPROVEMENT have been notified by the DEVELOPER and until all
required permits or approvals have been obtained from DEP, Bureau of Waterways
Engineering. In addition, FEMA and DCED shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of any WATERCOURSE.
7. All uses and STRUCTURES allowed under this ORDINANCE, shall be designed,
constructed, and placed so as to offer the minimum OBSTRUCTION possible to the flow
of water, and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow, velocity, or
height of FLOOD waters. Whenever possible, such STRUCTURES shall be constructed
with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of FLOOD flow, and, as far as is
practicable, such STRUCTURES shall be placed approximately on the same FLOOD
flow lines as those of nearby STRUCTURES.
8. All NEW CONSTRUCTION and SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS shall be
constructed by (1) methods and practices that minimize FLOOD damage; (2) using
FLOOD resistant BUILDING materials and (3) designing and locating electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities to prevent
water entry or accumulation.
9. All NEW CONSTRUCTION and SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS of permanent
non-residential STRUCTURES shall either; (1) have the LOWEST FLOOR (including
BASEMENT) elevated to a minimum of one (1) foot above the ONE-HUNDRED (100)
YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION, as defined by Section 301 of this ORDINANCE or; (2)
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be FLOODPROOFED to be a
minimum of one (1) foot above the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD
ELEVATION, the STRUCTURE is watertight, and with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capacity of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
10. All authorized IMPROVEMENTS or additions to existing residential STRUCTURES not
meeting the definition of SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS shall be elevated or
FLOODPROOFED to the greatest extent possible.
11. All authorized new or substantially improved residential STRUCTURES shall have the
LOWEST FLOOR (including BASEMENT) elevated to one (1) foot above the ONEHUNDRED
(100) YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION, as defined by Section 301 of this
ORDINANCE.
3-15
12. Where FLOODPROOFING is authorized by this ORDINANCE, it shall be certified by a
registered professional and shall be done according to the standards and provisions for
FLOODPROOFING classes W-1 or W-2, as contained in FLOODPROOFING
Regulations, published by the Office of the Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army, publication
EP 1165 2 314 (June 1972 and as subsequently amended), where such standards and
provisions do not conflict with other provisions of this ORDINANCE. Where reference
is made in FLOODPROOFING Regulations to the "RFD" (Regulator FLOOD Datum),
it shall be interpreted to mean the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION,
as defined by this ORDINANCE.
13. All NEW CONSTRUCTION or SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS to nonconforming
STRUCTURES, including BUILDINGS, air ducts, pipes, and storage tanks within the
FLOODPLAIN AREA shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, movement, or
collapse, thus reducing the possibility of the blockage of BRIDGE openings and other
restricted sections of the WATERCOURSE.
14. NEW CONSTRUCTION or SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS cannot be granted a
variance which would permit a STRUCTURE to be in non-compliance with the need to
elevate or FLOODPROOF to a minimum of one (1) foot above the BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION. Similarly, no CONSTRUCTION or SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENTS can be granted a variance to be located within the FLOODWAY
AREA.
15. Fully enclosed space or partially enclosed space below the LOWEST FLOOR (including
BASEMENT) is prohibited.
16. Adequate drainage shall be provided for all new DEVELOPMENT to reduce exposure to
FLOOD hazards.
17. Public utility facilities and STRUCTURES (except BUILDINGS) subject to the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or utility facilities which are
operated, owned or maintained by a municipality or a municipal authority organized
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are required to comply with the
following standards in the interest of achieving the purpose and intent of this
ORDINANCE:
A. Public utility facilities and associated STRUCTURES such as pipelines, gas lines,
STORM SEWER, sanitary sewers, water lines, outlet installations for sewage
treatment plants, sealed public and private water supply wells, pumping stations,
and underground communications facilities, should, except for necessary vents,
be designed and installed underground so as to be at or below the existing natural
surface GRADE within the FLOODPLAIN, and in such a manner as will prevent
flotation, minimize or eliminate FLOOD damage, and not alter the cross-sectional
AREA of the FLOODPLAIN. All new or replacement water supply facilities or
sanitary sewage facilities should be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
3-16
of FLOOD waters into the facilities and discharges from the facilities into
FLOOD waters. All gas lines should have a system of shut-off valves for service
to the FLOODPLAIN AREA to allow positive control during FLOOD
emergencies.
B. Public utility electrical transmission lines and supporting STRUCTURES should
be installed so as to minimize or eliminate FLOOD damage. Above-ground
electrical transmission lines should be designed to meet the following standards:
(1) Above-ground lines and supporting STRUCTURES should enter the
FLOODPLAIN AREA only to cross a WATERCOURSE, should cross
the WATERCOURSE and the FLOODPLAIN using the most direct and
shortest route possible consistent with the goals, objectives, purposes and
intents of this ORDINANCE, should make the minimum number of
crossings necessary, and should be designed and installed so as to
minimize or eliminate FLOOD damage.
(2) Supporting STRUCTURES for above-ground lines within the
FLOODPLAIN should be the minimum number necessary to carry the
lines across the FLOODPLAIN.
(3) Facilities and service in the FLOODPLAIN AREA should be designed so
that FLOOD damage within the FLOODPLAIN AREA does not disrupt
service outside the AREA.
18. Any on-site waste disposal system shall be located to avoid impairment to FLOOD-prone
AREAS or contamination from them during FLOODING.
19. All MOBILE HOMES and MANUFACTURED HOMES and any IMPROVEMENTS
thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing
over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the American National
Standards Institute and National Fire Protection Association Standards as specified in the
Standard for the Installation of MOBILE HOMES and MANUFACTURED HOMES
including MOBILE HOME PARK and MANUFACTURED HOME Requirements
(NFPA No. 501A-1974 ANSI A119.3-1975) as amended for MOBILE HOMES in
Hurricane Zones or other Appropriate Standards such as the following:
A. Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the MOBILE
HOME or MANUFACTURED HOME, with two (2) additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for units fifty (50) feet or more in length, and one (1)
additional tie per side for units less than fifty (50) feet in length.
B. Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the MOBILE HOME or
MANUFACTURED HOME, with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate
locations for units fifty (50) feet or more in length, and four (4) additional ties per
side for units less than fifty (50) feet in length.
3-17
C. All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of
four thousand eight hundred (4800) pounds.
20. All MOBILE HOMES and MANUFACTURED HOMES and any IMPROVEMENTS
thereto shall also be placed on a permanent foundation and be elevated in accordance with
the following requirements:
A. The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted FILL, or on pilings so that the
LOWEST FLOOR of the MOBILE HOME or MANUFACTURED HOME will
be a minimum of one (1) foot above the elevation of the designated ONEHUNDRED
(100) YEAR FLOOD.
B. Adequate surface drainage is provided.
C. Adequate access for a hauler is provided.
21. An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed
with the Emergency Management Coordinator for MOBILE HOME PARKS, MOBILE
HOME subdivisions or MANUFACTURED HOMES where appropriate.
22. The standards and specifications contained in the International Building Code (IBC) and
the International Residential Building Code (IRC) as incorporated into the UCC, 34 PA
Code (Ordinances 401-405), as amended shall apply to the above and other sections and
subsections of this ORDINANCE, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or
supplement the requirements of this ORDINANCE. [Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-17].





2015
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP OFFICIALS
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
David R. Heck, President
Albert B. Kling, Vice President
Donna E. DiMeo
Ian G. Hodge, Jr.
Samuel M. Mecum
Sean P. Molchany, Manager-Secretary
PLANNING COMMISSION
Michel Gibeault, Chairperson
Jeffery E. Swinehart, Vice Chairperson
Walter B. Lee
Maryann Marotta
John Shipman
Stacey Betts
John Hendrix
PLANNING & ZONING DEPARTMENT
Lisa A. Douglas, Director
Shannon Sinopoli, Land Development Administrator
Samuel L. Maurer IV, Assistant Zoning Officer
Rita Long, Administrative Assistant

STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
ORDINANCE
OF MANHEIM TOWNSHIP 2014
Revised 11/10/2014 by Ordinance 2014-23
Revised 12/10/2018 by Ordinance 2018-11
May 27, 2014, as amended
i
STORMWATERMANAGEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS................................................................................1-1
SECTION 101. STATUTORY AUTHORITY....................................................................1-1
SECTION 102. TITLE..........................................................................................................1-1
SECTION 103. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS.................................................................. 1-1
SECTION 104. PURPOSE................................................................................................... 1-2
SECTION 105. APPLICABILITY.......................................................................................1-3
SECTION 106. DUTY OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF LAND................................................................................................... 1-4
SECTION 107. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA..................................... 1-4
SECTION 108. ACCEPTABLE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) FOR
THE DETENTION AND CONTROL OF STORMWATER RUNOFF.1-5
SECTION 109. STORMWATER IMPERVIOUS CREDITS AND EXEMPTIONS.......1-5
SECTION 110. REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN....................... 1-7
SECTION 111. COMPATIBILITYWITH OTHER PERMIT AND
ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS............................................................1-7
ARTICLE II. TERMINOLOGY.............................................................................................. 2-1
SECTION 201. WORD USAGE..........................................................................................2-1
SECTION 202. DEFINITIONS............................................................................................2-2
ARTICLE III. PLAN REQUIREMENTS................................................................................ 3-1
SECTION 301. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.................................................................3-1
SECTION 302. PLAN CONTENTS....................................................................................3-2
SECTION 303. PLAN PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENTS.................................................................................... 3-8
SECTION 304. PLAN PROCEDURE FOR OTHER DEVELOPMENT
ACTIVITIES...............................................................................................3-8
SECTION 305. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REVIEW.............................3-9
SECTION 306. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REVISIONS.......................3-9
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATERMANAGEMENT................................................................4-1
SECTION 401. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.................................................................4-1
SECTION 402. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS............................................................................................ 4-3
SECTION 403. METHODS OF CALCULATION OF RUNOFF.....................................4-5
ii
ARTICLE V. COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
OF GUARANTEE THEREOF........................................................................ 5-1
SECTION 501. GENERAL..................................................................................................5-1
SECTION 502. STAND-ALONE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN............... 5-1
SECTION 503. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN COMBINEDWITH
SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT........................................ 5-2
ARTICLE VI. OPERATION ANDMAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES........................... 6-1
SECTION 601. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES............... 6-1
SECTION 602. MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES DURING DEVELOPMENT...............................................6-2
SECTION 603. MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES ACCEPTED BY THE
TOWNSHIP................................................................................................6-2
SECTION 604. MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATELY
OWNED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES..................6-2
SECTION 605. MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING FACILITIES / BMPs........................ 6-3
SECTION 606. RIGHT OF ENTRY ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY...............................6-4
SECTION 607. REVISIONS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES............................................................................................... 6-4
ARTICLE VII. PROHIBITION AGAINST
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES.........................................................7-1
SECTION 701. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES..................................................................7-1
SECTION 702. PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS...............................................................7-2
ARTICLE VIII. ADMINISTRATION.........................................................................................8-1
SECTION 801. MODIFICATIONS.....................................................................................8-1
SECTION 802. AMENDMENT.......................................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 803. ERRONEOUS PERMIT............................................................................ 8-1
SECTION 804. VIOLATIONS............................................................................................ 8-2
SECTION 805. ENFORCEMENT.......................................................................................8-2
SECTION 806. NOTIFICATIONS......................................................................................8-3
SECTION 807. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION ...8-3
SECTION 808. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY ........................................................................8-4
SECTION 809. CHALLENGE AND APPEALS ...............................................................8-4
SECTION 810. REPEALER................................................................................................ 8-4
SECTION 811. VALIDITY .................................................................................................8-5
SECTION 812. EFFECTIVE DATE................................................................................... 8-5
1-1
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
OF
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING RULES, REGULATIONS
AND STANDARDS, GOVERNING STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP OF MANHEIM,
SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED
BY THE OFFICIALS OF THE TOWNSHIP IN APPLYING
AND ADMINISTERING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS
AND STANDARDS AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE
VIOLATION THEREOF.
BE AND HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the COMMISSIONERS of
Manheim TOWNSHIP, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania as follows:
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101. STATUTORY AUTHORITY
The COMMISSIONERS of Manheim Township are empowered to regulate these activities by
the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et. seq., as
amended, the "Stormwater Management Act", Act 394 of 1937, as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et.
seq. the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, 53 P.S. § 55101 et. seq., and the First Class Township
Code. The TOWNSHIP is also empowered to regulate land use activities that affect RUNOFF by
the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC), as amended.
SECTION 102. TITLE
This ORDINANCE shall be known and may be cited as "The Stormwater Management
Ordinance of Manheim Township."
SECTION 103. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS
The COMMISSIONERS of Manheim Township find that:
1. Inadequate management of accelerated STORMWATER RUNOFF resulting from
DEVELOPMENT throughout a WATERSHED increases FLOOD flows and velocities,
contributes to EROSION and SEDIMENTATION, overtaxes the carrying capacity of
existing streams and STORM SEWERs, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to
convey and manage STORMWATER, undermines FLOODPLAIN management and
FLOOD control efforts in downstream communities, reduces GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE, threatens public health and safety, and increases NONPOINT SOURCE
POLLUTION of water resources.
1-2
2. A comprehensive program of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, including reasonable
regulation of DEVELOPMENT and activities causing accelerated RUNOFF, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of the
TOWNSHIP and all the people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the
environment.
3. STORMWATER is an important water resource, which provides GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and
maintains surface water quality.
4. The TOWNSHIP is required by federal and state regulations to implement a program of
STORMWATER controls. The TOWNSHIP is required to obtain a permit for
STORMWATER discharges for their MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER
SYSTEM (MS4) under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
5. RIPARIAN BUFFERs and RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFERs enhance water quality by
filtering pollutants in RUNOFF, providing light control and temperature moderation,
processing pollutants, increasing infiltration and providing CHANNEL and shoreline
stability thus decreasing EROSION. (Refer to PADEP Riparian Forest Buffer Guidance,
November 27, 2010 or latest edition)
SECTION 104. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ORDINANCE is to promote health, safety, and welfare by minimizing the
harms and maximizing the benefits described in Section 103 of this ORDINANCE through
provisions designed to:
1. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
2. Control and manage accelerated RUNOFF and EROSION and SEDIMENTATION
problems at their source by regulating activities which cause such problems.
3. Utilize, preserve, and improve the desirable existing NATURAL DRAINAGE systems
within the TOWNSHIP.
4. Provide procedures and performance standards for STORMWATER planning and
management.
5. Maintain GROUNDWATER RECHARGE to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
6. Preserve and restore the FLOOD carrying capacity of WATERCOURSEs.
7. Prevent scouring and EROSION of stream banks and streambeds.
8. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES which are constructed in the TOWNSHIP. Ensure proper Operation and
Maintenance Agreements are in place for all STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES (BMPs) that are implemented within the TOWNSHIP.
1-3
9. Maintain the existing flows and quality of WATERCOURSEs in the TOWNSHIP and the
Commonwealth.
10. In the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, the regulations of this ORDINANCE
are designed and intended to protect FLOODPLAIN areas subject to and necessary for
FLOOD waters, to permit and encourage the retention of open land uses so located and
utilized, and to guide incompatible DEVELOPMENT into more appropriate zoning
districts.
11. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
12. Promote STORMWATER RUNOFF prevention through the use of NON-STRUCTURAL
BMPS.
13. Provide a regulatory environment that supports the proportion, density and intensity of
DEVELOPMENT called for in the comprehensive plan; allow for creative methods of
improving water quality and managing STORMWATER RUNOFF; and promote a
regional approach to water resource management.
14. Help preserve and protect exceptional natural resources, and conserve and restore natural
resource systems including but not limited to native plant communities including those
within RIPARIAN BUFFERs and RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFERs.
15. Promote STORMWATER MANAGEMENT practices that emphasize infiltration,
evaporation, and transpiration.
16. Minimize thermal impacts to WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
17. Disconnect IMPERVIOUS SURFACEs by directing RUNOFF to pervious AREAs,
wherever possible.
18. To regulate uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENT which, acting alone or in combination
with other existing or future uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENT, will cause
unacceptable increases in FLOOD heights, velocities and frequencies.
SECTION 105. APPLICABILITY
The provisions, regulations, limitations, and restrictions of this ORDINANCE shall apply to the
following REGULATED ACTIVITIES:
1. DEVELOPMENT of any kind where a preliminary or final subdivision or a land
DEVELOPMENT PLAN is required by The Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of Manheim Township, or
2. Removal of ground cover, grading, FILLING or excavation on a property; greater than
5,000 square feet, or
3. CONSTRUCTION of new or additional IMPERVIOUS SURFACEs (driveways,
PARKING LOTs, etc.), and associated IMPROVEMENTS, or
1-4
4. CONSTRUCTION of new buildings or additions to existing buildings, or
5. Installation or ALTERATION of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES and
appurtenances thereto, or
6. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream CHANNEL, or
7. Any other REGULATED ACTIVITIES where the TOWNSHIP determines that said
activities may affect any existing WATERCOURSE's STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES, or STORMWATER drainage patterns.
SECTION 106. DUTY OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND
1. Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this ORDINANCE, including exemptions and
impervious credits, any landowner or any person engaged in the ALTERATION or
DEVELOPMENT of land which may affect STORMWATER RUNOFF characteristics
shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to protect other property. Such
measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction,
and quality of resulting STORMWATER RUNOFF in a manner which otherwise
adequately protects health, property, and water quality.
2. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANs approved by the TOWNSHIP shall be onsite
throughout the duration of the REGULATED ACTIVITY.
SECTION 107. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA
All STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANs shall include the following components:
1. VOLUME CONTROL. VOLUME CONTROL BMPs are intended to maintain existing
hydrologic conditions for SMALL STORM EVENTs by promoting GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE and/or evapotranspiration as described in this ORDINANCE. RUNOFF
VOLUME CONTROLs shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method described in
Section 402.2.A, or through continuous modeling approaches or other means as described
in the BMP MANUAL.
2. RUNOFF Rate Control. Rate control for large storms, up to and including the One-
Hundred (100) Year STORM EVENT, is essential to protect against immediate
downstream EROSION and FLOODING. If, after DEVELOPMENT, the pre-
DEVELOPMENT hydrograph cannot be matched using infiltration, a reduction in the post-
Developed peak flow will be required. Post-DEVELOPMENT peak flows shall not exceed
fifty (50) percent of the pre-DEVELOPMENT peak flows for the two, five, ten, twentyfive,
fifty, and One-Hundred (100) Year STORM EVENTs. (See Section 402.3.)
3. RIPARIAN BUFFERs or RIPARIAN FORESTED BUFFERs. In order to protect and
improve water quality, a protected RIPARIAN BUFFER or RIPARIAN FORESTED
BUFFER shall be created. (See Section 403.7.)
4. The TOWNSHIP may require additional STORMWATER control measures for
STORMWATER discharges to special management AREAs including but not limited to:
A. Waterbodies listed as “impaired” on Pennsylvania’s CLEAN WATER ACT
303(d/305(b) Integrated List.
1-5
B. Any waterbody or WATERSHED with an approved Total Maximum Daily Load
(TMDL).
C. Critical AREAs with sensitive resources including but not limited to state designated
special protection waters, cold water fisheries, carbonate or other GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE AREAs highly vulnerable to contamination, drainage AREAs to water
supply reservoirs and source water protection zones.
SECTION 108. ACCEPTABLE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) FOR THE
DETENTION AND CONTROL OF STORMWATER RUNOFF
Various combinations of methods should be tailored to suit the particular requirements of the
type of DEVELOPMENT and the topographic features of the PROJECT SITE and shall be
designed in accordance with the latest BMP MANUAL.
SECTION 109. STORMWATER IMPERVIOUS CREDIT AND EXEMPTIONS
Any REGULATED ACTIVITY that meets the impervious credit or exemption criteria below is
exempt from the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN preparation provisions of this
ORDINANCE. These criteria shall apply to the total DEVELOPMENT even if
DEVELOPMENT is to take place in phases. The square foot impervious credit is attributable to
the existing parent tract in existence at the time of enactment of the previously adopted
Stormwater Management Ordinance, December 14, 1998 where impervious credits were first
applied. The impervious AREA computations shall be cumulatively considered.
STORMWATER impervious credit shall not relieve the APPLICANT from providing adequate
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT to meet the intent of Section 104 of this ORDINANCE. The
following activities are specifically exempt from the plan requirements of this ORDINANCE.
1. AGRICULTURAL ZONE. The following criteria shall apply to all existing LOTs in the
Agricultural* Zone (1 LOT per 20 acres or larger).
Total Parcel Size (acres Minimum Distance
**(feet)
Impervious AREAs
Exempt from ORDINACE
0 to 1 50 1,000
>1 to 3 100 3,000
>3 to 5 250 6,000
>5 500 10,000
NOTES:
* All farms for which a STORMWATER impervious credit is requested shall have a
CONSERVATION PLAN and a Nutrient Management Plan on file with and approved by
the appropriate officials.
** The minimum distance between the proposed impervious AREA and/or
STORMWATER controls/structure discharge point to the down slope property line. In lieu
1-6
of meeting the minimum distance criteria, the APPLICANT may provide documentation
from a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the increased
flows from the site leaves the site in the same manner as the pre-DEVELOPMENT
condition and that there will be no adverse effects to adjacent property, or the increased
flows reach a NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY or existing STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT structure before affecting the adjacent property.
1. Lands improved with existing residential structures shall be credited for an additional 1,000
square feet of IMPERVIOUS SURFACE in all zoning districts other than the Agricultural
zoning district provided the following conditions are met:
A. Flows from the PROJECT SITE after DEVELOPMENT leave the PROJECT SITE in
the same manner as pre-DEVELOPMENT conditions.
B. Flows from the PROJECT SITE after DEVELOPMENT do not adversely affect any
existing STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY located on the PROJECT
SITE.
C. The 1,000 square foot impervious credit is attributable to the existing parent tract in
existence at the time of enactment of the previously adopted Stormwater
Management Ordinance, December 14, 1998 where impervious credits were first
applied. The impervious AREA computations shall be cumulatively considered.
2. Lands improved with existing nonresidential structures shall be credited for an additional
500 square feet of IMPERVIOUS SURFACE in all zoning districts other than the
Agricultural zoning district provided the following conditions are met:
A. Flows from the PROJECT SITE after DEVELOPMENT leave the PROJECT SITE in
the same manner as pre-DEVELOPMENT conditions.
B. Flows from the PROJECT SITE after DEVELOPMENT do not adversely affect any
existing STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY located on the PROJECT
SITE.
C. The 500 square foot impervious credit is attributable to the existing parent tract in
existence at the time of enactment of the previously adopted Stormwater
Management Ordinance, December 14, 1998 where impervious credits were first
applied. The impervious AREA computations shall be cumulatively considered.
4. AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES when operated in accordance with a CONSERVATION
PLAN or EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN found adequate
by the CONSERVATION DISTRICT in accordance with 25 Pa. Code CHAPTER 102.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES such as growing crops, rotating crops, tilling of soil and
grazing animals and other such activities are specifically exempt from complying with the
requirements of this ORDINANCE.
5. FOREST MANAGEMENT and TIMBER OPERATIONS which are following the PADEP
management practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Guidelines for Forestry", are operating under an and in accordance with 25 Pa. Code
CHAPTER 102 are exempt from complying with the requirements of this ORDINANCE.
1-7
6. TOWNSHIP capital improvement projects are exempt from complying with the
requirements of this ORDINANCE.
7. Use of land for gardening on the property; less than 5,000 square feet of EARTH
DISTURBANCE on the property, are exempt from complying with the requirements of
this ORDINANCE.
8. Removal of ground cover, grading, FILLING or excavation on the property; less than 5,000
square feet on the property, are exempt from complying with the requirements of this
ORDINANCE.
9. The TOWNSHIP may deny or revoke any impervious credit or exemption pursuant to this
Section at any time for any project that the TOWNSHIP believes may pose a threat to
public health, safety, property or the environment.
10. No APPLICANT and no activity is exempt from complying with any state or federal
requirements applicable if the subject property is located in a High Quality (HQ) or
Exceptional Value (EV) WATERSHED.
SECTION 110. REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
APPLICANTs have the option to propose a REGIONAL STORMATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN or participate in a REGIONAL STORMATER MANAGEMENT PLAN developed by
others. A REGIONAL STORMATER MANAGEMENT PLAN may include offsite volume and
rate control, as appropriate and supported by a detailed design approved by the TOWNSHIP. A
REGIONAL STORMATER MANAGEMENT PLAN must meet all of the VOLUME
CONTROL and rate control standards required by this ORDINANCE for the AREA defined by
the REGIONAL STORMATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, but not necessarily for each
individual DEVELOPMENT Site. Appropriate agreements must be established to ensure the
requirements of this ORDINANCE and the requirements of the REGIONAL STORMATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN are met.
SECTION 111. COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER PERMIT AND ORDINANCE
REQUIREMENTS
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this ORDINANCE, said provisions shall
be deemed to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion and protection of
health, safety and welfare. Approvals issued pursuant to this ORDINANCE do not relieve the
APPLICANT of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated
by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. If more stringent requirements concerning
regulation of STORMWATER or Erosion and sedimentation control are contained in these
permits or approvals, the more stringent regulation shall apply.
2-1
ARTICLE II. TERMINOLOGY
SECTION 201. WORD USAGE
Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be interpreted and construed
throughout this ORDINANCE to have the meaning herein indicated. Terms not herein defined
which are defined in The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Manheim Township,
The Zoning Ordinance of Manheim Township, or The Floodplain Ordinance of Manheim
Township shall have the meanings assigned in such ordinance. The following rules of
CONSTRUCTION and interpretation shall be used in this ORDINANCE.
1. Words in the present tense may imply the future tense.
2. Words used in singular imply the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
3. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter genders. The feminine gender
shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall include the masculine and
feminine.
4. The word "person" includes a partnership, firm, association, corporation, organization,
trust, estate, company, joint venture or any other legally recognized entity as well as an
individual and the officers of any corporation and the members of any partnership and shall
include both singular and plural.
5. The word “LOT” includes the words “plot”, “Tract”, and “Parcel”.
6. The words "shall", "must" and “will” are mandatory; the word "may" and “should” are
discretionary.
7. The words "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
8. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained, or
arranged to be used or occupied."
9. The time, within which any act required by this ORDINANCE is to be performed, shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. However, if the last day is
a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday declared by the United States Congress or the
Pennsylvania General Assembly, it shall also be excluded. The word “day” shall mean a
calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.
10. Terms not defined in this ORDINANCE, in such other ordinances, or in § 107 of the MPC
shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them as found in the most recent edition of
Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
11. References to officially adopted regulations, standards, or publications of the
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (PADEP)
or other governmental agencies shall include the regulation, publication, or standard in
effect on the date when a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN is first filed. It is the
intent of the TOWNSHIP in enacting this Section to incorporate such changes to statutes,
2-2
regulations, and publications to the extent authorized by 1 Pa. C.S. § 1937.
SECTION 202. DEFINITIONS
As used in this ORDINANCE, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION - The removal of the surface of the land through the combined
action of man's activities and natural processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the
natural processes alone.
ACCESS EASEMENT - A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing entry for the
purpose of inspecting, maintaining and repairing STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES.
ACT 167 PLAN - The plan for managing STORMWATER RUNOFF and prepared under the
authority of the Pennsylvania’s Stormwater Management Act of October 4, 1978.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY - Activities associated with AGRICULTURE such as
Agricultural cultivation, Agricultural operation, and ANIMAL HEAVY USE AREAS. This
includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking,
harrowing, planting, harvesting crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
CONSERVATION PRACTICES. CONSTRUCTION of new buildings or impervious AREAs is
not considered an AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY.
AGRICULTURE - The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry, horticulture, and
gardening, including the keeping or raising of livestock and including the sale of crops and
agricultural, dairy and horticultural farm products incidental to the operation of a farm.
AGRICULTURAL ZONE - The Agricultural zoning district as defined by The Zoning
Ordinance of Manheim Township.
ALTERATION - As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and
rock from one location or position to another; also the changing of surface conditions by causing
the surface to be more or less impervious; EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY.
ANIMAL HEAVY USE AREAS - A barnyard, feedlot, loafing AREA, exercise LOT, or other
similar AREA on an Agricultural operation where due to the concentration of animals, it is not
possible to establish and maintain vegetative cover of a density capable of minimizing
ACCELERATED EROSION and SEDIMENTATION by usual planting methods. The term does
not include entrances, pathways and walkways between AREAs where animals are housed or
kept in concentration.
APPLICANT - A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the
TOWNSHIP for approval to engage in any REGULATED ACTIVITY at a PROJECT SITE in
the TOWNSHIP.
AREA - The extent of surface contained within the boundaries or extremities of land or building.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) - Activities, facilities, control measures, planning
or procedures used to minimize ACCELERATED EROSION and SEDIMENTATION and
manage STORMWATER to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the quality of waters and the
2-3
existing and designated uses of WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH before, during and
after EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES. See also NON-STRUCTURAL BMP and
STRUCTURAL BMP.
BMP MANUAL - The Pennsylvania STORMWATER Best Management Practices Manual of
December 2006, or most recent version thereof.
BRIDGE - A structure including supports erected over a depression or an OBSTRUCTION, such
as water, highway, or railway, and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other
moving loads, and having an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than
twenty (20) feet between undercoping of abutments or spring lines of arches, or extreme ends of
openings for multiple boxes; it may also include multiple PIPEs, where the clear distance
between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening.
CARBONATE GEOLOGY - Limestone or dolomite bedrock. CARBONATE GEOLOGY is
often associated with KARST topography.
CHANNEL - A natural or artificial WATERCOURSE with a definite bed and banks which
confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
CHAPTER 102 - Chapter 102 Erosion and Sediment Control of the regulations of PADEP, 25
Pa. Code Sect. 102.1 et seq.
CHAPTER 105 - Chapter 105 Dam Safety and Waterway Management of the regulations of
PADEP, 25 Pa. Code Sect. 105.1 et seq.
CHAPTER 106 - Chapter 106 FLOODPLAIN Management of the regulations of PADEP, 25 Pa.
Code Sect. 106.1 et seq.
CISTERN - A reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLEAN WATER ACT – The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S. C.A. §§
1251-1387.
COMMISSIONERS - The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Manheim, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
CONCRETE CHANNEL - A Concrete CHANNEL with a definite bed and banks which confine
and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT - The Lancaster County Conservation District.
CONSERVATION PLAN - A plan written by a Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) certified planner or approved by the CONSERVATION DISTRICT identifying
CONSERVATION PRACTICES and including site specific BMPs for agricultural plowing or
tilling activities and ANIMAL HEAVY USE AREAS.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES - Practices installed on Agricultural lands to improve farmland,
soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a current CONSERVATION PLAN.
CONSTRUCTION - The CONSTRUCTION, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension,
2-4
expansion, ALTERATION, or relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of
mobilehomes.
CONVEYANCE - Facilities that carry a flow or have the ability of a PIPE, CULVERT,
BRIDGE, SWALE or similar facility to carry the peak flow from the DESIGN STORM.
CULVERT - An enclosed water carrying structure of one or more openings having a combined
span including spacing between openings equal to or less than twenty (20) feet.
DECLORINATED WATER - Water that when tested contains less than 0.1 mg/L of free
chlorine.
DESIGN STORM - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a STORM
EVENT measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty year STORM EVENT) and duration
(e.g., twenty-four hour), and used in the design and computation of the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT control systems.
DESIGNEE - An agent of the TOWNSHIP involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this ORDINANCE by appointment, contract or Memorandum
of Understanding.
DETENTION BASIN - An impoundment structure designed to manage STORMWATER
RUNOFF by temporarily storing the RUNOFF and releasing it at a predetermined rate to a
completely drained condition.
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, FILLING, grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations
DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The provisions for DEVELOPMENT, including a planned residential
DEVELOPMENT, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of DEVELOPMENT, streets, ways and
parking facilities, common OPEN SPACE and public facilities.
DISAPPEARING STREAM - A stream in an AREA underlain by limestone or dolomite that
flows underground for a portion of its length.
DISTURBED AREA - Any land AREA where an EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY is
occurring or has occurred. This includes REDEVELOPMENT and demolition.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT - A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of
land for STORMWATER MANAGEMENT purposes.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY- Any CONSTRUCTION or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading;
excavations; embankments; land DEVELOPMENT; Agricultural plowing or tilling; operation of
ANIMAL HEAVY USE AREAS; timber harvesting activities; road maintenance activities; oil
and gas activities; well drilling; mineral extraction; building CONSTRUCTION; and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials and building demolition.
2-5
ENGINEER - A professional ENGINEER registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EPHEMERAL STREAM - A transient stream, one that flows for a relatively short time.
EROSION - The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind,
or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN (E&S Plan) - A project specific
plan consisting of both drawings and a narrative that identifies BMPs to minimize
ACCELERATED EROSION and SEDIMENTATION before, during and after EARTH
DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES.
EXISTING CONDITIONS - The pre-DEVELOPMENT dominant land cover during the five (5)
year period immediately preceding a proposed REGULATED ACTIVITY, which would have
produced the least RUNOFF volume.
FEMA - The United States Federal Emergency Management Agency or any agency successor to
FEMA.
FILL - Material placed or deposited so as to form an embankment or raise the surface elevation
of the land, including but not limited to levees, bulkheads, dikes, jetties, embankments, and
causeways.
FINANCIAL SECURITY - Security posted by an APPLICANT in accordance with Article V of
the MPC, and Article V of this ORDINANCE, by which a APPLICANT assures the
CONSTRUCTION of IMPROVEMENTS required by this ORDINANCE.
FLOOD - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land AREAs from the overland flow of a WATERCOURSE or other body of surface water, or
from the unusual and rapid accumulation or RUNOFF of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN – An AREA of land adjacent to the CHANNEL of a WATERCOURSE which
has been or is likely to be FLOODED, or any AREA subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation or RUNOFF of surface waters from any source, as defined by FEMA or in
accordance with Section 301.2 of the Manheim Township Floodplain Ordinance.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT - Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, as amended
32 P.S. Section 679.101 et seq., and as may be amended in the future.
FLOODWAY - The designated AREA of a FLOODPLAIN required to carry and discharge
FLOOD waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this ORDINANCE, the FLOODWAY
shall equal the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN boundary.
FLOOR AREA - The maximum amount of usable space within a building.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS - Planning and activities necessary for the
management of forest land. These include conducting a timber inventory and preparation of
forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
CONSTRUCTION, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREQUENCY - The probability or chance that a given STORM EVENT/FLOOD will be
2-6
equaled or exceeded in a given year.
GEOLOGIST - An individual licensed and registered under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to engage in the practice of geology.
GRADE - A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the
building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior
walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the AREA between the
building and the LOT line or, when the LOT line is more than six (6) feet from the building,
between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building. Also, the slope of a road,
CHANNEL or natural ground specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE - The process by which water from above the ground surface is
added to the saturated zone of an aquifer, either directly or indirectly.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) - Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by
subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A,
B, C and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after
prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in
the United States and their group classification. The soils in the AREA of the PROJECT SITE
may be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or
CONSERVATION DISTRICT offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A
through D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - Any material that covers the land which inhibits the percolation of
STORMWATER directly into the soil including, but not limited to, buildings, pavement and
stone AREAs.
IMPROVEMENTS - Physical changes to the land, including, but not limited to
buildings/structures, grading, paving, curbs, gutters, STORM SEWERs and drains,
IMPROVEMENTS to existing WATERCOURSEs, sidewalks, streets, signs, monuments, water
supply facilities and sewage disposal facilities.
INFILTRATION FACILITIES - A facility designed to direct RUNOFF into the ground
including but not limited to french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, rain gardens, vegetated
SWALEs, porous asphalt, pervious concrete, and infiltration basins.
INLET - A surface connection to a closed drain. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT WATERCOURSE - A natural flow of water existing for a relatively long
time, but for weeks or months of the year is below the local water table and obtains its flow from
both surface RUNOFF and groundwater discharges.
INVASIVE VEGETATION - Plants which grow quickly and aggressively, spreading, and
displacing other plants. Invasive species typically are introduced into a region far from their
native habitat. See Invasive Plants in Pennsylvania by the Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources.
2-7
KARST - A type of topography or landscape characterized by features including but not limited
to surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles, uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage,
and caves. KARST is formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LIMITING ZONE - A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition which is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of STORMWATER. Seasonal high water
tables, whether perched or regional also constitute a LIMITING ZONE.
LINEAMENT - A linear feature in a landscape which is an expression of an underlying
geological structure such as a fault.
LOT - A parcel of land held in single and separate ownership, occupied or capable of being
occupied by buildings, structures, accessory buildings or structures, signs, and uses customarily
incidental to it, including such OPEN SPACEs as are required, and which is described by
reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
LOT AREA - The AREA contained within the property lines of the individual parcel of land.
LOT SIZE - The required AREA of a LOT.
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP IMPROVEMENTS SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL (MTISM) - The
Manheim Township Improvements Specifications Manual as may be modified by resolution
from time to time.
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REFERENCE MANUAL
(MTSMRM) - The Manheim Township Stormwater Management Reference Manual as may be
modified by resolution from time to time.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) - An equation for calculation of velocity of
flow (e.g. feet per second) and flow rate (e.g. cubic feet per second) in OPEN CHANNELs based
upon CHANNEL shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. OPEN CHANNELs may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure as the MANNING’S EQUATION
assumes steady, gradually varied flow.
MODIFICATION - A change, ALTERATION or amendment which introduces new elements
into the details, or cancels some of them, but leaves the general purpose and effect of the subject
matter intact.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER - A CONVEYANCE or system of
CONVEYANCEs (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, manmade CHANNELs, or storm drains), which is all of the following: (1)
owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, township, county, district, association or other
public body (created under state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial
wastes, STORMWATER or other wastes; (2) designed or used for collecting or conveying
STORMWATER; (3) not a combined sewer; and (4) not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment
Works as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) - All separate STORM SEWERs
that are defined as “large” or “medium” or “small” MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER
SYSTEMs pursuant to 40 CFR §§ 122.26(b)(18), or designated as regulated under 40 CFR §
2-8
122.26(a)(1)(v).
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) - The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) - A permit
issued under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a (relating to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permitting, monitoring and compliance) for the discharge or potential discharge of
pollutants from a POINT SOURCE to surface waters.
NATIVE VEGETATION - Plant species that have evolved or are indigenous to a specific
geographical AREA. These plants are adapted to local soil and weather conditions as well as
pests and diseases.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY - An existing CHANNEL for water RUNOFF that was formed
by natural processes.
NATURAL GROUND COVER - Ground cover which mimics the infiltration characteristics of
predominant HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP found at the site.
NATURAL RESOURCE CONSERVATION SERVICE (NRCS) - The Natural Resource
Conservation Service, previously Soil Conservation Service, or SCS or any agency successor to
the Natural Resource Conservation Service.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION - Any source of water pollution that does not meet the
legal definition of POINT SOURCE in §502(14) of the CLEAN WATER ACT.
NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS - Planning and design approaches, operational and/or behaviorrelated
practices which minimize the contact of pollutants with STORMWATER RUNOFF.
OBSTRUCTION - Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
refuse, FILL, structure, or other matter in, along, across or projecting into any CHANNEL,
WATERCOURSE, or FLOODPLAIN, which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the
flow of water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to
cause damage to life or property.
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD - A FLOOD which is likely to be equaled or exceeded
once every One-Hundred (100) Years (i.e. that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year).
ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN - Any land AREA susceptible to a general and
temporary condition of partial or complete inundation by the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR
FLOOD due to overflow of inland waters, or to the unusual and rapid accumulation or RUNOFF
of surface waters from any source.
OPEN CHANNEL - A drainage element in which STORMWATER flows with an open surface.
OPEN CHANNELs include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainage ways,
SWALEs, streams, ditches, canals, and PIPEs flowing partly full.
OPEN SPACE - Any parcel or AREA of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside,
dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and
2-9
enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such OPEN SPACE.
ORDINANCE – The Stormwater Management Ordinance of Manheim Township.
OUTLET - Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.
PARKING LOT - An accessory use provided on a LOT for the use of the general public designated
for short-term parking of vehicles. Vehicles shall be limited to currently registered and inspected
vehicles
PEAK DISCHARGE - The maximum rate of STORMWATER RUNOFF from a specific
STORM EVENT.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (PADEP) - The
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or any agency successor to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (PennDOT) - The Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation or any agency successor to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
PERMEABLE PAVEMENT - A man-made surface that allows water to penetrate through and
percolate into soil. Water is able to seep through into lower layers of gravel, then to the soil.
Permeable paving materials include porous asphalt, pervious concrete, permeable interlocking
concrete paving blocks, concrete grid pavers, and perforated brick pavers.
PIPE - A CULVERT, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys
STORMWATER.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The Manheim Township Planning Commission, Lancaster,
Pennsylvania.
POINT SOURCE - Any discernible, confined and discrete CONVEYANCE, including, but not
limited to, any PIPE, ditch, CHANNEL, tunnel or conduit from which STORMWATER is or
may be discharged, as defined in State regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92.1.
PROJECT SITE - An AREA of land under DEVELOPMENT and within the jurisdiction of this
ORDINANCE.
RATIONAL FORMULA (RATIONAL METHOD) - A rainfall-RUNOFF relation used to
estimate peak STORMWATER flow.
REDEVELOPMENT - Any physical improvement to a previously developed LOT that involves
earthmoving, removal, or addition of IMPERVIOUS SURFACEs. See also DEVELOPMENT.
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN - A plan to manage STORMWATER
RUNOFF from an AREA larger than a single PROJECT SITE. A Regional STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN could include two adjacent parcels, an entire WATERSHED, or some
defined AREA in between. Regional STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANs can be
prepared for new DEVELOPMENT, or as a retrofit to manage RUNOFF from already developed
AREAs.
2-10
REGULATED ACTIVITY - An action or proposed action that has an impact upon
STORMWATER RUNOFF and which is specified in Section 105 of this ORDINANCE.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY - RUNOFF Activity involving Earth
Disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, 25 Pa. Code CHAPTER 102, or
the Clean Streams Law.
RETURN PERIOD - The average interval, in years, within which a STORM EVENT of a given
magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example, the twenty-five (25) year RETURN
PERIOD rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every twenty-five (25) years; or
stated in another way, the probability of a twenty-five (25) year STORM EVENT occurring in
any one year is a four (4) percent chance.
RIPARIAN BUFFER - Undisturbed riparian land adjacent to a natural WATERCOURSE and
other bodies of water for the purpose of stabilizing banks, filtering pollutants from RUNOFF and
for providing habitat for a variety of wildlife. This is not intended to include man-made SWALEs
or detention facilities utilized solely for STORMWATER MANAGEMENT from the PROJECT
SITE.
RIPARIAN BUFFER/RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER EASEMENT - An easement created for
the purpose of protecting and preserving a RIPARIAN BUFFER or RIPARIAN FOREST
BUFFER.
RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER - A type of RIPARIAN BUFFER that consists of permanent
vegetation that is predominantly native trees, shrubs and forbs along a WATERCOURSE that is
maintained in a natural state or sustainably managed to protect and enhance water quality,
stabilize stream CHANNELs and banks, and separate land use activities from surface waters.
RUNOFF - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT - Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by water, wind or chemical action.
SEDIMENT BASIN - A barrier, dam, retention or DETENTION BASIN located and designed to
retain SEDIMENT material including rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material transported by
water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION - The placement, discharge or any other introduction of SEDIMENT
into the WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH occurring from the failure to design,
construct, implement or maintain control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this ORDINANCE.
SEDIMENTATION - The action or process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated
or deposited by the movement of water, wind or chemical action.
SHEET FLOW - RUNOFF which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not
concentrated in a CHANNEL.
SMALL STORM EVENT - A storm having a FREQUENCY of recurrence of once every two
(2) years or smaller. See 402.2. VOLUME CONTROL.
2-11
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD - A method of RUNOFF computation developed by the
SCS (now NRCS) that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to a RUNOFF parameter
called Curve Number (CN). For more information, see “Urban Hydrology for Small
WATERSHEDs”, Second edition, Technical Release No. 55, SCS, June 1986 or most current
edition.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS - The regulatory requirements to protect,
maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean
Streams Law and the CLEAN WATER ACT.
STORM EVENT - A storm of a specific duration, intensity, and FREQUENCY.
STORM FREQUENCY - The number of times that a given STORM EVENT occurs or is
exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See RETURN PERIOD.
STORM SEWER - A system of PIPEs, conduits, SWALEs or other similar structures including
appurtenant works which carries intercepted RUNOFF, and other drainage, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial waste.
STORMWATER - Drainage RUNOFF from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation,
snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT - A program of controls and measures designed to regulate
the quantity and quality of STORMWATER RUNOFF from a DEVELOPMENT while
promoting the protection and conservation of groundwater and GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACT - Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as
amended 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., and as may be amended in the future.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY - Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due
to its condition, design, or CONSTRUCTION, conveys, stores, infiltrates, evaporates, transpires,
cleans or otherwise affects STORMWATER RUNOFF. Typical STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
OPEN CHANNELs, WATERCOURSEs, road gutters, SWALEs, STORM SEWER(s), PIPE(s),
BMPs and infiltration structures. Those controls and measures used to effect a STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT program.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN (O&M
PLAN) - A plan, including a narrative, to ensure proper functioning of the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES in accordance with Article VI of this ORDINANCE.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN - The Plan prepared by the APPLICANT or his
representative indicating how STORMWATER RUNOFF will be managed at a particular
PROJECT SITE according to this ORDINANCE. The STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN shall consist of site plans, calculations, narrative and supplemental information described
in Article IV.
STRUCTURAL BMPS - Physical devices and practices that capture and treat STORMWATER
RUNOFF. STRUCTURAL BMPS include but are not limited to, wet ponds, constructed
2-12
wetlands, small scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low
impact design, bioretention, permeable paving, vegetated swales, riparian or forested riparian
buffers, sand filters, detention basins, manufactured devices, and other BMPs as referenced in
Chapter 6 of the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual (363-300-002). Structural
STORMWATER BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the PROJECT SITE
SWALE - A wide shallow ditch which carries surface water RUNOFF.
TIMBER OPERATIONS - See FOREST MANAGEMENT.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) - The time for surface RUNOFF to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the WATERSHED to a point of interest within the
WATERSHED. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in PIPEs or
CHANNELs, if any.
TOP OF STREAMBANK - First substantial break in slope between the edge of the bed of the
stream and the surrounding terrain. The TOP OF STREAMBANK can either be a natural or
constructed (that is, road or railroad GRADE) feature, lying generally parallel to the
WATERCOURSE.
TOTAL RESIDUAL CHLORINE (TRC) – The total amount of chlorine residual present in a
water sample after a given contact time.
TOWNSHIP - The Township of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER - A duly registered professional ENGINEER, licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, employed by the TOWNSHIP or engaged as a consultant
thereto and appointed as the ENGINEER for the TOWNSHIP.
TR-20 (CALIBRATED) - The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the
Cocalico Creek, Conestoga River, and Little Conestoga Creek WATERSHEDs for the ACT 167
PLAN. The models have been calibrated to reflect published and observed flow values by
adjusting key model input parameters.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (USDA) - The United States
Department of Agriculture or any agency successor to the United States Department of
Agriculture.
VOLUME CONTROL - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT controls, or BMPs, used to remove
a predetermined amount of RUNOFF or the increase in volume between the pre- and post-
DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STORM.
WATERCOURSE - A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, CHANNEL,
SWALE, pond, lake or other body of surface water, carrying or holding surface water, whether
natural or artificial, having defined bed and banks.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches,
WATERCOURSEs, STORM SEWERs, lakes, dammed water, WETLANDs, ponds, springs, and
all other bodies or CHANNELs of CONVEYANCE of surface and underground water, or parts
2-13
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED - All the land from which water drains into a particular WATERCOURSE.
WETLAND - Those AREAs that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a
FREQUENCY and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, ferns, constructed WETLANDs and similar AREAs.
WETLAND BUFFER - An AREA of land immediately adjacent to a WETLAND that is set
aside for naturally occurring vegetation or the reestablishment of native plant species and as a
transition zone to protect the WETLAND from impact caused by DEVELOPMENT of adjacent
upland AREAs.
WOODLAND - Land predominantly covered with trees and shrubs. Without limiting the
foregoing, WOODLANDs include all land AREAs of 10,000 square feet or greater, supporting at
least one-hundred (100) trees per acre, so that either (i) at least fifty (50) trees are two (2) inches
or greater in diameter at breast height, or (ii) fifty (50) trees are at least twelve (12) feet in height.
3-1
ARTICLE III. PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Prior to preliminary or final plan approval of any subdivision plan, land DEVELOPMENT
PLAN, the issuance of any permit, or the commencement of any DEVELOPMENT within
the jurisdiction of this ORDINANCE, the APPLICANT shall submit a STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN application to the TOWNSHIP for approval. No approval of any
subdivision plan, land DEVELOPMENT PLAN, issuance of any permit, or
commencement of any DEVELOPMENT within the jurisdiction of this ORDINANCE
shall be granted prior to approval of a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
application.
2. APPLICANTs are encouraged to schedule a pre-application meeting to review the
APPLICANT’s overall STORMWATER MANAGEMENT concept with the TOWNSHIP.
The pre-application meeting is not mandatory, shall not constitute formal filing of a plan
with the TOWNSHIP or imply any approvals by the TOWNSHIP. Topics discussed may
include the following;
A. Geological information, plans and other available data obtained by the APPLICANT.
B. Findings of the site analysis including identification of any environmentally sensitive
AREAs, wellhead protection AREAs, RIPARIAN BUFFERs, HYDROLOGIC SOIL
GROUPs (HSG), existing NATURAL DRAINAGEWAYs, KARST features,
AREAs conducive to infiltration to be utilized for VOLUME CONTROL, etc.
C. Results of infiltration testing performed.
D. Applicable TOWNSHIP Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Floodplain
Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance provisions.
E. The APPLICANT’s conceptual project layout, including proposed STRUCTURAL
and NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS with consideration given to maximizing the use of
both STRUCTURAL and NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS designed to accomplish the
following:
(1) Minimize impact by identifying environmentally sensitive AREAs early on in
the process and protecting them.
(2) Minimize impervious cover.
(3) Prevent STORMWATER generation.
(4) Prevent pollutant loads.
(5) Maximize the use of low impact and green infrastructure measures.
3. Preparation of a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN is required for all
REGULATED ACTIVITIES, unless preparation and submission of the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN is specifically exempted or granted impervious credit according
to Section 109.
3-2
SECTION 302. PLAN CONTENTS
The following items shall be included as part of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
1. Plans, showing the following information:
A. The copies of all plans submitted with the application for STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT approval can be either black and white or blue and white prints.
(1) The sheet sizes shall be either 18 inches by 24 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches.
(2) Proposed name or identifying title of project.
(3) Name and address of the landowner and APPLICANT of the PROJECT SITE.
(4) Name and address of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
(5) Plan date and date of the latest revision to the plan, north point, graphic scale
and written scale. All plans shall be at a scale of 20, 30, 40 or 50 feet to the
inch.
(6) If the plan is prepared in two (2) or more drawing sheets, a full size drawing
and key map showing the location of the sheets and a match line shall be placed
on each sheet.
(7) Each sheet shall be numbered to show the relationship to the total number of
sheets in the plan set.
(8) Plans shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording for
the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County.
(9) Total acreage of the PROJECT SITE and the tract of land on which the
PROJECT SITE is located.
(10) A location map, for the purpose of locating the PROJECT SITE to be
developed, at a minimum scale of 2,000 feet to the inch, showing the relation of
the tract to adjoining property and to all streets and TOWNSHIP boundaries
existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the tract of land on which the
PROJECT SITE is proposed to be developed.
2. Existing features.
A. Tract boundaries showing distances, bearings and curve data, as located by field
survey or by deed plotting.
B. Existing contours at vertical intervals of one (1) or two (2) feet for land with an
average natural slope of twenty (20) percent or less and at vertical intervals of five (5)
feet for more steeply sloping land. The location of the benchmark and the datum used
shall also be indicated.
C. The names of all owners of all immediately adjacent unplatted land, the names of all
3-3
proposed or existing DEVELOPMENTs immediately adjacent, and the locations and
dimensions of any streets or easements shown thereon.
D. The names, locations and dimensions of all existing streets, railroads,
WATERCOURSEs, drainage facilities, FLOODPLAINs, streams, lakes, ponds, and
other waterbodies, existing drainage courses, KARST features and other significant
features within 200 feet of any part of the tract proposed to be developed and the
location of all buildings and structures.
E. Other physical features including WETLANDs, sinkholes, AREAs of NATIVE
VEGETATION to be preserved including trees greater than two (2) inches in
diameter at breast height, WOODLANDs, other environmentally sensitive AREAs
and the total extent of the upstream AREA draining through the PROJECT SITE.
F. The locations of all existing utilities, including on-lot disposal systems and wells,
sanitary sewers, and water lines within 200 feet of property lines.
G. Soil boundaries and soil types as designated by the NRCS.
3. Proposed features.
A. The proposed land use, the number of LOTs and dwelling units and the extent of
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential uses.
B. The locations and dimensions of all proposed streets, parks, playgrounds, and other
public AREAs, sewer and water facilities; LOT lines and building locations, and
parking compounds, driveways, paved AREAs and other IMPERVIOUS
SURFACEs.
C. The proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover including AREAs to be
cut or FILLED.
D. Proposed contours at vertical intervals of one (1) or two (2) feet for land with an
average natural slope of twenty (20) percent or less and at vertical intervals of five (5)
feet for more steeply sloping land.
E. Finished elevations on tops of curbs at LOT lines projected and LOT corners.
Elevations shall be shown to the nearest tenth of a foot.
F. A summary table depicting the minimum lowest floor elevation, which includes the
basement for all LOTs located immediately adjacent to the FLOODPLAIN AREA.
G. The location of any proposed on-LOT disposal system, replacement drainfield
easements, and water supply wells.
H. The location of any proposed signage identifying the constructed BMP. Proposed
signage shall be installed on any nonresidential property or property under the control
of a homeowners association or community association.
4. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.
3-4
A. All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES must be shown. If multiple facilities are used in
conjunction with each other, such as infiltration BMPs with vegetation based
management practices, a summary narrative shall be included describing any
sequencing and how the facilities are meant to function with each other to manage
STORMWATER RUNOFF in accordance with this ORDINANCE.
B. All STORM SEWERs along with any proposed connections to existing facilities.
C. Plans and profiles, drawn to scale, of all proposed STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES including BMPs, drainage structures, PIPEs, OPEN
CHANNELs, and SWALEs and including vertical and horizontal alignment, size and
type of material. This information shall be of the quality required for the
CONSTRUCTION of all facilities. All SWALEs and OPEN CHANNELs shall have
centerline invert elevations shown every one-hundred (100) feet and at changes in
GRADE. Prior to final plan recording, such plans and profiles of all proposed
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES shall exclude any other utility
information and shall be limited to the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES.
D. When subdivision or land DEVELOPMENT PLAN applications, whether
preliminary or final, are submitted in sections, a generalized STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN for the entire PROJECT SITE shall be submitted in addition
to the detailed STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN for the proposed section.
This generalized plan shall demonstrate how the STORMWATER of the proposed
section will relate to the entire DEVELOPMENT. The amount and velocity at the
discharge point of the section shall be included in the data submitted. If temporary
facilities are required for CONSTRUCTION of a section, such facilities shall be
included in the submitted plans.
E. A minimum twenty (20) foot wide ACCESS EASEMENT shall be provided for all
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES. ACCESS EASEMENTs shall
provide for ingress and egress to a public right-of-way.
F. A minimum twenty (20) foot wide DRAINAGE EASEMENT shall be provided
where the CONVEYANCE, treatment, or storage of STORMWATER, either existing
or proposed, is identified on the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
DRAINAGE EASEMENTs shall be provided to contain and convey the One-
Hundred (100) Year STORM EVENT.
G. Where PERMEABLE PAVEMENT is to be installed, pavement material and
CONSTRUCTION specifications shall be included.
H. A planting plan for all vegetated BMPs in accordance with Section 401.4 and
Section 403.7 shall be provided.
I. A note on the plan indicating any AREA that is not to be offered for dedication along
with a statement that the TOWNSHIP is not responsible for maintenance of any
AREA not dedicated for public use. The only AREAs that shall be offered for
3-5
dedication are those STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES situated
within a dedicated TOWNSHIP right-of-way.
J. A table on the plan indicating the assumed square footage of IMPERVIOUS
SURFACE for each LOT.
K. A table on the plan indicating the assumed square footage of IMPERVIOUS
SURFACE permitted for each STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY.
L. A summary table on the plan identifying all BMPs including BMP ID, drainage
AREA to the BMP, name of receiving waterbody, the BMP’s inspection and
maintenance FREQUENCY, name of responsible person or organization at the time
of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN approval, and the LOT numbers where
the BMP is located. Refer to Figure 8, Attachment 1 of the MTSMRM.
M. A note on the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN referencing the
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT Agreement and Declaration of Easement and the
requirement to implement BMPs in accordance with the minimum design standards
and requirements for BMPs set forth in this ORDINANCE, in any deed of
CONVEYANCE for the PROJECT SITE or any part thereof.
N. A note on the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN indicating that nothing
shall be placed, planted, set or put within the AREA of an easement. No
ALTERATIONs to SWALEs, basins, BMPs or other STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES shall be permitted.
5. EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Controls.
A. The type, location and extent of all EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Control
measures shall be shown on an EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION
CONTROL PLAN including a narrative that conforms to the requirements of 25 Pa.
Code CHAPTER 102.
B. Evidence of approval of the EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL
PLAN from the CONSERVATION DISTRICT as required by 25 Pa. Code
CHAPTER 102 prior to final plan approval.
C. EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Controls are to be designed and maintained
throughout the construction phase of the PROJECT SITE, beginning with initial
topsoil removal and through the conversion and operation of all Post Construction
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT IMPROVEMENTS. Specifically, the runoff
conditions immediately downstream from the PROJECT SITE must be maintained or
be less than the pre-developed rates during construction. Calculations at significant
milestone dates within the construction phasing shall determine if the requirement is
met. This will require attention to sequencing of land cover and controls on the
PROJECT SITE. The designer shall provide information to define how such
protection is incorporated into all phases of the CONSTRUCTION activity.
3-6
6. Supplemental information.
A. A written description of the PROJECT SITE including a description of existing
natural and hydrologic features and any environmentally sensitive AREAs.
B. A written report, including STORMWATER RUNOFF calculations for both pre-
DEVELOPMENT and post-DEVELOPMENT conditions including complete
hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations for all STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.
C. A written description of the overall STORMWATER MANAGEMENT concept for
the project, including a description of permanent STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
techniques, STRUCTURAL and NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS to be employed and
CONSTRUCTION specifications of the materials to be used for Structural
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES to be applied both during and after
DEVELOPMENT, and expected project time schedule. The narrative shall include a
description of any treatment train and how the facilities are meant to function with
each other to manage STORMWATER RUNOFF.
D. A copy of the NPDES application.
E. A copy of the NPDES CONSTRUCTION Permit for REGULATED EARTH
DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES prior to final plan approval. Information supporting
any deviation, modification or renewal on an approved NPDES permit shall be
immediately submitted to the Township for review and approval.
F. Evidence of approval for any activities that require a PADEP Joint Permit and are
regulated under 25 Pa. Code CHAPTER 105 or CHAPTER 106, require a PennDOT
Highway Occupancy Permit, or require any other permit under applicable state or
federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN and must be obtained prior to final plan approval.
G. In AREAs of CARBONATE GEOLOGY, a geologic assessment of the effects of
STORMWATER RUNOFF and infiltration on sinkholes as specified in this
ORDINANCE.
H. The effect of the project (in terms of RUNOFF volumes, water quality and peak
flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing TOWNSHIP STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES that may receive RUNOFF from the PROJECT
SITE.
I. When utilization of a PennDOT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY is
proposed, a Declaration of Adequacy/Highway Occupancy Permit from the
PennDOT District Office as well as an executed and recorded Drainage
Indemnification Agreement with the TOWNSHIP is required. See informational
sheet in the MTSMRM. .
J. An O&M PLAN that clearly sets forth the operation and maintenance responsibility
that address the requirements of Article VI for all temporary and permanent
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES and EROSION and
SEDIMENTATION Control Facilities, including:
3-7
(1) Description of temporary and permanent maintenance requirements.
(2) Identification of a responsible individual, corporation, association or other
entity for ownership and maintenance of both temporary and permanent
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT and EROSION and SEDIMENTATION
Control Facilities.
(3) Establishment of suitable easements for access to and protection of all facilities.
(4) The intent of these regulations is to provide private ownership, operation and
maintenance of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT and EROSION and
SEDIMENTATION Control Facilities. Where the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN proposes that the TOWNSHIP own or maintain the
facilities, a description of the methods, procedures, and the extent to which any
facilities shall be turned over to the TOWNSHIP shall be incorporated as an
integral part of the plan.
7. All landowners of land included in the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN shall be
required to execute all applications and final documents.
8. The following certificates shall be shown on the plan:
A. A certificate signed and sealed by an individual registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and qualified under all applicable local and State laws to perform such
duties, indicating the compliance of the design of the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES with the provisions of this ORDINANCE. See form
of certificate in the MTSMRM.
B. A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgement of deeds and signed by the landowner of the property, to the effect
that the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN is the act and deed of the
landowner, that he/she is the owner of the property shown on the survey and plan,
and that he/she desires the same to be recorded as such. Said statement shall be dated
following the last change or revision to the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN. See form of certificate in the MTSMRM.
C. Certificate of dedication of IMPROVEMENTS and other public property to the
TOWNSHIP or other appropriate municipal or governmental authority. See form of
certificate in the MTSMRM.
D. Certificate for review by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. See form of certificate in the
MTSMRM.
E. A certification signed by the registered professional GEOLOGIST or professional
ENGINEER. See form of certificate in the MTSMRM.
9. FINANCIAL SECURITY for the completion of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES is set forth in Article V of this ORDINANCE.
10. Letters of approval from all utilities when CONSTRUCTION occurs within an existing
utility easement or existing utility right-of-way.
3-8
11. Prior to the full release of FINANCIAL SECURITY, the APPLICANT shall be responsible
for providing a Record Plan of all STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
included in the approved STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The Record Plan and
an explanation of any discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the
TOWNSHIP or its DESIGNEE for final approval. The Record Plan shall include a final
certification as required by CHAPTER 102, from an ENGINEER, Landscape Architect,
Surveyor or other qualified person registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
12. The APPLICANT shall submit both an approved and record plan on CD in AutoCAD data
file format. This data file, when opened in AutoCAD, shall provide a complete display of
the entire STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN including all information contained
on the approved final plan. The file shall be in AutoCAD 2000 or later format. All
coordinates as depicted on the plan shall be based on the PA South Zone State Plane
Coordinate System (NAD83 for horizontal and NAVD88 for vertical).
SECTION 303. PLAN PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENTS
1. All STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANs for subdivision and land
DEVELOPMENT shall adhere to the procedures required by The Manheim Township
Subdivision and Land DEVELOPMENT, including the number of copies of material to be
submitted, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANs for all other DEVELOPMENT
shall adhere to the plan procedure delineated in Section 304 of this ORDINANCE.
2. For any activities that require a PADEP Joint Permit Application and regulated under 25
Pa. Code CHAPTER 105 or CHAPTER 106, require a PennDOT Highway Occupancy
Permit, or require any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the
permit(s) shall be part of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
SECTION 304. PLAN PROCEDURE FOR OTHER DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
1. Two (2) copies of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, two (2) copies of, all
supporting information required in Section 301, an application, a STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN checklist, and a filing fee pursuant to the adopted TOWNSHIP
fee schedule shall be submitted to the TOWNSHIP Manager or DESIGNEE. The
TOWNSHIP Manager or DESIGNEE shall submit all applications to the TOWNSHIP
ENGINEER for review and recommendations.
A. In the event that APPLICANT disputes the amount of such review fees, the
APPLICANT shall, within ten (10) days of the filing date, notify TOWNSHIP that
such fees are disputed, in which case the TOWNSHIP shall not delay or disapprove a
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT application due to the APPLICANT's request
over disputed fees.
B. In the event TOWNSHIP and the APPLICANT cannot agree on the amount of review
fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the APPLICANT and TOWNSHIP
shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in § 503 of the MPC.
2. The APPLICANT is responsible for submitting plans to any other agencies including but
not limited to the CONSERVATION DISTRICT, PennDOT, and PADEP when approvals
from these agencies are required. Final approval shall be conditioned upon the
3-9
APPLICANT obtaining all necessary permits.
3. If a plan submission is determined by the TOWNSHIP or its DESIGNEE to be incomplete,
the APPLICANT shall be notified of the deficiencies. The STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN Checklist will be used as the basis for determining whether a
submission is complete or incomplete. See STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
checklist in the MTSMRM. The TOWNSHIP is not responsible for returning an
incomplete submission to the APPLICANT. If the application is deemed complete, it shall
be accepted for filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance of the application shall not,
however, constitute an approval of the plan or a MODIFICATION of any deficiencies or
irregularities. The APPLICANT may appeal the TOWNSHIP’s decision not to accept a
particular application in accordance with Section 809 of this ORDINANCE.
4. Approval of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN application shall be
communicated to the APPLICANT by mail at the APPLICANT's last known address.
5. No grading permits, building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued unless the
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER verifies that the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT standards
and requirements herein are satisfied and the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
has been recorded.
6. Approval of a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN by the TOWNSHIP shall not be
construed as an indication that the plan complies with the standards of any other agency of
the Commonwealth.
SECTION 305. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REVIEW
1. The TOWNSHIP or its DESIGNEE shall review the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN for consistency with this ORDINANCE.
2. In the case of a subdivision or land development, the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall
review the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN for conformance with The Manheim
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, for all provisions not superseded
by this ORDINANCE.
3. The TOWNSHIP or its DESIGNEE's approval of a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN shall be valid for a period not to exceed five (5) years unless a schedule is submitted
and approved for a longer period of time as part of the approval process. This five (5) year
time period shall commence on the date that the TOWNSHIP or its DESIGNEE approves
the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. If STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES included in this approved STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN have
not been completed and inspected within this five (5) year time period, then the
TOWNSHIP or its DESIGNEE may consider the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN disapproved and may recommend that the TOWNSHIP revoke any and all permits.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANs that are considered disapproved by the
TOWNSHIP or its DESIGNEE shall be resubmitted in accordance with this
ORDINANCE.
SECTION 306. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REVISION
3-10
1. Revisions to a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN after submission but before
TOWNSHIP approval shall require a resubmission of the modified STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN consistent with Section 304 of this ORDINANCE and be subject
to review as specified in Section 305 of this ORDINANCE.
2. Any substantial revisions to a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN after approval
shall be submitted as a new plan to the TOWNSHIP, accompanied by the applicable
application, supplemental information and filing fee pursuant to the adopted TOWNSHIP
fee schedule.
4-1
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION 401. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. All REGULATED ACTIVITIES shall include such measures as necessary to:
A. Protect health, safety, and property;
B. Meet the water quality goals of this ORDINANCE by implementing measures to:
(1) Protect and/or improve the function of FLOODPLAINs, WETLANDs, and
WOODLAND AREAs.
(2) Protect and/or improve native plant communities including those within the
RIPARIAN BUFFER or RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER.
(3) Protect and/or improve NATURAL DRAINAGEWAYs from EROSION.
(4) Minimize thermal impacts to WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
2. For all REGULATED ACTIVITIES, EROSION and SEDIMENT Control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of
this ORDINANCE and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code
and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the
Pennsylvania Department of Protection, Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (March 2012), as amended and updated.
3. A variety of STRUCTURAL and NON-STRUCTURAL BMPS should be employed and
tailored to suit the PROJECT SITE. Refer to the MTSMRM.
4. A planting plan is required for all vegetated STORMWATER BMPs. (See Section 403.7.)
A. Native or naturalized/non-INVASIVE VEGETATION suitable to the soil and
hydrologic conditions of the site shall be used unless otherwise specified in the BMP
MANUAL.
B. INVASIVE VEGETATION may not be included in any planting schedule. (See
Invasive Plants in Pennsylvania as published by the Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources.)
C. The limit of existing, NATIVE VEGETATION to remain shall be delineated on the
plan along with proposed CONSTRUCTION protection measures.
D. Prior to CONSTRUCTION, a tree protection zone shall be delineated at the dripline
of the tree canopy. The tree protection zone of trees scheduled to remain shall be
marked. Groups of trees may be marked by a protection zone along the outer most
dripline boundary. A forty-eight (48) inch high snow fence or forty-eight (48) inch
high CONSTRUCTION fence mounted on steel posts located eight (8) feet on center
shall be placed along the tree protection boundary. No CONSTRUCTION, storage of
4-2
material, temporary parking, pollution of soil, or regrading shall occur within the tree
protection zone.
E. All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery and landscape
practice. Plant materials shall conform to the standards recommended by the
American Association of Nurseryman, Inc. in the American Standard of Nursery
Stock.
(1) Planting designs are encouraged to share planting space for optimal root growth
whenever possible.
(2) No staking or wiring of trees shall be allowed without a maintenance note
requiring the stake and/or wire to be removed within one (1) year of planting.
5. All STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANs shall be designed and certified by
individuals registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified to perform such
duties.
6. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES which involve a State Highway shall be
subject to the approval of PennDOT.
7. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES located within or affecting the
FLOODPLAIN of any WATERCOURSE shall also be subject to the requirements of The
Floodplain Ordinance of Manheim Township which regulates CONSTRUCTION and
DEVELOPMENT within AREAs of the TOWNSHIP subject to FLOODING.
STORMWATER RUNOFF from a PROJECT SITE shall flow directly into a
WATERCOURSE or into an existing STORM SEWER, or onto adjacent properties in an
approved manner similar to the RUNOFF characteristics of the pre-DEVELOPMENT
flow. Maximum use shall be made of the existing on-site natural and man-made
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.
8. STORMWATER RUNOFF shall not be transferred from one WATERSHED to another
unless the WATERSHEDs are sub-WATERSHEDs of a common WATERSHED which
join together within the perimeter of the property, and the effect of the transfer does not
alter the PEAK DISCHARGE onto downstream lands, or DRAINAGE EASEMENTs from
the affected landowners are provided.
9. All STORMWATER RUNOFF flowing over or through the PROJECT SITE shall be
considered in the design of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES.
10. CARBONATE GEOLOGY Report. A detailed geologic report prepared by a GEOLOGIST
or ENGINEER must be submitted as part of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
and shall include the following:
A. The location of the following KARST features:
(1) Sinkholes.
(2) Closed depressions.
(3) LINEAMENTs in carbonate AREAs.
4-3
(4) Fracture traces.
(5) Caverns.
(6) Intermittent lakes.
(7) EPHEMERAL and DISAPPEARING STREAMs.
(8) Bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
B. The design of all STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES over KARST
features shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects and to
prevent groundwater contamination, and where necessary, sinkhole formation.
C. A plan for remediation of any identified KARST features shall be provided.
D. Impacts of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES on adjacent KARST
features and impacts of KARST features on adjacent STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES shall be identified.
E. STORMWATER shall not be discharged into sinkholes.
F. It shall be the APPLICANT's responsibility to verify if the PROJECT SITE is
underlain by CARBONATE GEOLOGY.
G. Whenever a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY will be located in an
AREA underlain by CARBONATE GEOLOGY, a geological evaluation of the
proposed location by a GEOLOGIST or ENGINEER shall be conducted to determine
the design parameters of proposed BMPs. The evaluation may include the use of
impermeable liners to reduce or eliminate the separation distances. Additionally, the
evaluation shall at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, seasonal
high water table, susceptibility for sinkhole formation, suitability of STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES, subgrade stability and maximum infiltration
capacity in depth of water per unit AREA.
SECTION 402. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. General. The following general standards shall be applied to all REGULATED
ACTIVITIES within the TOWNSHIP to promote flow and volume attenuation, water
quality, EROSION and SEDIMENT Control and FLOOD control.
A. The APPLICANT of any PROJECT SITE in the TOWNSHIP that does not fall under
the impervious credit or exemption criteria in Section 109 shall submit a
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN application consistent with this
ORDINANCE to the TOWNSHIP for review, approval and final recordation.
B. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, decking,
parking or driveway AREAs and any new streets and sidewalks. Any AREAs
designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone or to be placed on gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious.
4-4
2. VOLUME CONTROL.
VOLUME CONTROL BMPs are intended to maintain existing hydrologic conditions for
SMALL STORM EVENTs by promoting GROUNDWATER RECHARGE and/or
evapotranspiration as described in this Section. RUNOFF VOLUME CONTROLs shall be
implemented using the Design Storm Method described in Subsection A and B below, or
through continuous modeling approaches or other means as described in the BMP
MANUAL.
A. The Design Storm Method is applicable to any size of REGULATED ACTIVITY.
This method requires detailed modeling based onsite conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-DEVELOPMENT total RUNOFF volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two (2) year twenty-four (24) hour STORM
EVENT.
B. For modeling purposes:
(1) Existing (pre-DEVELOPMENT) non-forested pervious AREAs must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(2) When the existing PROJECT SITE contains IMPERVIOUS SURFACE, twenty
percent (20) percent of existing IMPERVIOUS SURFACE to be disturbed shall
be considered meadow in good condition in the model for EXISTING
CONDITIONS.
3. Rate Control. Rate control for storms, up to the One-Hundred (100) Year STORM
EVENT, is essential to protect against immediate downstream EROSION and
FLOODING. The following shall apply:
A. Match Pre-DEVELOPMENT Hydrograph.
APPLICANTs shall provide INFILTRATION FACILITITES or utilize other
techniques which will allow the post-DEVELOPMENT One-Hundred (100) Year
hydrograph to match the pre-DEVELOPMENT One-Hundred (100) Year
hydrograph, along all parts of the hydrograph, for the PROJECT SITE. To match the
pre-DEVELOPMENT hydrograph, the post-DEVELOPMENT peak rate must be less
than or equal to the pre-DEVELOPMENT peak rate, and the post-DEVELOPMENT
RUNOFF volume must be less than or equal to the pre-DEVELOPMENT volume for
the same STORM EVENT. A shift in hydrograph peak time of up to five (5) minutes
and a rate variation of up to five (5) percent at a given time may be allowable to
account for the timing affect of BMPs used to manage the peak rate and RUNOFF
volume. VOLUME CONTROL volumes as given in Section 402.5 and Section 402.6
may be used as part of this option; or
B. Where the pre-DEVELOPMENT hydrograph cannot be matched, the calculated peak
rates of RUNOFF for STORMWATER originating on the PROJECT SITE must meet
the following conditions, for all WATERSHEDs flowing from the PROJECT SITE
unless the pre-DEVELOPMENT hydrograph is not exceeded at all points in time:
4-5
(1) The two (2) year post-DEVELOPMENT peak flow shall not exceed fifty (50)
percent of the two (2) year pre-DEVELOPMENT peak flow.
(2) The five (5) year post-DEVELOPMENT peak flow shall not exceed fifty (50)
percent of the five (5) year pre-DEVELOPMENT peak flow.
(3) The ten (10) year post-DEVELOPMENT peak flow shall not exceed fifty (50)
percent of the ten (10) year pre-DEVELOPMENT peak flow.
(4) The twenty-five (25) year post-DEVELOPMENT peak flow shall not exceed
fifty (50) of the twenty-five (25) year pre-DEVELOPMENT peak flow.
(5) The fifty (50) year post-DEVELOPMENT peak flow shall not exceed fifty (50)
percent of the fifty (50) year pre-DEVELOPMENT peak flow.
(6) The One-Hundred (100) Year post-DEVELOPMENT peak flow shall not
exceed fifty (50) percent of the One-Hundred (100) Year pre-DEVELOPMENT
peak flow.
4. Storage facilities, including normally dry, open top facilities, shall completely drain the
storage over a period of time not less than twenty-four (24) hours and not more than
seventy-two (72) hours from the end of the DESIGN STORM.
5. Any portion of the VOLUME CONTROL storage that meets the following criteria may
also be used as rate control storage;
A. VOLUME CONTROL storage that depends on infiltration is designed according to
the infiltration standards in this ORDINANCE.
B. The VOLUME CONTROL storage which will be used for rate control is that storage
which is available within twenty-four (24) hours from the end of the DESIGN
STORM based on the stabilized infiltration rate and/or the evapotranspiration rate.
6. VOLUME CONTROL storage facilities designed to infiltrate shall avoid the least
permeable HSGs at the PROJECT SITE.
7. EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Controls are to be designed and maintained throughout
the construction phase of the PROJECT SITE, as specified in Section 302.5.C.
SECTION 403. METHODS OF CALCULATION OF RUNOFF
1. Any STORMWATER RUNOFF calculations involving drainage AREAs greater than two
hundred (200) acres and Time of Concentration (Tc) greater than sixty (60) minutes,
including on- and off-site AREAs, shall use generally accepted calculation techniques
based on the NRCS SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD.
2. STORMWATER RUNOFF from all PROJECT SITEs shall be calculated using the most
appropriate method, given the site considerations and drainage characteristics associated
4-6
with the design.
A. Table IV-1 summarizes acceptable computation methods. It is assumed that all
methods will be selected by the design professional based on the individual
limitations and suitability of each method for a particular PROJECT SITE.
Table IV-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method Method Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial computer
package based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full hydrology
computer model is desirable or necessary.
TR-55 (or commercial computer
package based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land development plans
within limitations described in TR-55.
HEC-1/HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
ENGINEERs
Applicable where use of full hydrologic
computer model is desirable or necessary.
Rational method (or commercial
computer package based on rational
method)
Emil Kuichling (1889) For project sites less than 200 acres, Tc less
than or equal to 60 min. or as approved by
the Township.
EFH2 (Engineering Field
Handbook, Chapter 2)
USDA NRCS Applicable to rural and undeveloped
AREAs subject to the Program Limits.
Other methods Varies Other methodologies approved by the
Township.
B. Rainfall amounts and intensity shall utilize published data based on the methodology
selected for the WATERSHED being studied. In general the National Weather
Service’s website http:/hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/org/pa_pfds.html should be the
source referred to for rainfall input.
C. Hydrographs may be obtained from NRCS methods such as TR-55, TR20, or from
use of the “modified” or “unit hydrograph” rational methods. If “modified” or “unit
hydrograph” rational methods are used, the ascending leg of the hydrograph shall
have a length equal to three (3) times the Time of Concentration(3xTc) and the
descending leg shall have a length equal to seven (7) times the Time of
Concentration(7xTc) to approximate an SCS Type II hydrograph.
D. RUNOFF calculations shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis indicating
volume and velocities of flow and the GRADEs, sizes, and capacities of water
4-7
carrying structures, SEDIMENT BASINs, retention and detention structures and
sufficient design information to construct such facilities. RUNOFF calculations shall
also indicate both pre-DEVELOPMENT and post-DEVELOPMENT rates for PEAK
DISCHARGE of STORMWATER RUNOFF from all discharge points from the
PROJECT SITE.
E. Criteria and assumptions to be used in the determination of STORMWATER
RUNOFF and design of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES are as
follows:
(1) RUNOFF coefficients shall be based on the information contained in the
MTSMRM, if the actual land use is listed in the MTSMRM. If the actual land
use is not listed in the MTSMRM, RUNOFF coefficients shall be chosen from
other published documentation, and a copy of said documentation shall be
submitted with the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(2) For the purpose of calculating pre-DEVELOPMENT PEAK DISCHARGEs, all
RUNOFF coefficients, both on-site and off-site, shall be based on actual land
use assuming summer or good land conditions. RUNOFF coefficients for offsite
discharges used to design facilities shall be based on actual land use
assuming winter or poor land conditions.
(3) Times of concentration shall utilize the worksheet provided in the MTSMRM.
F. The APPLICANT may use STORMWATER credits for NON-STRUCTURAL
BMPS in accordance with the BMP MANUAL. The allowable reduction will be
determined by the TOWNSHIP or TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
G. Peak rate control is not required for off-site RUNOFF. Off-site RUNOFF may be bypassed
around the site provided all other discharge requirements are met. If off-site
RUNOFF is routed through rate control facilities, RUNOFF coefficients for off-site
discharges used to design those rate control facilities shall be based on actual land use
assuming winter or poor land conditions.
3. Design Standards - General.
A. All STORM SEWER PIPEs, CULVERTs, BRIDGEs, gutters, and SWALEs
(excluding detention and retention basin outfall structures) conveying water
originating only from within the boundaries of the PROJECT SITE shall be designed
for a twenty-five (25) year STORM EVENT. All other STORM SEWER PIPEs,
CULVERTs and BRIDGEs, gutters, and SWALEs (excluding detention and retention
basin outfall structures and excluding sole access structures) conveying water
originating from off-site shall be designed for a fifty (50) year STORM EVENT. Sole
access structures shall be designed to convey the One-Hundred (100) Year STORM
EVENT without roadway overtopping. Drainage and ACCESS EASEMENTs shall
be provided to encompass the water surface limits of the One-Hundred (100) Year
STORM EVENT throughout the PROJECT SITE and to provide access from a public
street to the STORMWATER Facility. Easements shall begin at the furthest upstream
property line of the proposed DEVELOPMENT in a WATERSHED.
4-8
B. The maximum water depth for aboveground storage facilities shall not exceed six (6)
feet measured at the emergency spillway design water surface.
C. INLETs shall not be placed in AREAs other than streets and PARKING LOTs, unless
otherwise approved by the TOWNSHIP.
D. Water carrying facilities, roof drains, and sump pump discharges shall not directly
discharge water into a street right-of-way, sanitary sewer, STORM SEWER or
roadside gutter. Roof leader and sump pump discharge piping shall terminate at least
five (5) feet beyond the exterior foundation wall of any structure, but no closer than
ten (10) feet from a property line or the street right-of-way line.
E. All existing and natural WATERCOURSEs, CHANNELs, drainage systems,
WETLANDs, and AREAs of surface water concentration shall be maintained in their
existing condition unless an ALTERATION is approved by the TOWNSHIP and any
other necessary approving body.
F. Flow velocities from any STORM SEWER may not result in EROSION of the
receiving CHANNEL.
G. Adequate EROSION protection shall be provided along all OPEN CHANNELs and
at all points of discharge.
H. The following conditions shall be met for all SWALEs:
(1) Capacities and velocities shall be computed using the MANNING EQUATION.
The minimum design parameters shall be as follows:
(a) For vegetated SWALEs two design considerations shall be met:
[i] The first shall consider CHANNEL velocity and stability based upon
a low degree of retardance ("n" of 0.03);
[ii] The second shall consider CHANNEL capacity based upon a high
degree of retardance (“n” of 0.05). All vegetated SWALEs shall
have a minimum slope of one (1) percent unless otherwise approved
by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
(b) The "n" factors to be used shall be chosen from the MTSMRM.
I. All STORMWATER structures INLETs and OUTLETs smaller than a forty-eight
(48) inch equivalent diameter which convey STORMWATER from residential LOTs
to a street or from a street to residential LOTs shall extend from the street right-ofway
a minimum distance of 2/3 the length of the longest adjacent LOT dimension.
J. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES not located within a public rightof-
way shall be contained in and centered within a DRAINAGE EASEMENT.
Easements shall follow property boundaries where possible.
K. The last downstream structure, prior to the CONVEYANCE system leaving the
public right-of-way, shall have a one (1) foot sump created below the exiting PIPE's
4-9
invert. All other STORM SEWER manholes and INLETs shall have smooth flow
lines grouted as shown in the MTISM.
L. Headwalls and endwalls shall be used where STORMWATER RUNOFF enters or
leaves the STORM SEWER horizontally from a natural or man-made CHANNEL.
PennDOT Type “DW” headwalls and endwalls shall be utilized for PIPEs twelve (12)
inches and larger in diameter. End sections shall be utilized for PIPEs smaller than
twelve (12) inches in diameter.
4. Design Standards - Facilities within the public street right-of-way.
A. STORM SEWER PIPEs, other than those used for street subbase underdrains shall
have a minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches. Structural calculations that address
the actual design requirements will be required where installation conditions merit.
B. STORM SEWER PIPEs and CULVERTs shall be installed with a minimum slope of
one-half (0.5) percent.
C. Allowable PIPE, CULVERT, and BRIDGE materials shall be as outlined in the
MTISM.
D. All STORM SEWER crossings of streets shall not deviate by more than fifteen (15)
degrees from perpendicular to the street centerline.
E. All STORM SEWER PIPE and CULVERTs shall be laid to a minimum depth of
twelve (12) inches from finished subgrade to the crown of PIPE in paved AREAs and
twelve (12) inches from finished GRADE to the crown of the PIPE in grassed
AREAs.
F. Curves or angle points in PIPEs or box CULVERTs without the use of an INLET or
manhole are prohibited unless pre-approved by the TOWNSHIP. Tee joints, elbows,
and wyes shall be limited for use in constructing underground DETENTION
BASINs, underground retention basins, underdrain systems, and roof leader
collection systems.
G. Manholes, INLETs, headwalls, endwalls and end sections shall conform to the
requirements of the PennDOT, Publication 408, as modified by the adopted
TOWNSHIP standards found in the MTISM.
H. INLETs shall be placed on both sides of the street at low spots, at a maximum of 600
feet apart along a STORM SEWER PIPE or CULVERT, at points of abrupt changes
in the horizontal or vertical directions of STORM SEWERs. INLETs shall normally
be along the curbline at, or beyond the curb radius points. Within the street right-ofway,
the gutter spread based on the twenty-five (25) year STORM EVENT shall be
no greater than one-half (1/2) of the travel lane width and have a maximum depth of
three (3) inches at the curb line. A parking lane shall not be considered as part of the
travel lane. In the absence of pavement markings separating a travel lane from the
parking lane, the parking lane shall be assumed to be eight (8) feet wide if parking is
permitted on the street. INLETs shall be depressed two (2) inches below the GRADE
of the gutter or ground surface for streets with a cartway width greater than twenty4-
10
eight (28) feet. INLETs shall not be depressed for streets having a cartway width of
twenty-eight (28) feet or less. At intersections and access driveways, the depth of
flow across the through streets and across the access driveways (proposed and
existing) shall not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) inch for the twenty-five (25) year
STORM EVENT. Manholes may be substituted for INLETs at locations where
INLETs are not required to handle surface RUNOFF.
I. Placement or use of BMPs within the public street right-of-way shall only be allowed
after TOWNSHIP approval.
5. Design Standards - Facilities outside of the public street right-of-way.
A. The design of all BMP facilities shall incorporate best engineering practices. The
design ENGINEER shall utilize all available design criteria in the BMP MANUAL to
meet the requirements of this ORDINANCE and shall provide all the necessary
backup documentation with their submittal.
B. The BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses (e.g., drinking
water use; cold water fishery use) and maintain the level of Water Quality necessary
to protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain Water Quality in
"Special Protection" streams, as required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 .
C. To control post-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER impacts from REGULATED
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES, STATE WATER QUALITY
REQUIREMENTS can be met by BMPs, including site design, which provide for
replication of pre-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER infiltration and RUNOFF
conditions, so that post-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving waters.
D. PADEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure that design,
implementation and maintenance of BMPs that control RUNOFF from new
DEVELOPMENT and REDEVELOPMENT after REGULATED EARTH
DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES are complete. These requirements include the need
to implement post-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER BMPs with assurance of
long-term operations and maintenance of those BMPs.
E. No REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES within the TOWNSHIP
shall commence until approval by the TOWNSHIP of a plan that demonstrates
compliance with STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS after
CONSTRUCTION is complete.
6. ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN delineation.
A. The ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN must be determined and
delineated on all plans in accordance with The Floodplain Ordinance of Manheim
Township.
B. The lowest floor elevation of all new CONSTRUCTION and substantial
IMPROVEMENTS to buildings and structures shall be in accordance with The
4-11
Floodplain Ordinance of Manheim Township.
C. The boundaries of the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN must be field
staked prior to any CONSTRUCTION.
D. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES located within or affecting the
FLOODPLAIN or any WATERCOURSE shall also be subject to the requirements of
The Floodplain Ordinance of Manheim Township, The Zoning Ordinance of
Manheim Township, and any ordinance which regulates CONSTRUCTION and
DEVELOPMENT within AREAs of the TOWNSHIP subject to FLOODING, and
any other applicable requirements of the FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT.
7. RIPARIAN BUFFER and RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER delineation.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a RIPARIAN BUFFER or RIPARIAN
FOREST BUFFER shall be delineated on the plan and protected by an easement.
The RIPARIAN BUFFER EASEMENT or RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER
EASEMENT shall be recorded as part of any subdivision or land DEVELOPMENT
or STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN that encompasses a RIPARIAN
BUFFER or RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER.
B. Except as otherwise required by 25 Pa. Code CHAPTER 102, the RIPARIAN
BUFFER EASEMENT or RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER EASEMENT shall be
measured to be the greater of the limit of the ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR
FLOODPLAIN or fifty (50) feet from the TOP OF STREAMBANK (on each side).
C. Minimum Management Requirements for RIPARIAN BUFFERs.
(1) Existing NATIVE VEGETATION shall be protected and maintained within the
RIPARIAN BUFFER EASEMENT and RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER
EASEMENT.
(2) INVASIVE VEGETATION shall be actively removed and the RIPARIAN
BUFFER and RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER shall be planted with native
trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native plant community
appropriate to the intended ecological context of the site.
D. The RIPARIAN BUFFER EASEMENT or RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER
EASEMENT shall be enforceable by the TOWNSHIP and shall be recorded in the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds Office, so that it shall run with the land and
shall limit the use of the property located therein.
E. Any permitted use within the RIPARIAN BUFFER EASEMENT or RIPARIAN
FOREST BUFFER EASEMENT shall be conducted in a manner that will maintain
the extent of the existing ONE-HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOODPLAIN, improve or
maintain the stream stability, and preserve and protect the ecological function of the
FLOODPLAIN and shall comply the requirements of The Floodplain Ordinance of
Manheim Township and The Zoning Ordinance of Manheim Township.
4-12
F. The following conditions shall apply when public or private non-motorized recreation
trails are permitted within RIPARIAN BUFFERs and RIPARIAN FOREST
BUFFERs:
(1) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant species and
other sensitive environmental features.
G. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted within the
RIPARIAN BUFFER EASEMENT or RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER EASEMENT
and shall comply with setback requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
73.
8. Design Standards - EROSION and SEDIMENT Control.
A. All EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES shall be conducted in such a way as to
minimize ACCELERATED EROSION and resulting SEDIMENTATION. Measures
to control EROSION and SEDIMENTATION shall, at a minimum, meet the
standards of the CONSERVATION DISTRICT and 25 Pa. Code CHAPTER 102.
B. The PADEP has regulations that require an EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL PLAN for any EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY of 5,000 square
feet or more, under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a PADEP "NPDES CONSTRUCTION
Activities" permit is required for any REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE
ACTIVITY. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part of, or during and
stage of, a larger plan of DEVELOPMENT.
D. The EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN and any required
permit, as required by PADEP regulations, must be available at all times at the
PROJECT SITE. When required, a permit allowing EARTH DISTURBANCE
ACITIVITIES shall be obtained by the APPLICANT before any CONSTRUCTION
on the PROJECT SITE shall begin.
E. The EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN shall be submitted by
the APPLICANT to the CONSERVATION DISTRICT for their review and approval.
No REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES within the TOWNSHIP
shall commence until the EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN is
reviewed and approved by the CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
F. EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Controls are to be designed and maintained
throughout the construction phase of the PROJECT SITE, as specified in Section
302.5.C.
G. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for any REGULATED EARTH
DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES from the appropriate PADEP regional office or the
CONSERVATION DISTRICT must be provided to the TOWNSHIP.
5-1
ARTICLE V. COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS OR GUARANTEE THEREOF
SECTION 501. GENERAL
No DEVELOPMENT shall be considered in compliance with this ORDINANCE until the
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES, and other IMPROVEMENTS and common
amenities, have been installed in accordance with this ORDINANCE and the approved
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
SECTION 502. STAND-ALONE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
1. The APPLICANT shall provide FINANCIAL SECURITY to the TOWNSHIP to assure the
timely installation and proper CONSTRUCTION of all STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES including but not limited to EROSION and SEDIMENT Control measures and
BMPs as required by the approved STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN and this
ORDINANCE. The posting and administration of FINANCIAL SECURITY to guarantee
the completion of required IMPROVEMENTS and common amenities shall comply with the
provisions of this Section, the MPC and other applicable laws of the Commonwealth.
2. All FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be prepared by the APPLICANT in the form required by
the TOWNSHIP and in a form and content acceptable to the Solicitor for the TOWNSHIP.
The amount of the security shall be calculated in accordance with Article V of the MPC. The
following are acceptable forms of security. All other forms of security shall be individually
approved by the TOWNSHIP.
A. Letter of credit. A letter of credit provided by the APPLICANT from a financial
institution or other reputable institution subject to the approval of the TOWNSHIP.
This letter shall be deposited with the TOWNSHIP and shall certify the following:
(1) That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount equal to one hundred ten
(110) percent of the cost of completing all required IMPROVEMENTS.
(2) In case of failure on the part of the APPLICANT to complete the specified
IMPROVEMENTS within the required time period or notification by the
financial institution that the letter of credit will not be renewed, the creditor shall
pay to the TOWNSHIP immediately, and without further action, such funds as
are necessary to finance the completion of those IMPROVEMENTS, up to the
limit of credit stated in the letter.
(3) The letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released
by the TOWNSHIP.
B. Surety performance bond. A security bond from a surety bonding company authorized
to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The bond shall be payable and
in a form acceptable to the TOWNSHIP.
C. Escrow account. A deposit of cash with the TOWNSHIP or in escrow with a financial
institution. The use of a financial institution for establishing an escrow account shall be
subject to approval by the TOWNSHIP. In the case of an escrow account, the
APPLICANT shall file with the TOWNSHIP an agreement between the financial
institution and himself guaranteeing the following:
5-2
(1) That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the
TOWNSHIP, as appropriate, and may not be used or pledged by the
APPLICANT as security in any other manner during that period.
(2) In the case of a failure on the part of the APPLICANT to complete said
IMPROVEMENTS, then the institution shall immediately make the funds in said
account available to the TOWNSHIP for use in the completion of those
IMPROVEMENTS.
3. As the work of installing the required IMPROVEMENTS proceeds, the party posting the
FINANCIAL SECURITY may request the COMMISSIONERS to authorize the release of
such portions of the FINANCIAL SECURITY associated with the completed
IMPROVEMENTS. Requests for the partial release of FINANCIAL SECURITY as the
work of installing the required IMPROVEMENTS proceeds shall be made and governed by
the MPC.
4. At such time that the APPLICANT has completed and installed the required
IMPROVEMENTS, the COMMISSIONERS shall consider the APPLICANT's request for a
release from the improvement guarantee in accordance with the procedure set forth in the
MPC.
5. At the completion of the project, and as prerequisite for the release of the FINANCIAL
SECURITY, the APPLICANT shall provide Record Plans in accordance with Section
302.11.
6. Upon receipt of the Record Plans and prior to release of the remaining FINANCIAL
SECURITY per Section 502.4, the TOWNSHIP shall conduct a final inspection to certify
compliance with this ORDINANCE.
7. In the event that any IMPROVEMENTS which are required by this ORDINANCE have not
been installed as provided in this ORDINANCE or in accordance with the approved
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, the TOWNSHIP may enforce any corporate
bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond
or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the IMPROVEMENTS covered by said security, the COMMISSIONERS may, at their
option, install part of such IMPROVEMENTS in all or part of the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover
the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the IMPROVEMENTS.
SECTION 503. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN COMBINED WITH SUBDIVISION OR
LAND DEVELOPMENT
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES shall be completely installed prior to final plan
approval unless the APPLICANT submits proper FINANCIAL SECURITY with the application
for final approval in accordance with the requirements of Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of Manheim Township. The determination of the amount of FINANCIAL SECURITY
required, permissible forms of FINANCIAL SECURITY, procedure for release of FINANCIAL
SECURITY, regulations for FINANCIAL SECURITY governing staged DEVELOPMENT,
inspection of IMPROVEMENTS during CONSTRUCTION and final inspection of
IMPROVEMENTS shall be as set forth in The Manheim Township Subdivision and Land
5-3
Development Ordinance.
6-1
ARTICLE VI. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES
SECTION 601. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
1. The STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN for the PROJECT SITE shall contain an
O&M PLAN prepared by the APPLICANT and approved by the TOWNSHIP providing
for the necessary and proper operation and maintenance of all STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES and EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Control Facilities.
The O&M PLAN along with the required STORMWATER MANAGEMENT Agreement
and Declaration of Easement document shall be recorded at the Lancaster County Recorder
of Deeds office.
2. The STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN for the PROJECT SITE shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all proposed
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES, including BMPs, consistent with the
following principals:
A. If the TOWNSHIP elects to accept dedication of streets, the TOWNSHIP is under no
obligation to accept STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES located outside
of the public right-of-way.
B. If a PROJECT SITE is to be maintained in single ownership or if other
IMPROVEMENTS are to be privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES shall be the
responsibility of the owner, lessee, private management entity, or any other parties in
interests.
C. The TOWNSHIP is exempt from the requirement to sign and record an O&M PLAN.
3. The O&M PLAN shall be subject to the review and approval of the TOWNSHIP Solicitor
and COMMISSIONERS.
A. The following shall be addressed in the O&M PLAN:
(1) Description of maintenance requirements, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(a) Regular inspection of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES. To assure proper implementation of BMPs, maintenance
and care of STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BMPs should be
inspected by a qualified person, which may include the landowner, or the
owner’s DESIGNEE (including the TOWNSHIP for dedicated and owned
facilities), according to the following minimum frequencies:
[i] Annually for the first five (5) years.
[ii] Once every three (3) years thereafter.
[iii] During or immediately after the cessation of a ten (10) year or
greater STORM EVENT. A ten (10) year STORM EVENT is
defined as rainfall exceeding five (5) inches in a twenty-four
(24) hour period.
[iv] As specified in the O&M PLAN pursuant to this Article.
6-2
(b) All PIPEs, SWALEs and detention facilities shall be kept free of any
debris or other OBSTRUCTION and in original design condition.
(c) Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
SEDIMENT in order to keep the material from building up in grass
waterways, PIPEs, detention or retention basins, infiltration structures, or
BMPs, and thus reducing their capacity to convey or store RUNOFF.
(d) Re-establishment of vegetation of scoured AREAs or AREAs where
vegetation has not been successfully established. Selection of seed
mixtures shall be subject to approval by the TOWNSHIP.
4. RIPARIAN BUFFER and RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER management plan prepared in
accordance with 25 Pa. Code CHAPTER 102 §14(b)(4) if required.
5. Identification of a responsible individual, corporation, association or other entity for
ownership, operation and maintenance of both temporary and permanent STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT and EROSION and SEDIMENTATION Control Facilities.
SECTION 602. MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES DURING
DEVELOPMENT
1. The landowner, successor and assigns shall maintain all STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES in good working order in accordance with the approved
O&M PLAN.
2. The landowner shall keep on file with the TOWNSHIP, the name, address and telephone
number of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities. In the event of a
change, new information shall be submitted to the TOWNSHIP within ten (10) days of the
change.
SECTION 603. MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES ACCEPTED BY THE TOWNSHIP
1. If the COMMISSIONERS accept dedication for all or some of the required
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES following completion, the
COMMISSIONERS may require the posting of FINANCIAL SECURITY to secure
structural integrity of said facilities as well as the functioning of said facilities in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the approved
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN a term of eighteen (18) months from the date
of acceptance of dedication. Said FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be the same type as
required in Article V with regard to installation of such facilities, and the amount of the
FINANCIAL SECURITY shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the actual cost of
installation of said facilities.
SECTION 604. MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATELY OWNED STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
1. Prior to final approval of the PROJECT SITE's STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN,
the APPLICANT shall sign and record at the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds Office,
an O&M PLAN covering all STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES including
6-3
RIPARIAN BUFFERs and RIPARIAN FORESTED BUFFERs that are to be privately
owned. The O&M PLAN along with the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT Agreement
and Declaration of Easement document shall be recorded as a restrictive covenant
agreement that runs with the land. The agreement shall stipulate the following:
A. The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all STORMWATER facilities in
accordance with the approved O&M PLAN and shall keep all facilities in a safe and
attractive manner in accordance with the approved O&M PLAN and
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT Agreement and Declaration of Easement
document.
B. The owner shall grant the right to the TOWNSHIP to use easements and rights-ofway
to assure access for periodic inspections by the TOWNSHIP and maintenance, if
required.
C. The owner shall keep on file with the TOWNSHIP the name, address, and telephone
number of the person or company responsible for maintenance of both temporary and
permanent STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES, in the event of a
change, new information shall be submitted to the TOWNSHIP within ten (10) days
of the change.
D. Enumerate permanent STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES as
permanent real estate appurtenances and record as deed restrictions or easements that
run with the land.
E. If the owner fails to maintain the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
following due notice by the TOWNSHIP to correct the problem(s), the TOWNSHIP
may perform the necessary maintenance work or corrective work and the owner shall
reimburse the TOWNSHIP for all reasonable costs. Failure to reimburse the
TOWNSHIP may lead to a lien being placed against any or all properties that utilize
the facility.
2. Other items may be included in the O&M PLAN, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Agreement and Declaration of Easement document where determined necessary to
guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES. The O&M PLAN along with the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Agreement and Declaration of Easement document shall be subject to the review and
approval of the TOWNSHIP solicitor and TOWNSHIP.
SECTION 605. MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING FACILITIES/BMPS
1. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES existing on the effective date of this
ORDINANCE on individual LOTs that have not been accepted by the TOWNSHIP or for
which operation and maintenance responsibilities have not been assumed by a private
entity such as a homeowners' association shall be maintained by the individual property
owners. Such maintenance shall include at a minimum those items set forth in Section
601.3. If the TOWNSHIP determines at any time that any permanent STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITY has been eliminated, altered, blocked through the erection of
structures or the deposit of materials, or improperly maintained, the condition constitutes a
nuisance and shall notify the property owner of corrective measures that are required, and
6-4
provide for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, within which the
property owner shall take such corrective action. If the property owner does not take the
required corrective action, the TOWNSHIP may either perform the work or contract for the
performance for the work or bill the property owner for the cost of the work plus a penalty
of ten (10) percent of the cost of the work. If such bill is not paid by the property owner
within thirty (30) days, the TOWNSHIP may file a municipal claim against the property
upon which the work was performed in accordance with the applicable laws.
2. No person shall modify, remove, FILL, landscape or alter STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT FACILITIES or BMPs that have been installed on a property unless all
necessary plan approvals and permits have been obtained to permit such MODIFICATION,
removal, FILLING, landscaping or ALTERATION. No person shall place any structure,
FILL, landscaping, or vegetation in a STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY or
within a DRAINAGE or ACCESS EASEMENT.
SECTION 606. RIGHT OF ENTRY ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the TOWNSHIP may
enter, at reasonable times, upon any property, within the TOWNSHIP, to investigate or ascertain
the condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this ORDINANCE.
SECTION 607. REVISIONS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
A revision which involves a change in STORMWATER MANAGEMENT Control methods or
techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the approved plan, shall require a
resubmission by the APPLICANT in accordance with the plan requirements as set forth in
Section 301.
7-1
ARTICLE VII. PROHIBITION AGAINST NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES
SECTION 701. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
1. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, STORMWATER discharges into the WATERS
OF THE COMMONWEALTH or the MS4 which are not comprised entirely of
STORMWATER, except (1) as provided in Subsection B of this Section, and (2)
discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
2. Discharges which may be allowed based on a finding by the TOWNSHIP that the
discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to surface WATERS OF THE
COMMONWEALTH, are:
A. Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities.
B. Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire hydrant flushing,
provided such discharges contain less than 0.1 mg/L of free chlorine.
C. Non-contaminated irrigation drainage, water from lawn maintenance and landscape
drainage.
D. Routine external building wash down (which does not use detergents or other
compounds).
E. Water from individual residential car washing where cleaning agents are not utilized.
F. Diverted stream flows and springs.
G. Non-contaminated water from crawl space pumps.
H. Non-contaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation or from footing
drains.
I. Non-contaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal systems.
J. Non-contaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, provided such discharges
contain less than 0.1 mg/L of free chlorine.
K. Flows from riparian habitats and WETLANDs.
L. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges provided the discharge does not leave the
property boundary and provided such discharges contain less than 0.1 mg/L of free
chlorine.
M. Rising groundwater.
3. In the event that the TOWNSHIP determines that any of the discharges identified in
Subsection B of this Section significantly contribute to pollution of WATERS OF THE
COMMONWEALTH, or is so notified by PADEP, the TOWNSHIP will notify the
responsible person to cease the discharge.
4. Upon notice provided by the TOWNSHIP under Subsection C of this Section, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the TOWNSHIP, to cease the
discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
7-2
5. Nothing in this Section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under state law.
SECTION 702. PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in Section 701:
1. Any drain or CONVEYANCE, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows any
non-STORMWATER discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the MS4 or WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH, and any connections to the
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES from indoor drains and sinks; and
2. Any drain or CONVEYANCE connected from a nonresidential land use to the MS4 which
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the
TOWNSHIP.
8-1
ARTICLE VIII. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 801. MODIFICATIONS
1. The provisions of this ORDINANCE related to water quality are the minimum water
quality standards and the COMMISSIONERS are not permitted to alter these minimum
standards or grant relief from these standards.
2. The provisions of this ORDINANCE not related to water quality are the minimum
standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
3. If any mandatory provision of this ORDINANCE not related to water quality is shown by
the APPLICANT, to the satisfaction of the COMMISSIONERS at a scheduled public
meeting, to be unreasonable and to cause unique and undue hardship or that the alternate
proposal will allow for equal or better results, as it applies to the APPLICANT’s proposed
subdivision, land DEVELOPMENT or STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN the
COMMISSIONERS upon obtaining the comments and recommendations of the
TOWNSHIP or TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, may grant a MODIFICATION, in writing, to
such APPLICANT for such mandatory provision not related to water quality, so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such
MODIFICATION will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this
ORDINANCE.
4. All requests for a MODIFICATION shall be in writing and shall accompany and be a part
of the application for DEVELOPMENT. The request shall state in full, the grounds and
facts, of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provision or
provisions of the ORDINANCE involved and the minimum MODIFICATION necessary.
5. The COMMISSIONERS shall keep a written record of all action on all MODIFICATION
requests.
6. In granting MODIFICATIONs from the provisions of this ORDINANCE, the
COMMISSIONERS may impose conditions that will, in its judgment; secure substantially
the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.
7. The list of such MODIFICATIONs, along with the date of approval shall be included on
the plan.
8. This Section does not apply during an enforcement action.
SECTION 802. AMENDMENT
The COMMISSIONERS may, from time to time, amend this ORDINANCE by appropriate
action taken at a scheduled public meeting. Amendments to the ORDINANCE shall be
advertised and enacted in accordance with the MPC and First Class Township Code.
SECTION 803. ERRONEOUS PERMIT
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous
information provided by an APPLICANT is void without the necessity of any proceedings for
revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other
8-2
authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the
TOWNSHIP purporting to validate such a violation.
SECTION 804. VIOLATIONS
It shall be a violation of this ORDINANCE to commit or permit any other person to commit any
of the following acts:
1. To commence REGULATED ACTIVITIES for which this ORDINANCE requires a permit
prior to obtaining a permit or in violation of the terms or conditions of any permit issued
under this ORDINANCE.
2. To install, repair, modify or alter STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES prior to
obtaining a permit under this ORDINANCE, or, in a manner which violates the terms and
conditions of any permit issued under this ORDINANCE.
3. To misuse or fail to maintain any STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY installed
upon a property.
4. To construct any IMPROVEMENTS upon, GRADE, FILL or take any other action which
will impair the proper functioning of any STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY.
5. To place false information on, or, omit relevant information from an application for a
permit under this ORDINANCE.
6. To fail to comply with any other provisions of this ORDINANCE.
SECTION 805. ENFORCEMENT
The COMMISSIONERS are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of
this ORDINANCE.
1. Any permit or approval issued by the TOWNSHIP pursuant to this ORDINANCE may be
suspended by the TOWNSHIP for:
A. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, O&M PLAN or STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT Agreement and Declaration of Easement document.
B. A violation of any provisions of this ORDINANCE or any other applicable law,
ORDINANCE, rule, or regulation relating to the REGULATED ACTIVITY.
C. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
CONSTRUCTION or DEVELOPMENT that constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution or endangers the life or property of others.
D. When any other required permit is allowed to lapse prior to satisfying all
requirements of the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
2. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the TOWNSHIP when:
8-3
A. The TOWNSHIP has inspected and approved the corrections to the violation that
caused the suspension;
B. The TOWNSHIP is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
3. Any permit or approval may be withheld by the TOWNSHIP when other permits are
suspended.
SECTION 806. NOTIFICATION
1. In the event that any person fails to comply with the requirements of this ORDINANCE, or
fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the TOWNSHIP may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:
A. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
B. The elimination of prohibited discharges;
C. Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
D. The abatement or remediation of STORMWATER pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
E. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
F. The implementation of STORMWATER BMPs; and
G. Operation and maintenance of STORMWATER BMPs.
2. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a reasonable
time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified
shall subject each person to the penalty provisions of this ORDINANCE. All such penalties
shall be deemed cumulative and shall not preclude the TOWNSHIP from pursuing any and
all other remedies.
SECTION 807. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION
1. For each violation of the provisions of this ORDINANCE, the owner, agent, lessee, or
contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any such violation
shall be liable upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding to pay a fine of not more
than $300 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day or portion
thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation of this
ORDINANCE, and each Section of this ORDINANCE which is violated shall be
considered a separate violation.
2. The TOWNSHIP may also institute suits to restrain, prevent, or abate a violation of this
ORDINANCE in equity or at law. Such proceedings in equity or at law may be initiated
before any court of competent jurisdiction. In cases of emergency where, in the opinion of
the court, the circumstances of the case require immediate abatement of the unlawful
conduct, the court may, in its decree, fix a reasonable time during which the person
8-4
responsible for the unlawful conduct shall correct or abate the same. The expense of such
proceedings shall be recoverable from the violator in such manner as may now or hereafter
be provided by law.
SECTION 808. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
Except as specifically provided by Act 167, the making of any administrative decision by the
TOWNSHIP or any of its officials or employees shall not constitute a representation, guarantee
or warranty of any kind by the TOWNSHIP of the practicability or safety of any proposed
structure or use with respect to damage from EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, STORMWATER
RUNOFF, FLOOD, or any other matter, and shall create no liability upon or give rise to any
cause of action against the TOWNSHIP and its officials and employees. The
COMMISSIONERS, by enacting this ORDINANCE, does not waive or limit any immunity
granted to the TOWNSHIP and its officials and employees by the Governmental Immunity Act,
42 Pa. C.S. § 8541 et seq., and does not assume any liabilities or obligations.
SECTION 809. CHALLENGE AND APPEALS
1. Any person, partnership, corporation or organization aggrieved by any administration
action of a qualified representative of the TOWNSHIP, may appeal to the
COMMISSIONERS within thirty (30) days of that action. Any such appeal shall be
governed by the procedures of Article V of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. 401 et seq.
2. Any person, partnership, corporation or organization aggrieved by any decision of the
COMMISSIONERS, may appeal to Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas, in
accordance with Article VII of Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. 701 et seq. the Local
Agency Law, within thirty (30) days of that decision.
SECTION 810. REPEALER
1. Except as otherwise required by law, this ORDINANCE is intended as a continuation of,
and not a repeal of, existing regulations governing the subject matter. To the extent that this
ORDINANCE restates regulations contained in ordinances previously enacted by the
COMMISSIONERS, this ORDINANCE shall be considered a restatement and not a repeal
of such regulations. It is the specific intent of the COMMISSIONERS that all provisions of
this ORDINANCE shall be considered in full force and effect as of the date such
regulations were initially enacted. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with
the provisions of this ORDINANCE are hereby repealed. It is expressly provided that the
provisions of this ORDINANCE shall not affect any act done, contract executed or liability
incurred prior to its effective date, or affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any rights, rule, regulation or ordinance, or part thereof, or to punish
any violation which occurred under any prior STORMWATER regulation or ordinance. In
the event any violation has occurred under any prior STORMWATER regulation or
ordinance or code of the TOWNSHIP, prosecution may be initiated against the alleged
offender pursuant to the provisions of said prior STORMWATER regulation or ordinance
or code, and the provisions and penalties provided in said prior STORMWATER
regulation or ordinance or code shall remain effective as to said violation.
8-5
2. Any Plan (hereinafter defined) pending at the time of the effective date of this
ORDINANCE shall be allowed to proceed with revisions, finalization and implementation
in accordance with any ordinance or code in effect prior hereto.
SECTION 811 . VALIDITY
Should any section, subsection, provision, sentence or part of this ORDINANCE be declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this
ORDINANCE as a whole or any remaining section, subsection, provision, sentence or part
thereof.
SECTION 812 . EFFECTIVE DATE
This ORDINANCE shall become effective immediately following its adoption by the
COMMISSIONERS of Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Duly Ordained this __________ day of ___________, 2018.
ATTEST: MANHEIM TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS
_______________________________ _____________________________________
Sean P. Molchany, Secretary President (Vice-President)

i
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS .......................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 101. STATUTORY AUTHORITY .............................................................. 1-1
SECTION 102. TITLE ................................................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 103. PURPOSE ............................................................................................. 1-1
SECTION 104. JURISDICTION ................................................................................... 1-2
SECTION 105. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS ................................ 1-3
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION ................................................................................... 2-1
SECTION 201. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ............................................................ 2-1
SECTION 202. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED ............................................................... 2-1
SECTION 203. MODIFICATIONS ............................................................................... 2-2
SECTION 204. INTERPRETATION............................................................................. 2-2
SECTION 205. AMENDMENTS .................................................................................. 2-3
ARTICLE III. TERMINOLOGY ........................................................................................ 3-1
SECTION 301. WORD USAGE .................................................................................... 3-1
SECTION 302. DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................... 3-1
ARTICLE IV. SKETCH PLAN ........................................................................................... 4-1
SECTION 401. APPLICATION PROCEDURE............................................................ 4-1
SECTION 402. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS .................................................... 4-2
ARTICLE V. PRELIMINARY PLAN............................................................................... 5-1
SECTION 501. APPLICATION PROCEDURE............................................................ 5-1
SECTION 502. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS .................................................... 5-5
ARTICLE VI. FINAL PLAN ............................................................................................... 6-1
SECTION 601. APPLICATION PROCEDURE............................................................ 6-1
SECTION 602. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS .................................................... 6-3
SECTION 603. IMPROVEMENTS; FINANCIAL SECURITY………. ...................... 6-9
SECTION 604. RECORDING OF FINAL PLAN ....................................................... 6-11
SECTION 605. LOT ADDITIONS AND PLAN REVISIONS ................................... 6-13
ARTICLE VII. EXEMPTIONS ............................................................................................. 7-1
SECTION 701. SUBDIVISIONS FOR WIDENING AND/OR RELOCATION OF EXISTING STREETS .......................................................................... 7-1
ii
ARTICLE VIII. DESIGN STANDARDS ............................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 801. APPLICABILITY ................................................................................. 8-1
SECTION 802. GENERAL STANDARDS ................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 803. STREETS .............................................................................................. 8-7
SECTION 804. CURBS ............................................................................................... 8-15
SECTION 805. SIDEWALKS ..................................................................................... 8-15
SECTION 806. MONUMENTS AND MARKERS ..................................................... 8-16
SECTION 807. BLOCKS ............................................................................................. 8-16
SECTION 808. LOTS................................................................................................... 8-17
SECTION 809. PARKS AND RECREATION DEDICATION AND FEES IN
LIEU OF DEDICATION .................................................................... 8-18
SECTION 810. GREENWAY/LINEAR TRAILS ....................................................... 8-25
SECTION 811. BUILDING SETBACK LINES .......................................................... 8-27
SECTION 812. EASEMENTS ..................................................................................... 8-27
SECTION 813. SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL................................................... 8-27
SECTION 814. WATER SUPPLY .............................................................................. 8-29
SECTION 815. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ................................................... 8-30
SECTION 816. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ........................................ 8-30
SECTION 817. UTILITY TRANSMISSION LINES .................................................. 8-31
SECTION 818. STREET LIGHTING .......................................................................... 8-31
SECTION 819. LANDSCAPING ................................................................................ 8-31
SECTION 820. PUBLIC UTILITIES .......................................................................... 8-31
SECTION 821. TREE PROTECTION ......................................................................... 8-32
ARTICLE IX. MOBILEHOME PARKS ............................................................................ 9-1
SECTION 901. REGULATIONS................................................................................... 9-1
ARTICLE X. PENALTIES AND REMEDIES; APPEALS .......................................... 10-1
SECTION 1001. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES ... 10-1
SECTION 1002. APPEALS ......................................................................................... 10-2
SECTION 1003. VALIDITY ......................................................................................... 10-3
SECTION 1004. EFFECTIVE DATE ............................................................................ 10-3
APPENDIX I. COLLECTOR TOWNSHIP ROUTE ...................................................... A-1
APPENDIX II. SAMPLE FORMS ...................................................................................... A-3
CERTIFICATION OF SURVEY ACCURACY ............................................................ A-3
CERTIFICATION OF PLAN ACCURACY.................................................................. A-3
STORM DRAINAGE PLAN CERTIFICATION .......................................................... A-3
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLAN, AND OFFER OF DEDICATION (LANDOWNER IS AN INDIVIDUAL) ........................... A-4
iii
CERTIFICATE FOR APPROVAL BY THE COMMISSIONERS ............................... A-4
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLAN, AND OFFER OF DEDICATION (LANDOWNER IS A CO-PARTNERSHIP) .................... A-5
CERTIFICATE FOR REVIEW BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION ...................... A-5
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLAN, AND OFFER OF DEDICATION (LANDOWNER IS A CORPORATION) ......................... A-6
LANCASTER COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION’S REVIEW CERTIFICATE . A-7
CERTIFICATE FOR REVIEW BY THE TOWNSHIP ENGINEER ............................ A-7
RECORDER OF DEEDS CERTIFICATE ..................................................................... A-7
APPENDIX III. SIGHT DISTANCE CALCULATIONS ................................................... A-8
APPENDIX IV. CENTERLINE DISTANCE CHART ....................................................... A-9
1-1
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
OF
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP - 1998
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS, GOVERNING THE DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION OF LAND WITHIN THE TOWNSHIP OF MANHEIM, SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE OFFICIALS OF THE TOWNSHIP IN APPLYING AND ADMINISTERING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.
BE AND HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Board of Commissioners of Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania as follows:
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101. STATUTORY AUTHORITY
The Board of COMMISSIONERS of Manheim TOWNSHIP, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended, hereby enacts and ordains this ORDINANCE governing SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENTS within the limits of Manheim TOWNSHIP.
SECTION 102. TITLE
This ORDINANCE shall be known and may be cited as "The SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE of Manheim TOWNSHIP 1998, as amended".
SECTION 103. PURPOSE
This ORDINANCE is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To assist in the orderly, efficient and integrated DEVELOPMENT of land in accordance with the Manheim TOWNSHIP COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, as amended, ("COMPREHENSIVE PLAN").
2. To promote safe and adequate travel and transportation facilities and controls.
3. To ensure coordination and conformance of SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS with the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS plans of the TOWNSHIP.
1-2
4. To provide the proper extension of community services and facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
5. To ensure equitable handling of all SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS by providing uniform standards and procedures.
6. To promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the TOWNSHIP.
7. Control accelerated RUNOFF and EROSION and sedimentation problems at their source by regulating activities which cause such problems.
8. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems within the TOWNSHIP.
9. Encourage recharge of groundwaters.
10. Maintain the existing flows and quality of WATERCOURSES in the TOWNSHIP and the Commonwealth.
11. Preserve and restore the FLOOD carrying capacity of WATERCOURSES.
12. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent storm water management facilities which are constructed in the TOWNSHIP.
13. In the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, the regulations of this ORDINANCE are designed and intended to protect FLOODPLAIN AREAS subject to and necessary for FLOOD waters, to permit and encourage the retention of open land uses so located and utilized and to guide incompatible DEVELOPMENT into more appropriate zoning districts.
14. To regulate uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENT which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENT, will cause unacceptable increases in FLOOD heights, velocities and frequencies.
15. To restrict or prohibit certain uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENT from locating within AREAS subject to FLOODING.
16. To require all those uses, activities, and DEVELOPMENTS that do occur in FLOOD-prone AREAS to be protected and/or FLOODPROOFED against FLOODING and FLOOD damage.
17. To protect individuals from buying lands and STRUCTURES which are unsuited for intended purposes because of FLOOD hazards.
1-3
SECTION 104. JURISDICTION
1. In order that the actions of the Board of COMMISSIONERS under this SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE may be correlated with all relevant data and procedures, the Board of COMMISSIONERS hereby designates the PLANNING COMMISSION as the reviewing agency of the TOWNSHIP:
A. To which all applications relating to either sketch, preliminary or final approval of SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS shall be initially submitted
B. With which APPLICANTS shall hold all preliminary consultations relating to the plans;
C. Which shall make recommendations to the Board of COMMISSIONERS concerning approval, disapproval, MODIFICATION and conditions of approval of such plans; and
D. Which shall make recommendations to the Board of COMMISSIONERS concerning the interpretation of and the granting of MODIFICATION to provisions and standards of this ORDINANCE.
2. Without limitation of the foregoing, applications for preliminary or final approval of SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS shall be initially submitted to the TOWNSHIP Manager for processing and scheduling on behalf of the TOWNSHIP Commission, and the TOWNSHIP Manager or the Manager's designee shall be available, as administrative designees of the PLANNING COMMISSION, for preliminary consultations relating to such plans.
3. The Board of COMMISSIONERS has jurisdiction to take final action on all SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
SECTION 105. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS
In case of any DEVELOPMENT governed by the PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT provisions of the Manheim TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE, the applicable provisions of this ORDINANCE shall be as modified by such PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT provisions and procedures which shall be followed in the approval of any plan and the rights and duties thereto shall be governed by the provisions of such PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT provisions.
2-1
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 201. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. No person proposing a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT shall proceed with any grading or IMPROVEMENTS until the FINAL PLAN application is APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
2. No person proposing a SUBDIVISION shall sell, transfer, lease or otherwise convey a LOT, parcel or tract in a SUBDIVISION, or construct or commence the CONSTRUCTION of any BUILDING in a SUBDIVISION, until the FINAL PLAN application of the proposed SUBDIVISION is APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
3. All REPORTS shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only, and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any REPORT used, received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall be made available for inspection to the APPLICANT and all other parties to any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.
4. Every APPLICANT shall have the burden to comply with this ORDINANCE for every APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. The TOWNSHIP shall provide every APPLICANT with any initial REPORT concerning compliance with the ORDINANCE. Failure of any APPLICANT to comply with discrepancies after the issuance of the initial REPORT shall be reason for denial of the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
5. The official filing date for all applications for DEVELOPMENT shall be the date of the regular PLANNING COMMISSION meeting next following the date the complete APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT including payment of the applicable filing fee is filed, provided that should the said next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the filing of the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT, the official filing date shall be the thirtieth (30th) day following the day the complete APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT is filed.
SECTION 202. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
1. No SUBDIVISION, LAND DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT of any LOT, tract or parcel of land shall be made, no STREET, sanitary sewer, STORM SEWER, water main or other IMPROVEMENTS in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for the public use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of BUILDINGS abutting thereon, except in accordance with the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
2-2
SECTION 203. MODIFICATIONS
1. The provisions of this ORDINANCE are the minimum standards for the protection of the public welfare.
2. If any mandatory provision of this ORDINANCE is shown by the APPLICANT, to the satisfaction of the Board of COMMISSIONERS at a scheduled public meeting, to be unreasonable and to cause unique and undue hardship as it applies to his proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, the Board of COMMISSIONERS, upon obtaining the comments and recommendations of the PLANNING COMMISSION, may grant a MODIFICATION or waiver in writing to such APPLICANT of such mandatory provision, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such MODIFICATION will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this ORDINANCE.
3. All requests for a MODIFICATION or waiver shall be in writing and shall accompany and be a part of the APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the ORDINANCE involved and the minimum MODIFICATION necessary.
4. The Board of COMMISSIONERS shall keep a written record of all action on all MODIFICATION or waiver requests.
5. In granting MODIFICATIONS, the Board of COMMISSIONERS may impose conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.
SECTION 204. INTERPRETATION
1. In the interpretation and application of this ORDINANCE, the provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of health, safety, and general welfare.
2. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum applicable standards specified herein and those included in other applicable TOWNSHIP ordinances, rule regulations, the most restrictive provision or that provision imposing the higher standard, shall govern.
2-3
3. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum applicable standards specified herein and the requirements of deed restrictions, covenants or other agreements running with the land to which the TOWNSHIP is a party or requirements of notes or conditions upon approval of a prior SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT of the tract which is subject of the present application, the most restrictive requirement, or that requirement imposing the higher standard shall govern.
4. The provisions of this ORDINANCE shall not adversely affect an application for approval of a preliminary or FINAL PLAN which is duly filed with the TOWNSHIP and is pending action at the time of the effective date of this ORDINANCE, in which case the APPLICANT shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing ORDINANCES or plans as they at the time the application was duly filed. When a preliminary application has been duly APPROVED, the APPLICANT shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the APPROVED preliminary application; however, if an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to the provisions of this ORDINANCE.
5. When a plan has received preliminary or FINAL PLAN approval prior to the effective date of this ORDINANCE, no provision of this ORDINANCE shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the APPLICANT to commence and to complete any aspect of the APPROVED DEVELOPMENT, including application for final approval, in accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years from the date of such preliminary or FINAL PLAN approval. In case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary or FINAL PLAN approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of the governing ORDINANCE or plans as they stood at the time when the application for such approval was duly filed. The Board of COMMISSIONERS may grant an extension to the five (5) year period if it determines that the plan as APPROVED prior to this ORDINANCE will not have an adverse affect on the adjoining properties and that a hardship would be created if redesign is required.
6. The review or approval of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT by the TOWNSHIP in accordance with the provisions of this ORDINANCE shall not constitute liability upon the TOWNSHIP, its officials, or employees.
SECTION 205. AMENDMENTS
1. The Board of COMMISSIONERS may, from time to time, amend this ORDINANCE by appropriate action taken at scheduled public meeting, but before voting on the enactment of such amendment, the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall hold a PUBLIC HEARING thereon pursuant to PUBLIC NOTICE. At least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on the amendment, the TOWNSHIP shall submit the proposed amendment to the
2-4
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION for recommendation.
2. The PUBLIC NOTICE shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall include a brief summary setting forth the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to the place within the TOWNSHIP where copies of the proposed amendment may be secured or examined. Such notice shall be published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the TOWNSHIP. The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. If the full text is not included, a copy thereof shall be filed in the County Law Library (or other County office designated by the County COMMISSIONERS)
3. In the case of a proposed amendment other than that prepared by the PLANNING COMMISSION, the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall submit each such amendment to the PLANNING COMMISSION for recommendations at least thirty (30) days prior to the date fixed for the PUBLIC HEARING on such proposed amendment.
4. Upon approval and enactment of an amendment to this ORDINANCE, a certified copy of such amendment shall be filed with the Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION within thirty (30) days of adoption.
3-1
ARTICLE III. TERMINOLOGY (Amended by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
SECTION 301. WORD USAGE
Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be interpreted and construed throughout this ORDINANCE to have the meaning herein indicated. Terms not herein defined which are defined in the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE or Zoning ORDINANCE shall have the meanings assigned in such ORDINANCE. Terms not defined in this ORDINANCE or in such other ORDINANCES shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them as found in the most recent edition of Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary.
The following rules of CONSTRUCTION and interpretation shall be used in this ORDINANCE.
1. Words in the present tense may imply the future tense.
2. Words used in singular imply the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
3. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter genders.
4. The word “person” includes a partnership, firm, association, corporation, organization, trust, estate, company or any other legally recognized entity as well as an individual and the officers of any corporation and the members of any partnership and shall include both singular and plural.
5. The word “shall” or “must” is to be interpreted as mandatory; the work “may” is discretionary.
6. References to codes, ORDINANCES, resolutions, plans, maps, governmental bodies, commissions or agencies or officials are to codes, ORDINANCES, resolutions, plans, maps, governmental bodies, commissions or agencies or officials of the TOWNSHIP or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as in effect or office from time to time including amendments thereto or revisions or successors thereof, unless the text indicates another reference is intended.
SECTION 302. DEFINITIONS
As used in this ORDINANCE, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION. The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activities and natural processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
ACCESS. A way or means of approach for vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic from a STREET, RIGHT-OF-WAY, public AREA or community facility, to a LOT.
ACCESS DRIVE. A private drive providing pedestrian and vehicular ACCESS between a public or PRIVATE STREET and a parking AREA(s) within a LAND DEVELOPMENT and any
3-2
DRIVEWAY servicing two or more units of occupancy on a single LOT or contiguous LOTS. The ACCESS DRIVE is not intended to include any portion of the travel lane abutting parking AREAS (See also STREET).
ACCESSORY BUILDING. A detached subordinate BUILDING, the use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the PRINCIPAL BUILDING, and which is located on the same LOT as that occupied by the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
ACT. The FLOODPLAIN Management ACT, ACT No. 166, October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, as amended and supplemented, and all regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADT. Average Daily Trip.
AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry, horticulture, and gardening, including the keeping or raising of livestock and poultry, and including sale of crops and agricultural, dairy and horticultural farm products incidental to the operation of a farm.
ALLEY. A minor RIGHT-OF-WAY, privately owned, primarily for secondary means of ACCESS to the rear or sides of properties.
APPLICANT. A LANDOWNER or DEVELOPER, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT, including his heirs, successors, and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. Every application, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and APPROVED prior to start of CONSTRUCTION or DEVELOPMENT including but not limited to, an application for a BUILDING PERMIT, for the approval of a SUBDIVISION PLAT or plan or for the approval of a DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Every APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT must include the form designated by the TOWNSHIP and all other plans and information required by this ORDINANCE.
APPROVED. APPROVED by the recognized authoritative agency or official as specified in the respective regulations.
AREA. The extent of surface contained within the boundaries or extremities of land or BUILDING.
AUTHORITY. The General Municipal AUTHORITY of the TOWNSHIP of Manheim and any successor thereto.
BASEMENT. Any AREA of the BUILDING having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BICYCLE LANE. A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for the exclusive use of bicycles.
BIKE PATH. A pathway that is exclusively used by bicyclists, where a separate, parallel path is
3-3
provided for pedestrians and other wheeled users. Most pathways are shared between bicyclists and other users. See non-motorized paths. (Added by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
BIKEWAY. A pathway or lane designed to be used by bicyclists.
BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by three (3) or more STREETS.
BUILDING. Any STRUCTURE used for a residence, business, industry, or other public or private purpose, or accessory thereto, and including porches, greenhouses, stables, garages, roadside stands, MOBILEHOMES and similar STRUCTURES, whether stationary or movable, but excluding fences and walls which are part of the landscaping, signs and awnings.
BUILDING PERMIT.
A. The permit required for:
(1) The erection, CONSTRUCTION, placement, reconstruction, alteration, replacement, restoration, or conversion of any STRUCTURE or BUILDING or;
(2) A change of use;
(3) Percentage of use or extension or displacement of the use of any STRUCTURE or BUILDING.
B. The term BUILDING PERMIT, as used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation or other IMPROVEMENTS to an existing STRUCTURE, rebuilding a damaged or destroyed STRUCTURE, or a change in use provided there is no increase in gross FLOOR AREA or number of DWELLING units resulting therefrom.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line defining the minimum required distance within a LOT from, and parallel to a STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY line and side rear LOT lines which designates the minimum location of future BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES.
CARTWAY. The surface of a STREET, ACCESS DRIVE or ALLEY available for vehicular traffic.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the TOWNSHIP upon completion of the CONSTRUCTION of a new BUILDING or upon a change or conversion of the STRUCTURE or use of a BUILDING, which certifies that all requirements and regulations as provided herein, and within all other applicable requirements have been complied with.
CHANNEL. A natural or artificial WATERCOURSE with a definite bed and banks which confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
COMMISSIONERS. The Board of COMMISSIONERS of Manheim TOWNSHIP, Lancaster
3-4
County, Pennsylvania.
COMMON OPEN SPACE. A parcel or parcels of land or an AREA of water, or a combination of land and water within a DEVELOPMENT site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a DEVELOPMENT, not including STREET, off-STREET parking AREAS, and AREAS set aside for public facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The COMPREHENSIVE PLAN for Manheim TOWNSHIP, March 2010, and any amendments thereto, indicating the general locations recommended for circulation facilities, community IMPROVEMENTS and land uses. (Amended by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
CONDITIONAL USE. A use permitted in a particular zoning district based upon the location of that use within the district and upon compliance with specific conditions and criteria.
CONSTRUCTION. The CONSTRUCTION, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE, including the placement of MOBILE HOMES.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION. The Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION.
CROSSWALK. A RIGHT-OF-WAY, privately or publicly owned, intended to furnish ACCESS for pedestrians.
DENSITY. The proportionate amount of land allocated for each DWELLING unit of permitted use.
DETENTION BASIN. A basin designed to drain completely after retarding storm water RUNOFF by temporarily storing the RUNOFF and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER. Any LANDOWNER, agent of such LANDOWNER or tenant with the permission of such LANDOWNER, who makes or causes to be made a SUBDIVISION of land or a LAND DEVELOPMENT, or other activities covered by this ORDINANCE.
DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to BUILDINGS or other STRUCTURES, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The provisions for DEVELOPMENT, including a PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT, a PLAT of SUBDIVISION, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of BUILDINGS and other STRUCTURES, intensity of use or DENSITY of DEVELOPMENT, STREETS, ways and parking facilities, COMMON OPEN SPACE and public facilities.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A LOT with front and rear STREET frontage with possible vehicular ACCESS to both STREETS.
3-5
DRIPLINE. The line marking the outer edges of the branches of a TREE.
DRIVEWAY. A private drive providing ACCESS between a public or PRIVATE STREET or ACCESS DRIVE and a parking AREA for a single unit of occupancy.
DWELLING.
A. BUILDING permanently erected on and attached to a foundation, having a fixed location on the ground, and used for residential occupancy, which BUILDING when so erected and attached, shall, in the normal frame of reference, be immobile. Hospitals, hotels, boarding, rooming and lodging houses, institutional homes, motels, tourist courts, and the like, offering overnight accommodations for guests or patients, shall not be considered DWELLINGS within the meaning of this ORDINANCE.
B. In addition, in order to qualify as a DWELLING, all of following standards and conditions must be complied with:
(1) The foundation for the DWELLING shall be an entire perimeter wall, either of concrete or masonry CONSTRUCTION, extending from below the frost line to the underside of the DWELLING;
(2) The DWELLING must be attached to the foundation wall by anchor bolts or similar attachments APPROVED by the TOWNSHIP as contrasted with the mere setting of the DWELLING unit on the foundation wall system;
(3) In the event the DWELLING formerly was a MOBILEHOME as defined herein, the entire running gear, as contrasted with just the wheels, must be removed, and;
(4) Any towing hitch must be removed from the DWELLING.
EASEMENT. A RIGHT-OF-WAY granted for limited use of private land for a public, quasi-public or private purpose, and within which the owner of the property shall not have the right to make use of the land in a manner that violates the right of the grantee.
ENGINEER. A professional ENGINEER registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION. The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological agents.
FEMA. The United States Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FILL. Material placed or deposited so as to form an embankment or raise the surface elevation of the land, including but not limited to levees, bulkheads, dikes, jetties, embankments, and causeways.
3-6
FINANCIAL SECURITY. Security posted by a DEVELOPER in accordance with Article V of the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE and Article V of the ORDINANCE by which a DEVELOPER assures the CONSTRUCTION of IMPROVEMENTS required by this ORDINANCE.
FLOOD, FLOODED, OR FLOODING. A partial or complete inundation of normally dry land AREAS from the overflow of a WATERCOURSE or other body of surface water, or from the unusual and rapid accumulation or RUNOFF of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD OF RECORD. The FLOOD which has reached the highest FLOOD elevation above MEAN SEA LEVEL at a particular location.
FLOODPLAIN. An AREA of land adjacent to the CHANNEL of a WATERCOURSE which has been or is likely to be FLOODED, or any AREA subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or RUNOFF of surface waters from any source, or as defined by FEMA.
FLOODPROOF, FLOODPROOFED, OR FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and/or nonstructural provisions, additions, changes or adjustments to STRUCTURES or contents which are designed or adapted primarily to reduce or eliminate FLOOD damage to those STRUCTURES or contents.
FLOOR AREA. The maximum amount of usable space within a BUILDING.
GRADE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the BUILDING at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the AREA between the BUILDING and the LOT line or, when the LOT line is more than 6 feet (1829 mm) from the BUILDING, between the BUILDING and a point 6 feet (1829 mm) from the BUILDING.
GREENWAYS. Linear Corridors of OPEN SPACE which generally correspond to or link major river or stream corridors (including adjoining FLOODPLAIN, RIPARIAN BUFFERS, and steep slope areas), old railways or ridge tops, and are intended to function as part of an integrated system or network for a variety of purposes, including protecting natural, cultural and scenic resources, providing recreational benefits, enhancing the quality of life in neighborhoods, and stimulating economic development opportunities. The base Trail & Greenway System for Manheim Township is shown on the Trail & Greenway System Map, dated November 2, 2011 and is part of the Manheim Township Comprehensive Recreation, Park, Greenways and Open Space Plan. (Added by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE. Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface which prevents the percolation of water into the ground.
IMPROVEMENTS. Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable DEVELOPMENT.
3-7
ITE. Institution of Transportation ENGINEERS.
LAND DEVELOPMENT.
A. The IMPROVEMENTS of one LOT or two or more contiguous LOTS, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more residential or nonresidential BUILDINGS, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential BUILDING on a LOT or LOTS regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(2) The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of STREETS, common AREAS, leaseholds, condominiums, BUILDING groups or other features.
B. A SUBDIVISION of land.
C. DEVELOPMENT in accordance with the following shall be excluded from LAND DEVELOPMENT procedure:
(1) The conversion of an existing single-family detached DWELLING or single family semi-detached DWELLING into not more than three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
(2) The addition of an ACCESSORY BUILDING, including farm BUILDINGS, on a LOT or LOTS subordinate to an existing PRINCIPAL BUILDING; or
(3) The addition or conversion of BUILDINGS or rides within the confines of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the purposes of this ORDINANCE, an amusement park is defined as a tract or AREA used principally as a location for permanent amusement STRUCTURES or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded AREA have been APPROVED by proper AUTHORITIES.
LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the LANDOWNER, or other persons having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LEVEL OF SERVICE. A qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic stream, generally described in terms of such factors as speed and travel time, freedom to
3-8
maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience, and safety.
LINEAR PARK AND TRAIL GREENWAYS (LINKAGES). AREAS set aside for recreational activities like walking, biking and horseback riding. These greenways usually follow the path of a natural feature such as a stream or mountain or a manmade feature such as an abandoned railroad bed or roadway.
LINEAR TRAIL. A NON-MOTORIZED pathway, separated from the road, designed for recreational activities like walking, biking and horseback riding. See NON-MOTORIZED PATH. (Added by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
LOT. A parcel of land held in single and separate ownership, occupied or capable of being occupied by BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS or STRUCTURES, signs, and uses customarily incidental to it, including such OPEN SPACES as are required, and which is described by reference to a recorded PLAT or by metes and bounds.
LOT AREA. The AREA contained within the property lines of the individual parcels of land.
LOT COVERAGE. A percentage which when multiplied by the LOT AREA will determine the permitted LOT AREA to be covered.
LOT SIZE. The required AREA of a LOT.
MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, using the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME. A transportable, single family DWELLING intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MODIFICATION. A change, an alteration or amendment which introduces new elements into the details, or cancels some of them, but leaves the general purpose and effect of the subject-matter intact.
MULTI-USE PATH. A pathway usually separated from the roadway, designed specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER. A professional ENGINEER licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the ENGINEER for the TOWNSHIP of Manheim. (See TOWNSHIP ENGINEER).
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE. The Pennsylvania MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE, ACT of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted, 53 P.S. §10101 et seq.
3-9
MUNICIPALITY. Manheim TOWNSHIP, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
NON-MOTORIZED PATH. A path intended for use by pedestrian and bicyclist, but not by any motorized vehicles. It is a path that runs parallel to the STREET but is separated from it. (Amended by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, refuse, FILL, STRUCTURE, or other matter in, along across or projecting into any CHANNEL, WATERCOURSE, or FLOODPLAIN, which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to cause damage to life or property.
OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or AREA of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such OPEN SPACE.
ORDINANCE. The Manheim TOWNSHIP SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE.
PENNDOT. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or any agency successor thereto.
PARKING LOT. An OPEN SPACE other than a public or PRIVATE STREET exclusively for parking of vehicles.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT. Oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form, including crude oil and derivatives or crude oil. It may be alone, as a sludge, as oil refuse, or mixed with other wastes.
PIPE. An enclosed water carrying STRUCTURE of one or more barrels having a total flow AREA equivalent to 48-inch diameter or less.
PLAN, FINAL. A complete and exact SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN prepared for official recording as required by statute: a FINAL PLAN/PLAT. A FINAL PLAN application is duly filed as of the date of submission provided the application is deemed complete.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY. A tentative SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN, in lessor detail than the FINAL PLAN, indicating the approximate proposed layout of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of the FINAL PLAN(s): a PRELIMINARY PLAN/PLAT. A PRELIMINARY PLAN application is duly filed as of the date of submission provided the application is deemed complete.
PLAN, SKETCH. A plan of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT showing the tentative STREET and LOT layout, to be used for informal discussion with the PLANNING COMMISSION/Staff prior to preparation of the preliminary and/or FINAL PLAN(s).
3-10
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. An AREA of land, controlled by a LANDOWNER, to be developed as a single entity for a number of DWELLING units or a combination of residential and non-residential uses, the DEVELOPMENT PLAN for which does not correspond in LOT size, bulk, or type of DWELLING or use, DENSITY, or intensity, LOT COVERAGE and required OPEN SPACE to the regulations established in any one residential district created, from time to time, under the provisions of the TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The Manheim TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION.
PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF. The technical staff of the Manheim TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION.
PLAT. The map or plan of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, whether preliminary or final.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A BUILDING or STRUCTURE in which is conducted the PRINCIPAL USE of the LOT on which the BUILDING or STRUCTURE is located.
PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or main use of a BUILDING, STRUCTURE or LOT.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR. A SURVEYOR registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PROJECT SITE. An AREA of land under DEVELOPMENT and within the jurisdiction of this ORDINANCE.
PUBLIC HEARING. A formal meeting held pursuant to PUBLIC NOTICE by the Board of COMMISSIONERS, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the TOWNSHIP provisions.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. All roads, STREETS, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, waterlines, sewers, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILTIES, WALKWAYS and other facilities to be dedicated to or maintained by the TOWNSHIP or a public entity for which plans and specifications must comply with the Manheim TOWNSHIP IMPROVEMENTS Specifications Manual.
PUBLIC NOTICE. Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the TOWNSHIP. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SEWER. A system of providing sanitary sewage collection and treatment which is owned and/or operated by the AUTHORITY, or any other MUNICIPALITY or public
3-11
AUTHORITY.
PUBLIC WATER. A system of providing potable water which is owned and/or operated by Manheim TOWNSHIP and/or the AUTHORITY or any other MUNICIPALITY or public AUTHORITY.
REPORT. Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made by anybody, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of such REPORT in the rendering of any decision or determination.
RETENTION BASIN. A basin designed to retain storm water RUNOFF with its primary release of water being through the infiltration of said water into the ground.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT. A LOT extending between and having frontage on two (2) STREETS with vehicular ACCESS solely from the STREET of lower classification.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a STREET, ALLEY, pedestrian way, or for other public or private use.
RIPARIAN BUFFER. Undisturbed riparian land adjacent to a natural WATERCOURSE and other bodies of water for the purpose of stabilizing banks, filtering pollutants from runoff and for providing habitat for a variety of wildlife. This is not intended to include man-made swales, infiltration beds, or detention or retention facilities utilized solely for stormwater management from the project site. (Added by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
RUNOFF. That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SCREEN. A STRUCTURE or planting of fencing, berms, and/or evergreen TREES or shrubs providing a continuous view OBSTRUCTION within a site or property.
SEDIMENT. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by water.
SEDIMENT BASIN. A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin designed to retain SEDIMENT.
SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangle shaped portion of land established at STREET intersection on which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SOIL SURVEY. The latest published version of the United States Department of Agriculture's Soil Survey for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A use to be permitted or denied, by the Manheim TOWNSHIP Zoning Hearing Board, in a particular zoning district pursuant to expressed standards and criteria.
STORM SEWER. A system of PIPES, conduits, SWALES or other similar STRUCTURES
3-12
including appurtenant works which carries intercepted RUNOFF, and other drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial waste.
STORMWATER. Drainage RUNOFF from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. A program of controls and measures designed to regulate the quantity and quality of storm water RUNOFF from a DEVELOPMENT while promoting the protection and conservation of ground waters and GROUNDWATER RECHARGE.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILTIES. Those controls and measures used to effect a storm water management program.
STREET. A strip of land, including the entire RIGHT-OF-WAY, publicly or privately owned, serving primarily as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, and furnishing ACCESS to abutting properties, which may also be used to provide space for sewer, public utilities, shade TREES, and sidewalks.
STREET, ARTERIAL. A STREET whose primary function is to serve comparatively high volumes of through traffic at speeds higher than desirable on collector and local STREETS.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A local STREET intersecting another STREET at one end and terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET LINE. The limit of a STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.
STREET LOCAL. A STREET used primarily to provide ACCESS to abutting properties.
STREET, COLLECTOR. A STREET which provides ACCESS to abutting properties and for inter-community travel, connecting borough and unincorporated population centers, and carrying large volumes of traffic to the ARTERIAL STREET system.
STREET, PRIVATE. A STREET not offered for dedication or whose dedication was not accepted by the TOWNSHIP.
STRUCTURE. Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER. (See DEVELOPER)
SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a LOT, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more LOTS, tracts, parcels or other divisions or land, including changes in existing LOT lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership, or BUILDING or LOT DEVELOPMENT; provided, however that the SUBDIVISION by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new STREET or EASEMENT or ACCESS or any residential DWELLING, shall be exempt.
3-13
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
A. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a STRUCTURE, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the STRUCTURE either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started or;
(2) If the STRUCTURE has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
B. For purposes of this definition, "SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT" is considered to occur upon commencement of the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a STRUCTURE, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the STRUCTURE.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED. In the judgment of the MUNICIPAL ENGINEER, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required IMPROVEMENTS for which FINANCIAL SECURITY was posted pursuant to Section 509) of those IMPROVEMENTS required as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with the APPROVED plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR. A SURVEYOR registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE. A wide shallow ditch which carries surface water RUNOFF.
TOWNSHIP. The TOWNSHIP of Manheim, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER. A duly registered professional ENGINEER, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, employed by the TOWNSHIP or engaged as a consultant thereto and appointed as the ENGINEER for the TOWNSHIP of Manheim.
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Board of COMMISSIONERS of Manheim TOWNSHIP, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TREE. Any woody plant that has a single trunk with a caliper of one and one-half (1-1/2) inches at six (6) inches above ground level.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE. An AREA that is radial to the trunk of a TREE in which no CONSTRUCTION activity can occur. The TREE PROTECTION ZONE shall be fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of the TREE to be retained, or the distance from the trunk to the DRIPLINE, whichever is greater. Where there is a group of TREES or woodlands, the TREE PROTECTION ZONE shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for the individual TREES.
UTILITY FACILITY. Any facility, equipment, or STRUCTURE necessary to conduct a service
3-14
by a government, public or private utility.
WALKWAY. A paved pedestrian path which is not aligned with vehicular circulation patterns, but which is located on a LOT along proposed or existing pedestrian patterns. (Amended by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
WATERCOURSE. A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, CHANNEL, SWALE, pond, lake or other body of surface water, carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLANDS. Those AREAS that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar AREAS.
4-1
ARTICLE IV. SKETCH PLAN
SECTION 401. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
1. For the purpose of expediting applications, APPLICANTS are encouraged to discuss possible DEVELOPMENT with the TOWNSHIP Manager and/or the Manager's designees, prior to submission of the PRELIMINARY PLAN application, at a pre-application conference. Such pre-application conferences are not mandatory. The purpose of this conference is to:
A. Acquaint the APPLICANT with the substantive and procedural requirements of this ORDINANCE;
B. Provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed DEVELOPMENT PLAN and applicable elements of the Manheim TOWNSHIP COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, Manheim TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE, Manheim TOWNSHIP STORMWATER ORDINANCE, Manheim TOWNSHIP FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE, Manheim TOWNSHIP Parks and Recreation Plan, Manheim TOWNSHIP Comprehensive Traffic Study and other requirements of the TOWNSHIP.
C. Advise the APPLICANT of any public sources of information that may aid the application;
D. Identify policies and regulations that create opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed DEVELOPMENT;
E. Review any proposed SKETCH PLANS and consider opportunities to increase TOWNSHIP benefits and mitigate undesirable project consequences, and
F. Permit input into the project.
2. If desired by the APPLICANT and at the option of the APPLICANT, a SKETCH PLAN may be prepared and presented for review and discussion at the time of any such preliminary consultations. If the APPLICANT chooses to submit a SKETCH PLAN, ten (10) copies of the SKETCH PLAN should be submitted to the PLANNING COMMISSION which should include those items listed in Section 402. of this ORDINANCE.
3. Submission of a SKETCH PLAN, being at the option of the APPLICANT, shall not constitute the filing of a preliminary or FINAL PLAN application for any purpose of this ORDINANCE.
4-2
SECTION 402. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
1. The SKETCH PLAN of a proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT should be drawn to a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1”=20’), or a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1”=50’) or a scale of one inch equals thirty feet (1”=30’) or a scale of on inch equals forty feet (1”=40’), except if the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT contains more than two hundred (200) acres, the plan may be drawn to a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1"=200').
2. The SKETCH PLAN should contain at least the following information but not necessarily show precise dimensions:
A. Tract boundary and adjacent LANDOWNERS;
B. Location of the DEVELOPMENT within the TOWNSHIP and any other MUNICIPALITY;
C. North point, scale and date;
D. STREETS on and adjacent to the tract;
E. Significant topographical and physical features;
F. Proposed general STREET layout;
G. Proposed general LOT layout and relationship of uses including; but not limited to BUILDINGS, COMMON OPEN SPACE, off-STREET PARKING LOTS and other STRUCTURES;
H. Proposed land uses, intensity or DENSITY of each use proposed and the location of each use;
I. In the case of a LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN, the proposed location and size of all BUILDINGS, parking compounds, and other planned features.
J. A written statement of a qualified professional concerning the feasibility of proposals for sewer, water, and STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, but not to include drawings.
K. Any other information that may be a benefit to the TOWNSHIP in reviewing the application.
3. No application shall be considered complete without the payment of the required filing fee.
5-1
ARTICLE V. PRELIMINARY PLAN
SECTION 501. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
1. The PRELIMINARY PLAN application shall be submitted for all SUBDIVISIONS and/or LAND DEVELOPMENTS, as defined by Section 302. of this ORDINANCE. Such application shall be APPROVED prior to consideration of the FINAL PLAN application. In the case of a LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN involving not more than one (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING on not more than one (1) recorded LOT, the Board of COMMISSIONERS may waive the requirement that a PRELIMINARY PLAN application be submitted and APPROVED prior to consideration of the FINAL PLAN application.
2. The PRELIMINARY PLAN application and all information and procedures relating thereto shall, in all respects, be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this ORDINANCE. It is the responsibility of the APPLICANT to coordinate all requirements pursuant to the provisions of this ORDINANCE with respective private and public service agencies.
3. Eight (8) copies of the PRELIMINARY PLAN application, including the PRELIMINARY PLAN, all supporting information required in Section 502. of this ORDINANCE, and an 11 x 17 copy of the site plan and a filing fee shall be submitted to the TOWNSHIP Manager. The TOWNSHIP Manager shall submit all applications to the PLANNING COMMISSION and the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER for their review and recommendations to the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
A. In the event the APPLICANT disputes the amount of any such review fees, the APPLICANT shall, within ten days of the billing date, notify Manheim TOWNSHIP that such fees are disputed, in which case the TOWNSHIP shall not delay or disapprove a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT application due to the APPLICANT'S request over disputed fees.
B. In the event that Manheim TOWNSHIP and the APPLICANT cannot agree on the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the APPLICANT and Manheim TOWNSHIP shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in Section 503. of the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE.
4. A PRELIMINARY PLAN application shall be accompanied by all required plans and documents and the required filing fee. No application shall be considered complete without the payment of the required filing fee. The TOWNSHIP Manager and/or Manager's designees shall have seven (7) days from the date of submission of an application to check the plans and documents to determine if on their face they are in proper form and contain all the information required by this ORDINANCE, thereby establishing the official filing date, or incomplete and rejected. Within said time, the TOWNSHIP shall notify the APPLICANT in writing that the PRELIMINARY PLAN application is essentially complete and accepted including the official filing date and date
5-2
of review by the PLANNING COMMISSION, if applicable, or that the preliminary application is incomplete and rejected, stating the deficiencies in the application and returning the filing fee. The APPLICANT can reapply, submitting the fee and missing material at any time.
5. Failure of the TOWNSHIP to make a determination of acceptance/rejection shall result in deemed acceptance of the PRELIMINARY PLAN application for processing. However, deemed acceptance for processing shall not constitute a wavier of any deficiencies in the PRELIMINARY PLAN application or approval of the PRELIMINARY PLAN application.
6. In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with Subsection 3 of this Section, the APPLICANT shall file with the Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION the required number of copies of plans and supporting information including a filing fee, as determined by the County. The Board of COMMISSIONERS will not approve the PRELIMINARY PLAN application until the Board receives County review comments or until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the application was forwarded.
7. In general, the PLANNING COMMISSION will schedule the PRELIMINARY PLAN application for action at its regular meeting which is at least twenty-one (21) calendar days following the filing of the application by the APPLICANT. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall also submit a REPORT to the PLANNING COMMISSION for action at the meeting scheduled by the PLANNING COMMISSION to review that particular application.
8. The PLANNING COMMISSION will discuss the PRELIMINARY PLAN application with the APPLICANT or his agent at its regular meeting and will review the application to determine if it meets the standards set forth in this ORDINANCE. The PRELIMINARY PLAN application shall then be submitted by the PLANNING COMMISSION, together with its analysis and recommendations, to the Board of COMMISSIONERS for consideration.
9. Any ACT or recommendation of the PLANNING COMMISSION which involves engineering consideration may be subject to review and comment by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, whose comments shall be incorporated and separately set forth with the analysis and recommendations of the PLANNING COMMISSION to the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
10. All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the Board of COMMISSIONERS which shall render its decision and communicate it to the APPLICANT not later than ninety (90) days from the official filing date as established in accordance with Section 201.5 of this ORDINANCE the date of the regular meeting of the Board of COMMISSIONERS or the PLANNING COMMISSIONERS (whichever first reviews the application) next following the date the application is filed.
5-3
A. The decision of the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the APPLICANT personally or mailed to him at his last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision;
B. When the APPLICANT is not APPROVED in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the ORDINANCE relied upon;
C. Failure of the Board of COMMISSIONERS to render a decision and communicate it to the APPLICANT within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented, unless the APPLICANT has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision; in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.
D. The APPLICANT must notify the Board of COMMISSIONERS in writing, within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the plan review, indicating acceptance or rejection of any conditions of approval. If the APPLICANT fails to notify the Board of COMMISSIONERS of either the acceptance or rejection of such conditions or rejection of any conditions within such time period, the approval of the plan will be automatically rescinded.
E. From the time an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided in this ORDINANCE and while such application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of the zoning, SUBDIVISION or other governing ORDINANCE or plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the APPLICANT, and the APPLICANT shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing ORDINANCE or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed. In addition, when a preliminary application has been duly APPROVED, the APPLICANT shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the APPROVED preliminary application as hereinafter provided. However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations. When an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary or final, has been APPROVED or APPROVED subject to conditions acceptable to the APPLICANT, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, SUBDIVISION or other governing ORDINANCE or plan shall be applied to effect adversely the right of the APPLICANT commence and to complete any aspect of the APPROVED DEVELOPMENT in accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years from such approval. Where final approval is proceeded by preliminary approval, the five (5) year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In case of any doubt as to the terms of preliminary approval, the terms
5-4
shall be construed in the light of provisions of the governing ORDINANCES or plans as they stood at the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
F. Where the LANDOWNER has SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED the required IMPROVEMENTS as depicted upon the FINAL PLAN within the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Board of COMMISSIONERS no change of municipal ORDINANCES or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the PRELIMINARY PLAN shall modify or revoke any aspect of the APPROVED FINAL PLAN pertaining to zoning classification or DENSITY, LOT, BUILDING, STREET or utility location.
G. In the case of a PRELIMINARY PLAN calling for the installation of IMPROVEMENTS beyond the five (5) year period, a schedule shall be filed by the LANDOWNER with the PRELIMINARY PLAN delineating all proposed sections as well as deadlines within which applications for FINAL PLAN approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedules shall be updated annually by APPLICANT on or before the anniversary of the PRELIMINARY PLAN approval, until FINAL PLAN approval of the final section has been granted and any MODIFICATION in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of the Board of COMMISSIONERS in its discretion.
H. Each section in any residential SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT, except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of DWELLING units as depicted on the PRELIMINARY PLAN, unless a lesser percentage is APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS in its discretion. Provided the LANDOWNER has not defaulted with regard to or violated any of the conditions of the PRELIMINARY PLAN approval, including compliance with LANDOWNER'S aforesaid schedule of submission of FINAL PLANS for the various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded by substantially completing the IMPROVEMENTS depicted upon the FINAL PLAN within five (5) years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the initial section, in which the required IMPROVEMENTS have not been SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED within said five (5) year period the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three (3) years from the date of FINAL PLAN approval for each section.
I. Failure of LANDOWNER to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission of FINAL PLANS for the various sections shall subject any such section to any and all changes in zoning, SUBDIVISION and other governing ORDINANCES enacted by the MUNICIPALITY subsequent to the date of the initial PRELIMINARY PLAN submission.
5-5
11. Approval of the PRELIMINARY PLAN application shall constitute approval of the DEVELOPMENT as to the character and intensity of DEVELOPMENT, the arrangement and approximate dimension of STREETS, LOTS, and other planned features, but shall not authorize the sale of LOTS, the lease of land, BUILDINGS or portions of BUILDINGS, or the DEVELOPMENT of land.
12. Multiple Applications. The resources of the TOWNSHIP and the orderly administration of this ORDINANCE are unduly burdened by multiple and conflicting applications. Therefore, the same APPLICANT may not submit multiple applications for approval of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN for the same property or a portion thereof involving the same land use. If an APPLICANT desires to submit a new application, then the APPLICANT must withdraw in writing any pending applications. In the event the APPLICANT fails or refuses to withdraw any pending applications, the Board of COMMISSIONERS may deny the new application due to noncompliance with this section.
SECTION 502. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
1. The copies of all plans submitted with the application for PRELIMINARY PLAN approval can be either black and white or blue and white prints. The sheet sizes shall be no smaller than 18" x 22" and no larger than 30" x 42", provided that the plan for recording is drawn to scale and is no larger than 24" x 36".
2. The PRELIMINARY PLAN shall be at a scale of twenty (20) feet, thirty (30) feet, forty (40) feet or fifty (50) feet to the inch. If the PRELIMINARY PLAN is drawn in two or more sections, a key map showing the location of the several sections shall be placed on each sheet. The plan shall show the following information and shall conform to any other specifications, documents, codes, or regulations adopted by the TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS:
A. Proposed SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT name or identifying title and the location of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT in the TOWNSHIP and any other MUNICIPALITY.
B. Name and address of the LANDOWNER of the tract or of the authorized agent, if any, and of the DEVELOPER.
C. North point, written scale, graphic scale, plan date, and dates of all revisions to the plan.
D. Total acreage of the tract, number of LOTS or DWELLING units and net DENSITY.
E. Proposed land uses and AREA for residential and non-residential uses.
5-6
F. Schedule of zoning district requirements, including AREA and bulk regulations, DENSITY, LOT COVERAGE, IMPERVIOUS SURFACE, BUILDING and yard requirements.
G. A location map of the DEVELOPMENT at a minimum scale of two thousand (2,000) feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all STREETS and municipal boundaries existing within one thousand (1,000) feet of any part of the property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
H. Tract boundaries showing distances and bearings, however, when a LANDOWNER retains a single LOT with a LOT AREA in excess of the largest LOT of the SUBDIVISION, the boundary of that LOT may be identified as deed plotting and shall be drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals four hundred feet (1"=400').
I. Contours of existing elevations at intervals of two (2) feet. In AREAS of slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), five (5) foot contour intervals may be used; location of bench mark and datum used. United States Geodetic Surveys are not acceptable. Differentials between U.S.G.S. (e.g. Manheim TOWNSHIP Sanitary Sewer System datum, Lancaster AREA Sewer AUTHORITY datum, or Lancaster Sewer AUTHORITY datum) shall be made note of on the submitted plan.
J. Contours and elevations for items required as IMPROVEMENTS of the plan, including but not limited to existing and proposed STREET profiles, sanitary sewer extensions, storm drainage systems, and all known IMPROVEMENTS requiring GRADE, profile, and elevation documentation.
K. Soil types and soil classifications as indicated by the United States Department of AGRICULTURE SOIL SURVEY of Lancaster County.
L. The names of all owners of all immediately adjacent undeveloped land; the names of all proposed or existing DEVELOPMENTS immediately adjacent, and the locations and dimensions of any STREETS or EASEMENTS shown thereon; the names, locations and dimensions of all existing STREETS, railroads, PUBLIC SEWERS, PUBLIC WATER mains and feeder lines, fire hydrants, gas, electric, and oil transmission lines, storm drains, WETLANDS, WATERCOURSES, one hundred (100) year FLOOD plain, and other significant features on or within two hundred (200) feet of any part of the property proposed to the developed and the location of all BUILDINGS approximate location of all TREE masses within the property.
M. The location and width of any STREETS or public ways or places shown upon an adopted TOWNSHIP or County plan, if such exists for the AREA to be subdivided or developed.
5-7
N. The full plan of the DEVELOPMENT, showing the location of all proposed and existing STREETS, fire hydrants, parks, playgrounds, and other public AREAS; proposed connection BUILDING SETBACK LINES for each STREET; proposed LOT lines and approximate dimensions of LOTS; LOT numbers and/or BLOCK numbers in consecutive order; BUILDING locations, PRIVATE STREETS and parking compounds in relation to LAND DEVELOPMENTS; and all STREETS and other AREAS designed for appurtenant facilities, public use, or proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, together with the conditions of such dedications or reservations. Location of existing and proposed EASEMENTS, including widths, ownership and purposes.
O. The size, material, and approximate location of any proposed capped sewers permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, any on-LOT lateral main sewer system, sewers, sewage facilities as well as capped water lines and proposed connections with existing facilities.
P. The size, material and approximate location of any proposed individual, community or PUBLIC WATER supply facilities, and proposed connections with existing facilities, as well as capped water lines and proposed connections with existing facilities.
Q. Storm water management control measures and devices (temporary and permanent), and RUNOFF calculations for the proposed project in conformance with Manheim TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
R. Proposed STREET names.
S. Typical STREET cross sections for each proposed and existing STREET shown on the PRELIMINARY PLAN.
T. A bench mark shall be placed on an existing frost proof STRUCTURE, said STRUCTURE and structural elevation to remain as part of required IMPROVEMENTS plan, or if said STRUCTURE does not exist, bench mark shall be placed on a newly installed frost proof monument as described in Section 807.3. of this ORDINANCE.
U. Seal of the registered professional ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR or registered LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT who prepared the plan.
V. RIGHT-OF-WAY dimensions and locations for all utilities.
W. The location of all TREES and/or woodlands on the site and the location of TREES and/or woodlands to be removed and TREES and/or woodlands to remain.
5-8
X. List of any variances, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS and/or CONDITIONAL USEs previously granted for the site and list of MODIFICATIONS or waivers of SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT, or STORMWATER MANAGEMENT requirements previously granted for the site.
Y. List of any MODIFICATIONS of SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT or STORMWATER MANAGEMENT requirements being requested and a justification for request.
3. The application for PRELIMINARY PLAN approval shall contain the following supporting information:
A. A Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION preliminary Appendix 24 Application for Consideration of SUBDIVISION and/or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
B. Proposed and existing centerline profiles for each STREET shown on the PRELIMINARY PLAN.
C. A letter from the postmaster of the AREA in which the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT is located stating that the proposed STREET names are acceptable.
D. A SKETCH PLAN of the remaining lands of the DEVELOPER, including the prospective future STREET system. The STREET system of the PRELIMINARY PLAN will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the future STREETS as shown in the SKETCH PLAN of the remaining lands.
E. When connection to public or private water and/or sewer facilities is proposed, assurance of the availability of such service. This assurance shall be in the form of a letter signed by an authorized and responsible officer or person, as appropriate, of the company, party or AUTHORITY concerned, indicating their ability and willingness to make such service available.
F. A properly executed Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Planning Module for LAND DEVELOPMENT.
G. A draft of any proposed covenants to run with the land.
H. A phasing plan and tentative timetable for the proposed sequence of DEVELOPMENT for SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT. The timetable may be in a letter form, indicating the order in which activities will occur.
5-9
I. Where the land included in the proposed DEVELOPMENT has a gas pipeline, PETROLEUM PRODUCTS transmission line, electric transmission line, or any other cable or pipeline located thereon, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner of such pipeline stating minimum distance requirements and restrictions on the use of the land.
J. A check or money order drawn to the TOWNSHIP in the amount specified on the fee schedule, as may be amended from time to time, adopted by resolution of the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
4. Whenever a proposed project will have (a) ten (10) or more DWELLING units or (b) contain five thousand (5,000) or more total square feet of commercial or industrial gross FLOOR AREA or (c) will generate one hundred (100) or more average weekday vehicle trips, the APPLICANT shall perform a traffic impact study in accordance with Section 502.4.A.
A. Traffic Impact Study
(1) Definition of Influence AREA.
(a) An influence are must be defined which contains eighty percent (80%) or more of the trip ends that will be attracted to the DEVELOPMENT. A market study can be used to establish the limits of an influence AREA, if available. If no market study is available, an influence AREA should be estimated based on a reasonable documented estimate. The influence AREA can also be based on a reasonable maximum convenient travel time to the site, or delineating AREA boundaries based on locations of competing DEVELOPMENTS.
(b) Other methods such as using trip data from an existing DEVELOPMENT with similar characteristics or using an existing origin-destination survey of trips within the AREA can be used in place of the influence AREA to delineate the boundaries of the impact.
(2) AREA of Traffic Impact Study. The traffic impact study AREA shall be based on the characteristics of the influence AREA. The intersections and roadway segments to be included in the study shall be adjacent to the site or impacted by vehicular traffic generated by the DEVELOPMENT of the site. The intersections and roadway segments shall be mutually agreed upon by the TOWNSHIP Staff and the traffic ENGINEER preparing the study. In the absence of an agreement, the APPLICANT may be required to analyze additional intersections and/or roadway segments within the study AREA.
5-10
(3) Preparation by Transportation ENGINEER Required. When it has been determined that a traffic impact study is required for a proposed site DEVELOPMENT, it shall be the responsibility of the DEVELOPER to ensure the study is conducted and a final REPORT submitted in accordance with these guidelines. The traffic impact study and final REPORT shall be prepared under the supervision of a registered Professional ENGINEER who possesses a license issued by the Pennsylvania State Registration Board for Professional ENGINEERS. The final traffic impact study REPORT must have the seal of the supervising ENGINEER on it when submitted.
(4) Documentation Required. A traffic impact study REPORT shall be prepared to document the purpose, procedures, findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the study.
(a) The documentation for a traffic impact study shall include, at a minimum:
[i] Executive summary.
[ii] Study purpose and objectives.
[iii] Description of the site and study AREA.
[iv] Existing conditions in the AREA of the DEVELOPMENT.
[v] Recorded or APPROVED nearby DEVELOPMENT.
[vi] Trip generation, trip distribution, and modal split.
[vii] Projected future traffic volumes (build and no-build).
[viii] A description of the change in roadway operating conditions resulting from the DEVELOPMENT traffic.
[ix] Recommendations for site ACCESS and transportation IMPROVEMENTS needed to maintain traffic flow to, from, within, and past the site at an acceptable and safe level of service.
[x] Supplemental studies, i.e., gap, queue, left turn, etc.
[xi] IMPROVEMENTS to be implemented by the APPLICANT.
5-11
[xii] Appendix - Include data collection summaries, detailed capacity analysis worksheets, etc.
[xiii] Signed and Sealed by a Professional ENGINEER.
(b) The analysis shall be presented in a straight forward and logical sequence. It shall lead the reader step-by-step through the various stages of the process and resulting conclusions and recommendations.
(c) Recommended IMPROVEMENTS to the study AREA network to include preliminary cost estimates, proposed implementation schedule and expected levels of service for the recommended network. Any off-site IMPROVEMENTS which are to be constructed, should be noted.
(d) The recommendations shall specify the time period within which the IMPROVEMENTS should be made (particularly if the IMPROVEMENTS are associated with various phases of the DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION), and any monitoring of operating conditions and IMPROVEMENTS that may be required.
(e) Data shall be presented in tables, graphs, maps, and diagrams.
(f) An executive summary of one or two pages shall be provided, concisely summarizing the purpose, conclusions, and recommendations.
5. Data Collection.
(a) Existing twenty-four-hour and peak hour traffic volume data, including weekdays, Saturdays and Sundays, for all STREETS which provide direct ACCESS to the proposed DEVELOPMENT and for the ARTERIAL STREETS and COLLECTOR STREETS which will serve the proposed DEVELOPMENT, as well as any major intersection within the traffic impact AREA.
(b) Traffic count data shall not be more than two (2) years old. Manual turning movement traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday of a non-holiday week. Additional counts (i.e. on a Saturday or Sunday for a proposed commercial or non-residential DEVELOPMENT) may also be required in some cases.
5-12
6. Horizon Year. The traffic forecasts shall be prepared for the anticipated completion year of the DEVELOPMENT, assuming full buildout and occupancy. This year shall be referred to as the horizon year in the remainder of this ORDINANCE. If ACCESS is proposed onto a State Highway, an analysis shall be conducted at a period of 10 years beyond the horizon year.
7. Non-Site Traffic Estimates. Estimates of non-site traffic shall be made, and will consist of traffic generated by all other DEVELOPMENTS within the impact study AREA for which preliminary or FINAL PLANS have been APPROVED. Non-site traffic may be estimated using historic trends for the roadway or the PennDOT Traffic Data Collection and Factor Development Report.
8. Trip Generation Rates Required. The traffic impact study REPORT shall include a table showing the categories and quantities of land uses, with the corresponding trip generation rates or equations (with justification for selection of one or the other), and resulting number of adjacent STREET peak trips (AM and PM), generator peak hour trips, and total daily trips. The trip generation rates used must be either from the 6th edition of Trip Generation by Institute of Transportation ENGINEERS, or from a local study of corresponding land uses and quantities. All sources must be referenced in the study. The reasoning and data used in developing a trip generation rate for special/unusual generators must be justified and explained in the REPORT.
9. Consideration of Pass-By Trips. If a reduction in the site generated traffic volumes is a consideration for the land use in question, studies and interviews at similar land uses, in similar AREAS must be conducted or referenced justifying the pass-by reduction to be applied.
10. Rate Sums. Any significant difference between the sums of single-use rates and proposed mixed-use estimates must be justified in the study REPORT. If a reduction in the overall trip generation of a mixed-use DEVELOPMENT was proposed due to internalization, documentation should be provided.
11. Estimates of Trip Distribution Required.
(a) Trip distribution can be estimated using any one of the following three methods:
[i] Analogy
[ii] Trip distribution model
5-13
[iii] Surrogate data
(b) Whichever method is used, trip distribution must be estimated and analyzed for the horizon year. A multi-use DEVELOPMENT may require more than one distribution and coinciding assignment for each phase (for example, residential and retail phases on the same site). Consideration must also be given to whether site generated inbound and outbound trips will have similar distributions.
12. Trip Assignments. Assignments must be made considering logical routings, available roadway capacities, left turns at intersections, and projected (and perceived) minimum travel times . In addition, multiple paths should often be assigned between origins and destinations to achieve realistic estimates rather than assigning all of the trips to the route with the shortest travel time. The assignments must be carried through the external site ACCESS points and in large projects (those producing two hundred (200) or more additional peak direction trips to or from the site during the DEVELOPMENT'S peak hour) through the internal roadways. When the site has more than one ACCESS DRIVE, logical routing and possibly multiple paths should be used to obtain realistic DRIVEWAY volumes. The assignment should reflect conditions at the time of the analysis. Assignments can be accomplished either manually or with applicable computer models. If a thorough analysis is required to account for pass-by trips, the following procedure should be used:
(a) Determine the percentage of pass-by trips in the total trips generated.
(b) Estimate a trip distribution for the pass-by trips.
(c) Perform two separate trip assignments, based on the new and pass-by trip distributions.
(d) Combine the pass-by and new trip assignment.
13. Total Traffic Impacts.
(a) Traffic estimates for any site with current traffic activity must reflect not only new traffic associated with the site's redevelopment, but also the trips subtracted from the traffic stream because of the removal of a land use. The traffic impact REPORT should clearly depict the total traffic estimate and its components.
5-14
(b) The study AREA roadway network is to be analyzed for safety and capacity sufficiency for three separate conditions: (1) existing network conditions, (2) future network conditions without the proposed DEVELOPMENT and 3) future network conditions with the proposed DEVELOPMENT. For each of the three conditions the following analyses shall be completed:
[i] Mainline ADT volumes and turning movement volumes for all critical intersections within the study AREA will be determined for the AM peak hour, PM peak hour and the proposed DEVELOPMENT peak hour, if other than either the AM or PM peak hour of the network.
[ii] The effectiveness of the traffic signal control at all intersections will be evaluated by approach in terms of vehicle stops and delays.
[iii] Gap studies will be conducted in accordance with standards established by the ITE at the proposed site ACCESS points to evaluate the need for signal control, turn prohibitions or additional site ACCESS points to reduce the left turn volume from the site DRIVEWAYS if unsatisfactory levels of service are achieved.
[iv] Queue length studies will be completed in accordance with standards established by the ITE to evaluate the potential for a backup of traffic from controlled intersections which could impact other intersections including ACCESS points to the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
(c) The analysis of the existing roadway and intersection conditions in the study AREA will be based upon the current geometric conditions and traffic control operations. This analysis will serve as a basis for determining the current adequacy of the roadway network and to document any deficiencies.
(d) The analysis of the future conditions without the proposed DEVELOPMENT will document the adequacy of the study AREA network to accommodate traffic in the horizon year(s) without the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
(e) The analysis of the future conditions with the proposed DEVELOPMENT will document the adequacy of the study AREA network to accommodate traffic in the horizon year(s) with the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
5-15
14. Required Levels of Service. The recommendations of the traffic impact study shall provide safe and efficient movement of traffic to and from and within and past the proposed DEVELOPMENT, while minimizing the impact to non-site trips. The current levels of service must be maintained if they are C or D, they should not deteriorate to worse than C if they are currently A or B, and shall be improved to a D if they are E or F. In addition, there shall be no increase in delay if an unsatisfactory level of service cannot be attained.
15. Capacity Analysis.
(a) Capacity analysis must be performed at each of the STREET and PROJECT SITE ACCESS intersection locations (signalized and unsignalized) within the study AREA. In addition, analyses must be completed for roadway segments effected by the proposed site traffic within the study AREA. These may include such segments as weaving sections, ramps, internal site roadways, parking facility ACCESS points, and reservoirs for vehicles queuing off site and on site. Other locations may be deemed appropriate depending on the situation.
(b) The recommended level-of-service shall be computed in accordance with 1994 Highway Capacity Manual, Special REPORT 209, published by the Transportation Research Board, or any subsequent revision of such manual. The most current version of the Highway Capacity Software can be used.
(c) The operational analyses in the Highway Capacity Manual should be used for analyzing existing conditions, traffic impacts, ACCESS requirements, or other future conditions for which traffic, geometric, and control parameters can be established.
(d) In developing the proposed IMPROVEMENTS, the study prepared is to consider the following:
[i] All highway capacity evaluations shall consider not only the overall intersection level of service and delay but also evaluate each approach and movement to identify any substandard values which need to be improved.
[ii] For locations where the level of service of the horizon year without the proposed DEVELOPMENT is F, the IMPROVEMENTS shall provide an estimated delay which will be no worse than the delay for the horizon year without the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
5-16
[iii] Where new intersections are being established to serve as ACCESS to the proposed DEVELOPMENT, these intersections must be designed to at least operate at Level of Service C or better.
[iv] IMPROVEMENTS must be designed to meet the preferred level of service which is defined in TOWNSHIP Impact Fee ORDINANCE for the applicable transportation service AREA.
[v] For ACCESS points to the proposed DEVELOPMENT, which are not proposed to be controlled by a traffic signal, an analysis will be completed to determine the design details for a separate left turn lane on the adjoining highway.
[vi] For ACCESS points to the proposed DEVELOPMENT where traffic signal control is being proposed, a traffic signal warrant analysis shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the PA Department of Transportation, Publication 201. Although a left turn lane shall be provided, an analysis shall be completed to determine the type of signal phasing required.
B. Soils
1. Those applications involving lands with soils characterized by "severe" limitations for BUILDING site DEVELOPMENT according to the “SOIL SURVEY”, and/or those plans involving the use of on-LOT sewage disposal systems on lands with soil characterized by "severe" limitations for such facilities according to the “SOIL SURVEY”, or those applications involving land that contains prime farmland as defined in such SOIL SURVEY, shall require the preparation of a statement by a qualified planner, soil scientist, or ENGINEER which includes the following minimum considerations:
(a) A planimetric map of the site that depicts those soils contained on the site. Soils with severe DEVELOPMENT constraints or which constitute prime farmland shall be highlighted. The map shall also depict all existing and proposed IMPROVEMENTS on the site;
(b) A description of the site planning methods used to protect soils with severe DEVELOPMENT constraints from deleterious impacts associated with the proposed use; and,
5-17
(c) A description of the CONSTRUCTION techniques used to assure that the site's soils can safely accommodate the proposed use.
(d) APPLICANT shall identify the classification of agricultural soil is involved, what efforts, if any, are being made to preserve such prime soil.
C. Steep Slopes
(1) All application involving lands that possess slopes exceeding ten (10%) percent shall include a statement by a Commonwealth registered ENGINEER or LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT which includes the following minimum considerations:
(a) A topographic map of the site which highlights those AREAS that possess slopes exceeding ten (10%) and fifteen (15%) percent, respectively. Also reflected on this map shall be all existing and proposed site IMPROVEMENTS (e.g. BUILDINGS, roads, sewer systems, DRIVEWAYS and etc.);
(b) A detailed description of the methods that are being used to:
(i) protect and stabilize AREAS that have a high potential for soil EROSION;
(ii) prevent the CONSTRUCTION of STRUCTURES and other site IMPROVEMENTS on AREAS with slopes exceeding fifteen percent (15%) or a description of the specific design and CONSTRUCTION techniques used to assure structural safety and minimize harm to the environment associated with DEVELOPMENT of steep slopes;
(iii) minimize grading throughout the site;
(iv) protect water quality on and around the site from the adverse effects of the proposed use;
(v) protect any steep slopes on adjoining properties; and
(c) In those instances where BUILDINGS and/or other STRUCTURES are being placed on slopes exceeding ten percent, a description of the methods used to assure adequate foundations, shall be provided.
5-18
D. Historic Properties or STRUCTURES.
(1) APPLICANT shall identify on-site properties or STRUCTURES listed with the National Register of Historic Places and/or listed on the Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places. APPLICANT shall also identify such other properties and STRUCTURES as may be of local historic significance by means of a field survey by the Historic Preservation Trust of Lancaster County or such other individual or organization of equivalent expertise. Properties or STRUCTURES that are identifiable links to past ownership, such as markers or cemeteries shall be identified.
(a) The APPLICANT shall describe the ways in which the APPLICANT intends to preserve, protect and maintain such historic properties or STRUCTURES and other man-made resources.
E. Wildlife and Woodlands.
(1) The APPLICANT shall identify wildlife habitats on the property. In addition, the APPLICANT shall also identify all stands of TREES on the property. The APPLICANT shall also identify individual TREES that are more than 6 inches in diameter or greater than 20 feet in height on the property. The APPLICANT shall identify all public utilities and site IMPROVEMENTS in relation to such TREES, with the intent of preserving and protecting such TREES.
(a) The APPLICANT shall describe the way in which the APPLICANT intends to preserve and protect such habitats and woodlands.
F. Parks and Recreation.
(1) All APPLICANTS for residential DEVELOPMENT shall review the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and the Parks & Recreation Plan, and any updates thereto, relative to the need for parks and recreation facilities in Manheim TOWNSHIP and shall specify the effect of the proposed residential use on TOWNSHIP parks and recreation facilities.
(a) The review shall specify the adopted level of service standard for TOWNSHIP parks; the existing park and recreational facilities in the vicinity of the proposed DEVELOPMENT; the need, if any, for additional parks and recreational facilities; the cost of needed IMPROVEMENTS; and the method of funding such IMPROVEMENTS.
5-19
(b) All APPLICANTS shall comply with the mandatory dedication requirements or fees in lieu thereof, and other applicable provisions of this ORDINANCE.
G. STORMWATER/Hydrogeology
(1) All APPLICANTS shall submit hydrogeological data to show that the proposed use of the site will not adversely affect the geology of the site and the regional groundwater table underlying the site. Hydrogeological data shall be compiled by a qualified hydrologist or hydrogeologist.
(a) If hydrogeological examination of the site discloses a condition which could adversely affect the geology of the site or of any adjacent sites or the regional groundwater table underlying the site or adjacent AREAS, APPLICANT shall submit a plan for addressing and correcting any such condition.
(b) All APPLICANTS shall comply with The Manheim Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
H. Public Facilities
(1) The APPLICANT shall review the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (December 1995) and any amendments or updates thereto, and shall submit the following information relative to public facilities and services.
(a) A description of the effect of the proposed use on the need for additional TOWNSHIP BUILDINGS, IMPROVEMENTS and services including, but not limited to, municipal and maintenance BUILDINGS and properties, and any measures taken to account for these additional needs.
(b) A description of the effect of the proposed use on the need for additional police and/or fire protection in order to maintain the standards specified in the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
(c) A description of the effect of the proposed use on the need for any additional public facilities or services deemed necessary by the TOWNSHIP to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
6-1
ARTICLE VI. FINAL PLAN
SECTION 601. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
1. FINAL PLAN application for the entire project shall be submitted within five (5) years after the Board of COMMISSIONERS has APPROVED the PRELIMINARY PLAN application. FINAL PLAN applications may either be submitted in sections, each section covering a portion of the entire DEVELOPMENT shown on the PRELIMINARY PLAN application if the relationship of the part to the whole is clearly shown, or the FINAL PLAN can be for the entire project.
2. Unless an extension of time has been granted by the Board of COMMISSIONERS upon written request, a FINAL PLAN application submitted after the five (5) year period shall be considered a new PRELIMINARY PLAN and shall be required to comply with the plan application requirements listed in Article V, PRELIMINARY PLANS.
3. The FINAL PLAN application shall conform in all important respects with the PRELIMINARY PLAN application previously APPROVED by the TOWNSHIP and shall incorporate MODIFICATIONS and revisions specified by the Board of COMMISSIONERS in its conditional approval of the PRELIMINARY PLAN application. If the FINAL PLAN does not so conform, the DEVELOPER may in a written request have the application be considered as a revised PRELIMINARY PLAN application, in which case it shall be required to comply with the plan application requirements listed in Article V, PRELIMINARY PLANS.
4. Eight (8) copies of the FINAL PLAN application, including the FINAL PLAN, all supporting information required in Section 602. of this ORDINANCE, and an 11 x 17 copy of the site plan and a filing fee shall be submitted to the PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF. The PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF shall submit all applications to the PLANNING COMMISSION and TOWNSHIP ENGINEER for their review and recommendations to the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
A. In the event the APPLICANT disputes the amount of any such review fees, the APPLICANT shall within ten days of the billing date, notify Manheim TOWNSHIP that such fees are disputed, in which case the TOWNSHIP shall not delay or disapprove an APPLICANT’S request over disputed fees.
B. In the event that Manheim TOWNSHIP and the APPLICANT cannot agree on the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the APPLICANT and Manheim TOWNSHIP shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in Section 503. of the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE.
6-2
5. A FINAL PLAN application shall be accompanied by all required plans and documents and the required filing fee. The PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF shall have seven (7) days from the date of submission of an application to check the plans and documents to determine if on their face they are in proper form and contain all the information required by this ORDINANCE, thereby establishing the official filing date, or incomplete and rejected. Within said time, the TOWNSHIP shall notify the APPLICANT in writing that the FINAL PLAN application is essentially complete and accepted including the official filing date and date of review the PLANNING COMMISSION, if applicable, or that the final application is incomplete and rejected, stating the deficiencies in the application and returning the filing fee. The APPLICANT can reapply, submitting the fee and missing material at any time.
6. Failure of the TOWNSHIP to make a determination of acceptance/rejection shall result in deemed acceptance of the FINAL PLAN application for processing. However, deemed acceptance for processing shall not constitute a wavier of any deficiencies in the FINAL PLAN application or approval of the FINAL PLAN application.
7. In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with Subsection 4. of this Section, the APPLICANT shall file with the Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION, the required number of copies of plans and supporting information, including a filing fee, as determined by the County. The Board of COMMISSIONERS will not approve the FINAL PLAN application until the Board receives County review comments or until the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the application was forwarded to the County.
8. In general, the PLANNING COMMISSION will schedule the FINAL PLAN application for the action at its first regular meeting which is at least twenty-one (21) calendar days following the filing of the application by the APPLICANT. The TOWNSHIP ENGINEER shall also submit his REPORT to the PLANNING COMMISSION for action at the meeting scheduled by the PLANNING COMMISSION to review that particular application.
9. The PLANNING COMMISSION will discuss the FINAL PLAN application with the APPLICANT or his agent at its regular meeting and will review the application to determine if it meets the standards set forth in this ORDINANCE. The FINAL PLAN application shall be submitted by The PLANNING COMMISSION, together with its analysis and recommendations, to the Board of COMMISSIONERS for consideration.
6-3
10. Any ACT or recommendation of the PLANNING COMMISSION which involves engineering consideration may be subject to review and comment by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER, whose comments shall be incorporated and separately set forth with analysis and recommendations of the PLANNING COMMISSION to the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
11. All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the Board of COMMISSIONERS which shall render its decision and communicate it to the APPLICANT within the time periods specified in Section 501.10. of this ORDINANCE. The decision shall be communicated to the APPLICANT in the same manner as directed in Section 501.10.
12. Multiple Applications. The resources of the TOWNSHIP and the orderly administration of this ORDINANCE are unduly burdened by multiple and conflicting applications. Therefore, the same APPLICANT may not submit multiple applications for approval of a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN for the same property or a portion thereof involving the same land use. If an APPLICANT desires to submit a new application, then the APPLICANT must withdraw in writing any pending applications. In the event the APPLICANT fails or refuses to withdraw any pending applications, the Board of COMMISSIONERS may deny the new application due non-compliance with this Section.
SECTION 602. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
1. The copies of all plans submitted with the application for FINAL PLAN approval can be either black and white or blue and white prints, however, the FINAL PLAN to be submitted for signatures and subsequent recording (two required) shall either be drawn with India ink on tracing cloth or be a transparent reproduction of the FINAL PLAN with black line on cloth or stable plastic base film. The sheet size for FINAL PLANS shall not be larger than 24" x 36".
2. The FINAL PLAN shall be at a scale of twenty (20) feet, thirty (30) feet, forty (40) feet, or fifty (50) feet to the inch. If the FINAL PLAN is drawn in two or more sections, a key map showing the locations of the several sections shall be placed on each sheet. The plan shall show the following information and shall conform to any other specifications, documents, codes or regulations adopted by the TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS:
A. Name or identifying title of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT and the location in the TOWNSHIP and any other MUNICIPALITY.
B. Name and address of the LANDOWNER of the tract and of the DEVELOPER.
C. North point, written scale, graphic scale, plan date and the date of all revisions to the plan.
6-4
D. BLOCK and LOT numbers in consecutive order; LOT AREAS for each LOT with the AREA being calculated to the existing and/or proposed right of way.
E. A list of site data including: minimum LOT AREA or average AREA per DWELLING unit; total number of LOTS or DWELLING units; total acreage of the DEVELOPMENT; DENSITY in units per acre or LOTS per acre; zoning district; and proposed use of land.
F. Source of title to the land of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT as shown upon the records of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
G. Tax assessment map number, BLOCK number, and the LOT number.
H. Names of the owners of all adjoining undeveloped land, and the names of all existing DEVELOPMENTS immediately adjacent to the property.
I. A location map of the DEVELOPMENT at a minimum scale of two thousand (2,000) feet to the inch, showing the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all STREETS and municipal boundaries existing within one thousand (1,000) feet of any part of the property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
J. LOT lines with accurate bearings and distances. Distances shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot, and shall exclude AREAS within any existing or proposed STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.
K. Pedestrian ways, including all sidewalks, CROSSWALKS, WALKWAYS, bikeways and pedestrian RIGHTS-OF-WAY to be used for general public use.
L. Accurate dimensions of existing public land and of any property to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public, or community use along with exact content of STREET CONSTRUCTION and dedication; all AREAS to which title is reserved by owner.
M. Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings, which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not more than one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet.
N. Approximate distances to the intersection of the center lines of the nearest established STREET intersection.
O. Accurate locations of all existing and recorded STREETS intersecting and/or adjoining the boundaries of the tract.
6-5
P. Complete curve data for all STREET center line and STREET right of way line curves included in the plan, including radius, delta angle, tangent, arc, and chord bearing and distance. Curve segments included in LOT descriptions shall be comprised of arc and chord bearing and distances. At STREET intersections, tangent distance shall be included.
Q. STREET center lines and STREET right of way lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet, with bearing of such STREET LINES.
R. STREET names.
S. Location and material of all permanent monuments and LOT markers including a note that all monuments and LOT markers are set or indicating when they will be set.
T. EASEMENTS for utilities and any limitations on EASEMENTS.
U. BUILDING SETBACK LINES not less than the greater of;
(1) The minimum setback lines fixed by the Zoning ORDINANCE;
(2) Any setback lines required under the provisions of this ORDINANCE;
(3) Any setback lines required by other public AUTHORITY or utility provider;
(4) Any setback lines which the DEVELOPER intends to provide by deed restriction.
V. Clear SIGHT TRIANGLES at all STREET intersections.
W. Typical STREET cross-sections for each proposed STREET shown on the FINAL PLAN and for each existing STREET which will be improved as part of the application.
X. Location of all BUILDINGS, PRIVATE STREETS, and parking compounds on LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
Y. The following notes shall be shown on the plan where applicable:
(1) A note indicating the type of sewer and water facilities to be provided for the DEVELOPMENT.
6-6
(2) A note to be placed on the plan indicating any AREA, park, IMPROVEMENTS, plantings, STREET or ALLEY that is not to be offered for dedication, and referring to any deed restrictions or agreement of upkeep or maintenance which shall be included in the deed or deeds of such AREA and recorded with Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
(3) A note indicating the TOWNSHIP is not responsible for CONSTRUCTION or maintenance of any AREA, park, improvement, plantings, STREET or ALLEY not dedicated for public use.
(4) A note indicating that the proper number of parking spaces, as required by the Zoning ORDINANCE, shall be located on each LOT.
(5) In the case of a plan which requires ACCESS to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the inclusion of the following plan note: "A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the ACT of June 1, 1945 before DRIVEWAY ACCESS to a State Highway is permitted, (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law". ACCESS to the State Highway shall only be as authorized by the Highway Occupancy Permit, and the Board of COMMISSIONERS' approval of this plan in no way implies that such permit can be acquired. The TOWNSHIP upon approving the BUILDING PERMIT requested shall not be held liable for damages to persons or property arising out of the issuance or denial of a DRIVEWAY permit by the department.
Z. The following certificates shall be shown on the plan:
(1) On SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS, a certification with seal and signature of the registered PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR to the effect that the survey is correct, and a certification with seal and signature of an individual registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified to make such certification to the effect that the plan is correct. See forms of certificate in the Appendix.
(2) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds and signed by the LANDOWNER of the property, to the effect that the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT shown on the FINAL PLAN is the ACT and deed of the LANDOWNER, that he/she is the owner of the property shown on the survey and plan, and that he/she desires the same to be recorded as such. Said statement shall be dated following the last change or revision to the FINAL PLAN. See form of certificate in the Appendix.
6-7
(3) Certificate of dedication of STREETS, IMPROVEMENTS and other public property to the TOWNSHIP or other appropriate municipal or governmental AUTHORITY. See form of certificate in the Appendix.
(4) Certificate for approval by the Board of COMMISSIONERS. See form of certificate in the Appendix.
(5) Certificate for review by the PLANNING COMMISSION. See form of certificate in the Appendix.
(6) Certificate for review by the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER as required by the Board of COMMISSIONERS. See form of certificate in the Appendix.
(7) Certificate acknowledging that the plan has been reviewed by the Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION. See form of certificate in the Appendix.
(8) A certificate to accommodate the recording information affixed by the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds. See form of certificate in the Appendix.
3. The application for FINAL PLAN approval shall contain the following supporting information:
A. A final Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION Appendix 24 Application for Consideration of SUBDIVISION and/or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
B. FINAL PLANS, profiles and cross sections for STREET IMPROVEMENTS, sanitary sewerage facilities, storm water management facilities, and water distribution systems.
C. Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants in the deeds of lands shown on the plans, which may be subject to the approval of the TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS.
D. All covenants running with the land governing the reservation and maintenance of dedicated or undedicated land or OPEN SPACE, which may be subject to the approval of the TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS.
E. Where LOT sizes or number of DWELLING units are based on PUBLIC WATER and/or PUBLIC SEWER facilities, assurance acceptable to the Board of COMMISSIONERS that such facilities will be installed.
6-8
F. A grading plan, showing existing GRADES and proposed finished GRADES on the site.
G. For plans which include landscaping as required by the Manheim TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE, a landscaping plan prepared by a certified LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. Such plans shall show the location, size and type of all plant material to be installed on the site and existing plant material to remain.
H. A storm water management plan, including storm water RUNOFF calculations for pre-DEVELOPMENT and post-DEVELOPMENT conditions as specified by Manheim TOWNSHIP STORMWATER ORDINANCE.
I. An EROSION and sedimentation control plan that conforms to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
J. A dedication plan, showing existing public land and property to be dedicated or reserved for public use, STREETS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, sanitary sewer and EASEMENTS. The nature of the form dedication shall be noted as fee simple or an EASEMENT.
K. Such certificates or letters of approval by proper AUTHORITIES including certificates approving the water supply system and sanitary sewer system of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT. (See Sections 813. and 814. for specific requirements).
L. A plan, APPROVED by the proper utility company, showing the location and type of STREET lights to be installed, if applicable.
M. A properly executed Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Planning Module for LAND DEVELOPMENT.
N. For DEVELOPMENT PLANS which include CONSTRUCTION of PUBLIC SEWER extensions, pump stations, force mains or other similar facilities, a properly executed permit from the a Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or Sewer Extension Permit where applicable.
O. Plans which front on State Highways shall have a properly executed Highway Occupancy Permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
P. A check or money order drawn to the TOWNSHIP in the amount as specified on the fee schedule, as may be amended from time to time, adopted by resolution of the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
6-9
Q. If a public recreation site is not dedicated or private recreation site is not acceptable to the TOWNSHIP, a check or money order for the fee in lieu of dedication of recreation land drawn to the TOWNSHIP in an amount, representing the fair market value of the land required to be dedicated, as APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
R. Agreements signed by owners of off-site properties are required for EASEMENTS and RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
S. If the proposed project will require the relocation of existing utility facilities, the APPLICANT shall provide a UTILITY FACILITY relocation plan. Such plan shall identify, by name and address, all utilities affected, indicate existing and proposed facility locations and include the signature of utility officials authorized to approve the relocation plan.
T. Certified copies of all permits and approvals by applicable federal and state laws and county codes and regulations.
SECTION 603. IMPROVEMENTS; FINANCIAL SECURITY
1. No DEVELOPMENT shall be considered in compliance with this ORDINANCE until the STREETS, STREET signs, sidewalks and curbs, storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, water supply facilities, fire hydrants, STREET lights, shade TREES, buffer and SCREEN plantings, recreational facilities, OPEN SPACE IMPROVEMENTS, LOT line markers, survey monuments, and other IMPROVEMENTS and common amenities have been installed in accordance with this ORDINANCE and the APPROVED FINAL PLAN.
2. No FINAL PLAN shall be unconditionally APPROVED and executed on behalf of this TOWNSHIP for recording in the Office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds unless (1) all IMPROVEMENTS required by this ORDINANCE have been installed in accordance with the conditionally APPROVED FINAL PLAN or (2) FINANCIAL SECURITY in accordance with this Section 603. and the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE is accepted by the TOWNSHIP and the AUTHORITY.
3. The posting and administration of FINANCIAL SECURITY to guarantee the completion of required IMPROVEMENTS and common amenities shall comply with the provisions of this Article, the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE and other applicable laws of the Commonwealth.
4. All FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be prepared by the DEVELOPER in the form required by the TOWNSHIP and by the AUTHORITY and in a form and content acceptable to the Solicitor for the TOWNSHIP and AUTHORITY. The amount of the security shall be calculated in accordance with Article V of the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE. The security shall assure completion of all IMPROVEMENTS within a time period as may be determined by the TOWNSHIP. The following are acceptable forms of security.
6-10
All other forms of security shall be individually APPROVED by the TOWNSHIP and AUTHORITY.
A. Letter of Credit. A letter of credit provided by the DEVELOPER form a financial institution or other reputable institution subject to the approval of the TOWNSHIP and AUTHORITY. This letter shall be deposited with the TOWNSHIP and the AUTHORITY and shall certify the following:
(1) That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount equal to 110% of the cost of completing all required IMPROVEMENTS.
(2) In case of failure on the part of the DEVELOPER to complete the specified IMPROVEMENTS within the required time period or notification by the financial institution that the letter of credit will not be renewed, the creditor shall pay to the TOWNSHIP or AUTHORITY immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those IMPROVEMENTS, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter.
(3) The letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released by the TOWNSHIP or AUTHORITY.
B. Surety Performance Bond. A security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The bond shall be payable and in a form acceptable to the TOWNSHIP and/or the AUTHORITY.
C. Escrow Account. A deposit of cash with the TOWNSHIP and/or AUTHORITY or in escrow with a financial institution. The use of a financial institution for establishing an escrow account shall be subject to approval by the TOWNSHIP and the AUTHORITY. In the case of an escrow account, the DEVELOPER shall file with the TOWNSHIP and the AUTHORITY an agreement between the financial institution and himself guaranteeing the following:
(1) That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the TOWNSHIP or AUTHORITY, as appropriate, and may not be used or pledged by the DEVELOPER as security in any other manner during that period.
(2) In the case of a failure on the part of the DEVELOPER to complete said IMPROVEMENTS, then the institution shall immediately make the funds in said account available to the TOWNSHIP or AUTHORITY for use in the completion of those IMPROVEMENTS.
5. Facilities dedicated to a Utility.
A. If facilities are to be dedicated to a utility, the developer shall provide one of the following:
6-11
(1) Evidence that FINANCIAL SECURITY in an amount sufficient to secure completion of all sewer and/or water facilities to be dedicated to such Utility has been provided to and accepted by such Utility; or
(2) Evidence that the DEVELOPER has requested the Utility to accept FINANCIAL SECURITY in an amount sufficient to secure completion of all sewer and/or water facilities to be dedicated to such Utility and that such Utility has declined to accept the FINANCIAL SECURITY. If the Utility refuses to accept the FINANCIAL SECURITY. If the Utility refuses to accept the FINANCIAL SECURITY, the DEVELOPER shall post FINANCIAL SECURITY to secure completion of the sewer and/or water facilities to be dedicated with the TOWNSHIP; or
(3) Evidence that the Utility has previously notified the TOWNSHIP that such Utility desires for the TOWNSHIP to hold FINANCIAL SECURITY for all extensions of its sewer and/or water facilities, in which case the DEVELOPER shall post FINANCIAL SECURITY to secure completion of the sewer and/or water facilities to be dedicated to the Utility with the TOWNSHIP.
B. If the TOWNSHIP accepts the FINANCIAL SECURITY for sewer and/or water facilities under this Subsection, the inspection of required IMPROVEMENTS and release of FINANCIAL SECURITY shall be in accordance with this Section.
6. As the work of installing the required IMPROVEMENTS proceeds, the party posting the FINANCIAL SECURITY may request the Board of COMMISSIONERS to authorize the release of such portions of the FINANCIAL SECURITY associated with the completed IMPROVEMENTS Requests for the partial release of FINANCIAL SECURITY as the work of installing the required IMPROVEMENTS proceeds shall be made and governed by Section 509. of the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE.
7. At such time that the DEVELOPER has completed and installed the required IMPROVEMENTS, the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall consider the DEVELOPER’S request for a release from the improvement guarantee in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 510. of the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE.
8. In the event that any IMPROVEMENTS which are required by this ORDINANCE have not been installed as provided in this ORDINANCE or in accord with the APPROVED FINAL PLAN, the TOWNSHIP may enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the IMPROVEMENTS covered by said security, the Board of COMMISSIONERS may, at its option, install part of such IMPROVEMENTS in all or part of the SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the IMPROVEMENTS.
6-12
SECTION 604. RECORDING OF FINAL PLAN
1. Within ninety (90) days after approval of a FINAL PLAN by the Board of COMMISSIONERS, the plan shall be filed for recording by the DEVELOPER with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds. Should the plan not be recorded within such period, the action of the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall become null and void. The FINAL PLAN to be recorded shall be an exact copy of the APPROVED FINAL PLAN prepared in accordance with the provisions of this ORDINANCE and shall bear the signatures of the representatives of the Board of COMMISSIONERS, the TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION and the Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION. The FINAL PLAN shall be filed with Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds before proceeding with the sale of LOTS, CONSTRUCTION of BUILDINGS or grading of site (except for IMPROVEMENTS constructed in accordance with subsection 603.1. of this ORDINANCE).
2. Recording of the FINAL PLAN after approval of the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall have the effect of an irrevocable offer to dedicate to the public use, all STREETS, sanitary sewer systems and extensions (other than private LOT force lateral systems, as described in Section 813.7. of this ORDINANCE), storm drainage systems (other than storm water RETENTION BASINS which shall not be dedicated unless so elected upon by the TOWNSHIP, notation of nondedication to be placed upon the FINAL PLAN), water main extensions and systems, other required IMPROVEMENTS, neighborhood parks, and other public AREAS shown thereon, unless reserved by the DEVELOPER as provided in Section 604.4. of this ORDINANCE with respect to STREETS, parks and certain AREAS. The approval of the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall not impose any duty upon the TOWNSHIP concerning maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated STREETS, IMPROVEMENTS or public AREAS until the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall have accepted the same by ORDINANCE or Resolution. Nothing in this section shall imply that the Board of COMMISSIONERS is bound to accept a STREET, park, or other improvement if all conditions are in compliance as required herein. Until accepted by the Board of COMMISSIONERS, all STREETS, parks or other IMPROVEMENTS shall be deemed to the private.
3. At the time the DEVELOPER requests that the IMPROVEMENTS be accepted by the Board of COMMISSIONERS, the DEVELOPER shall file with the TOWNSHIP, one (1) complete set of "as built" drawings of all required IMPROVEMENTS. These "as built" drawings shall be at a scale of forty (40) feet to the inch.
4. If certain AREAS, parks, STREETS, or ALLEYS are proposed to remain in private ownership, the DEVELOPER shall place a notation on the FINAL PLAN to effect that there is no offer of dedication to the public of such designated AREAS, parks, STREETS or ALLEYS, in which event, the title to and obligation to maintain such AREAS shall remain with the LANDOWNER, and the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall assume no responsibility for IMPROVEMENTS or maintenance thereof, which fact shall be noted on the FINAL PLAN.
6-13
5. No BUILDING PERMIT shall be issued to authorize DEVELOPMENT shown on any APPROVED plan, unless and until one copy of the reproducible mylar with all required signatures is filed with the County Recorder of Deeds, and two complete sets of printed copies with the TOWNSHIP.
6. In addition to the plan prepared for recording, the APPLICANT shall submit a computer-readable file in the form specified by the TOWNSHIP which shall provide a complete display of the entire FINAL PLAN including all information contained on the finally APPROVED plan. The computer readable file shall be submitted at the same time that the plan is submitted for recording.
SECTION 605. LOT ADDITIONS AND PLAN REVISIONS
Plans for LOT additions and/or plan revisions shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements for Preliminary and FINAL PLAN preparation, whichever is applicable. The plan shall show bearings and distances of the tract and, if a FINAL PLAN, the applicable certificates required for a FINAL PLAN approval and recording. In addition, the plan shall show the applicable items of information and the APPLICANT shall submit the supporting data as required by the provisions of this ORDINANCE pertaining to preliminary and FINAL PLANS.
7-1
ARTICLE VII. EXEMPTIONS
SECTION 701. SUBDIVISIONS FOR WIDENING AND/OR RELOCATION OF EXISTING STREETS
The TOWNSHIP or any other person proposing the transfer of fee title to the TOWNSHIP for the widening and/or relocation of an existing STREET shall be exempted from the requirement to submit, gain approval of, and record a SUBDIVISION plan if all of the following conditions are met:
1. No new LOTS shall be created, or no existing LOT line shall be changed other than the LOT line abutting the existing STREET.
2. No activity which constitutes a LAND DEVELOPMENT shall be proposed.
3. A plan shall be prepared and submitted to the TOWNSHIP showing the existing STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY, the AREA proposed to be deeded to the TOWNSHIP to widen and/or relocate such STREET, and the new property line. The LANDOWNER shall execute all documentation necessary to enable recording.
8-1
ARTICLE VIII. DESIGN STANDARDS
(Amended by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
SECTION 801. APPLICABILITY
All SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall comply with the following design standards. The standards outlined herein shall be considered minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
SECTION 802. GENERAL STANDARDS
1. Land shall be developed in conformance with the TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE and all other ORDINANCES and regulations in effect in the TOWNSHIP.
A. Whenever the Zoning ORDINANCE provides that the use proposed by the APPLICANT for SUBDIVISION and/or LAND DEVELOPMENT approval shall constitute a use by SPECIAL EXCEPTION or a CONDITIONAL USE, the APPLICANT shall obtain such SPECIAL EXCEPTION or CONDITIONAL USE approval from the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of COMMISSIONERS, as applicable, prior to the submission of the PRELIMINARY PLAN. The plan shall be designed and developed in accordance with any conditions which have been imposed upon the grant of such SPECIAL EXCEPTION or CONDITIONAL USE by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Board of COMMISSIONERS, as applicable.
B. Whenever the APPLICANT proposes to develop a SUBDIVISION and/or LAND DEVELOPMENT in a manner that would require a variance from any requirements of the Zoning ORDINANCE, the APPLICANT shall obtain such variance form the Zoning Hearing Board prior to the submission of the PRELIMINARY PLAN. The plan shall be designed and developed in accordance with any conditions which have been imposed upon the grant of such variance or variances by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Whenever all or a portion of the land contained within an application for SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT approval constitutes all or a portion of land included in a prior SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVED by the TOWNSHIP and recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, the plan shall comply with all conditions, restrictions and notes imposed on the prior approval and/or included upon the recorded SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The APPLICANT shall identify all prior recorded SUBDIVISION and/or LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANS of which all or a portion of the land contained in the plan was a part and all conditions, restrictions and notes which affect the current application. Failure to identify all applicable conditions, restrictions and notes of record on prior plans constitutes a violation of this ORDINANCE. The APPLICANT shall submit with the application for PRELIMINARY PLAN
8-2
approval a statement identifying the prior plans reviewed; the conditions, restrictions and notes which would impact DEVELOPMENT in accordance with the plan for which approval has been requested; and an explanation of the manner in which the proposed plan has been designed to comply with such conditions, restrictions and notes. This information shall be signed by the APPLICANT or the APPLICANT’S ENGINEER or LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT.
2. Significant natural and historical features shall, insofar as possible, be preserved. DEVELOPMENTS should be designed to protect the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil and existing TREES of the DEVELOPMENT site.
3. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property, such as may arise from fire, FLOODS, disease, or other causes, shall not be developed for BUILDING purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless the plan shall show adequate safeguards against them, which shall be APPROVED by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
4. All portions of a tract being developed shall be utilized in LOTS, STREETS, public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and landlocked AREAS shall not be created.
5. Where existing STRUCTURES on a tract being developed are intended to be demolished and removed by the DEVELOPER, such STRUCTURES shall be removed within such period as the Board of COMMISSIONERS may require, as a condition of final approval, following final approval of a FINAL PLAN application.
6. In order to ensure that the adopted minimum Level of Service for adjacent STREETS and intersections are met and to assure that the costs of the necessary transportation IMPROVEMENTS to accommodate the DEVELOPMENT consistent with said Levels of Service are funded and equitably apportioned based upon the traffic generation characteristics of the proposed use, FINAL PLAN approval of all plans shall be conditioned upon participation by the DEVELOPER in the Manheim TOWNSHIP Transportation Impact Fee. Participation shall be guaranteed by the execution of an agreement between the TOWNSHIP and the DEVELOPER, on a form provided by the TOWNSHIP, providing for payment of the applicable impact fee at the time of issuance of a BUILDING PERMIT for the DEVELOPMENT pursuant to the FINAL PLAN.
7. Improvement of Existing STREETS and Intersections. Where a SUBDIVISION or LAND DEVELOPMENT abuts an existing TOWNSHIP and/or state STREET or will have a traffic impact on an existing TOWNSHIP and/or state STREET or intersection as indicated by the Traffic Impact Study performed under Section 502.4 of this ORDINANCE, the DEVELOPER shall make the following IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Where the Traffic Impact Study indicates that IMPROVEMENTS are necessary or advisable to existing TOWNSHIP and/or state STREETS and/or intersections within the Traffic Impact Study AREA in order (i) to assure adequate, safe and convenient ACCESS to each LOT and/or STRUCTURE and/or parking compound proposed as part of the DEVELOPMENT of the tract, (ii) to
8-3
accommodate the traffic due to the proposed DEVELOPMENT, (iii) to provide for a level of service and delay for the horizon year, or years for phased projects, with the DEVELOPMENT which is at least equivalent to the protected level of service and delay for the horizon year(s) without the proposed SUBDIVISION or DEVELOPMENT, and/or (iv) to preserve the existing convenience of ACCESS to or ability to exit from abutting properties which gain ACCESS from the existing STREET, the DEVELOPER shall install all such indicated IMPROVEMENTS. The DEVELOPER shall install additional traffic lanes, traffic dividers, traffic control devices, traffic signals, and other measures as appropriate to ensure that the DEVELOPMENT of the tract does not adversely impact the existing STREET system and/or ACCESS to or the ability to exit from properties gaining ACCESS from an affected STREET. If the Traffic Impact Study indicates that IMPROVEMENTS must be made to a state STREET, the DEVELOPER shall also take all action necessary to obtain any PennDOT permits and/or approvals to install the necessary STREET widening and/or traffic signals or traffic control devices. If the Traffic Impact Study recommends installation of traffic signals or traffic signal MODIFICATIONS, the DEVELOPER shall prepare all studies and submit all necessary applications to enable the installation of the traffic signal or MODIFICATIONS and shall install the traffic signal or MODIFICATIONS at their cost and expense. If the Traffic Impact Study indicates that traffic control devices or regulations, including but not limited to stop intersections, speed limit reductions, or parking prohibitions, are required, the DEVELOPER shall prepare all studies necessary to justify imposition of such regulations in accordance with PennDOT regulations and shall pay all costs associated with the preparation and enactment of an ORDINANCE to establish such regulations.
B. The DEVELOPER shall bear all costs and expenses in connection with the IMPROVEMENTS required by this Section. If the DEVELOPER requires the TOWNSHIP to submit any permit applications or requests for approvals in the name of the TOWNSHIP, the DEVELOPER shall reimburse the TOWNSHIP for all costs and expenses incurred by the TOWNSHIP in connection with its review of the application and submission of the application to the PennDOT or any other Governmental agency.
8. Specific Traffic Control and ACCESS Requirements. The following specific control and ACCESS requirements shall be met for DEVELOPMENTS which produce 100 peak hour directional trips.
A. If any traffic signals are to be installed, the distance between any new and/or existing signals shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet unless it can be demonstrated that adjacent traffic signals can operate sufficiently at lesser distances.
8-4
B. Design of proposed DEVELOPMENT ACCESS points shall take into consideration the horizontal and vertical GRADES of the existing road network in the traffic impact study AREA to permit safe and convenient ACCESS to the site as defined in the latest PennDOT standards and regulations. All MODIFICATIONS required to meet these regulations will be the responsibility of the DEVELOPER.
C. The DEVELOPER shall demonstrate by using the latest PennDOT standards and regulations that the proposed use will not create traffic patterns and movements which will jeopardize the traveling public.
(1) Stacking of sufficient length shall be provided in all traffic lanes on the site and off the site on adjacent roadways to insure that there shall be no blockage of through traffic. The design and length of the stacking lanes shall be justified and supported by the queuing analysis required as part of the traffic impact study.
(2) STREET and/or ACCESS DRIVES to and within the site shall be designed in a manner that blockage of through traffic by vehicles attempting to enter or exit on these STREETS or ACCESS DRIVES will not occur.
(3) Acceleration, deceleration and turning lanes shall be of sufficient lengths to accomplish their intended use.
D. If reduction of the speed limit, installation of traffic control devices, limitation of parking or turning, movements or similar measures are required to mitigate traffic impacts upon TOWNSHIP or State highways, the APPLICANT shall present traffic studies performed in accordance with PennDOT regulations and Publication No. 201,Engineering and Traffic Study Regulations. The erection or the installation of such traffic control devices shall be in accordance with Title 67, Chapter 211, Official Traffic Control Devices, of PennDOT regulations. If the enactment of an ORDINANCE is necessary to effectuate the traffic regulations or the installation of the traffic control device, the APPLICANT shall reimburse the TOWNSHIP for all expenses in the preparation and enactment of the necessary ORDINANCE.
E. No STREET shall be located in a manner which would limit ACCESS to or exiting from abutting properties gaining ACCESS from the existing STREET with which a proposed STREET will intersect unless the DEVELOPER provides such LOTS with alternate ACCESS from the proposed STREET system in a manner acceptable to each affected LOT owner. It shall be the burden of the APPLICANT to demonstrate that such ACCESS is acceptable to all owners of an affected LOT. For the purpose of this provision, limitation of ACCESS shall include the limitation of movements into or exiting the abutting property or properties gaining ACCESS from the existing STREET, whether by traffic regulations, installation
8-5
of barriers to prevent turning movements, installation of additional traffic lanes in front of a property, or difficulties or delays resulting from increased flows.
F. Where new intersections are being established to serve as ACCESS to the proposed DEVELOPMENT, these intersections must be designed to at least operate at Level of Service C or better.
G. For ACCESS points to the proposed DEVELOPMENT and any major intersections where signal control may be required or is being proposed, a traffic signal warrant analysis shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of PennDOT's Publication 201. A left turn lane shall be provided and an analysis shall be completed to determine the type of signal phasing required.
H. Emergency traffic signal preemption shall be addressed and provided as required.
I. Additional left and right turning lanes shall be provided to address the existing roadway site conditions and ACCESS to the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
J. An agreement between the TOWNSHIP and DEVELOPER shall be provided with regard to operating expenses and maintenance of proposed traffic signals.
K. Additional through lanes and lane transitions of sufficient length shall be provided to allow smooth traffic flow to existing traffic lanes thus minimizing congestion, delays and or blockage of through traffic within the proposed improvement AREA. The design and length should be justified and supported by the queuing analysis required as part of the traffic impact study and PennDOT standards.
SECTION 803. STREETS
1. Table of Roadway Design Criteria:
Criteria Collector Local
Number of Travel Lanes 2 2
Roadway Width, Public (Min.)
No Parking 38 ft. * 34 ft. *
Criteria Collector Local
Parking, One Side 38 ft. * 34 ft. *
8-6
Parking, Two Sides 38 ft. * 34 ft. *
Roadway Width, Private (Min.)
No Parking -- 27 ft. *
Parking -- 34 ft. *
Cross Slope
(Ft. per ft.) .021 .021
Horizontal Clearance
(beyond edge of Road) R/W limits R/W limits
Horizontal Curvature
Desirable 500 ft. 175 ft.
Minimum 500 ft. 175 ft.
Vertical GRADE
Range 1% - 6% 1% - 10%
Sight Distance (Min.)
Stopping 275 ft. 200 ft.
Passing 1,500 ft. 1,100 ft.
Intersection
(for passenger cars) 440 ft. 250 ft.
Intersection Curb
Radii (Min.) 50 ft. 30 ft.
RIGHT-OF-WAY Width
Typical 55 ft. 50 ft.
At Intersection
(width 300 ft.) 55 ft. (min) 50 ft. (min)
* Curb Line Width
8-7
2. General STREET Arrangement
A. The location, width and classification of all STREETS shall conform to the Manheim TOWNSHIP COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, Manheim TOWNSHIP Comprehensive Traffic Study, the Zoning ORDINANCE of the TOWNSHIP and Appendix I, attached to and made a part of this ORDINANCE with respect to STREET classification.
B. Proposed STREETS shall further conform to such County and State STREET and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
C. STREETS shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce reasonable GRADES, satisfactory drainage and suitable BUILDING sites.
D. Residential STREETS shall be designed to discourage through traffic; however, the arrangement of STREETS shall provide for the continuation of existing or platted STREETS and proper ACCESS to adjoining undeveloped tracts suitable for future SUBDIVISION.
E. All required IMPROVEMENTS including but not limited to existing and new STREETS, sanitary sewer and water line interceptor systems, storm drainage systems and all other IMPROVEMENTS shall be installed in the RIGHTS-OF-WAY of existing and /or new STREETS, and shall be extended to the boundary line of the DEVELOPMENT, as required, to provide ACCESS to adjacent lands. All such existing and/or new STREETS and all required IMPROVEMENTS to be located within the RIGHTS-OF-WAY of such existing and/or new STREETS shall be so designed as to accommodate the future needs of the TOWNSHIP with respect to STREET circulation patterns and utility alignment.
F. If LOTS resulting from original SUBDIVISION are large enough to permit re-SUBDIVISION or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate RIGHTS-OF-WAY for STREETS and other required IMPROVEMENTS shall be provided as necessary to permit further SUBDIVISION.
G. Half STREETS at the perimeter of the DEVELOPMENT or partial STREETS with less than required right of way or CARTWAY width shall not be permitted.
H. Where a DEVELOPMENT abuts a collector major or ARTERIAL STREET, the Board of COMMISSIONERS may require the use of local STREETS, REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS or such other treatment that will provide protection for abutting properties, reduce the number of intersections with the major STREET, and separate the local and through traffic.
8-8
I. STREETS that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing STREETS shall bear the names of the existing STREETS. STREET names shall not be repeated within the TOWNSHIP and all STREET names shall be subject to the approval of the appropriate local postmaster.
J. Whenever design standards for required STREET IMPROVEMENTS are not specified by the Board of COMMISSIONERS, the applicable standard requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall govern.
K. All existing TOWNSHIP STREETS at the perimeter and/or through the DEVELOPMENT shall be reconstructed according to TOWNSHIP specifications: (1) if an existing TOWNSHIP STREET lies at the perimeter of the DEVELOPMENT, it shall be to the center line of the STREET; and (2) if an existing TOWNSHIP STREET lies through the DEVELOPMENT, it shall be reconstructed to the full width of the STREET as required by the TOWNSHIP specifications and design standards.
3. Cul-de-sac and Dead-End STREETS
A. The center line distance of CUL-DE-SAC STREETS shall be greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length and shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length. The length of the CUL-DE-SAC STREET shall be measured from the intersection of the intersecting STREETS edge of CARTWAY and centerline of cul-de-sac to the terminace of the cul-de-sac CARTWAY. CUL-DE-SAC STREETS must be provided with a paved turn-around with a minimum diameter of eight-four (84) feet to the outside curb and of one hundred (100) feet to the STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY line ( For Measurement See Appendix IX).
B. The minimum GRADE on cul-de-sacs shall be designed to ensure a minimum of one (1%) percent along the curb line to the designed low points.
C. Dead-end STREETS shall be prohibited except when designed for the future STREET extension into adjoining tracts or APPROVED for staged DEVELOPMENT.
D. Any STREET temporarily dead-ended in order to provide for future continuation of the STREET into adjoining property or for authorized stage DEVELOPMENT shall be fully constructed and all utilities installed. A barrier to prevent vehicular ACCESS to adjoining property shall be constructed at the termination point of the STREET.
E. Where any adjacent stub STREET is not proposed for extension as through STREETS, a cul-de-sac shall be constructed in compliance with TOWNSHIP standards.
8-9
4. Horizontal Alignment
A. Horizontal curves shall be used at all horizontal alignment deflections in excess of two (2) degrees.
B. There shall be a tangent of at least hundred (100) feet between reverse curves for all local and COLLECTOR STREETS.
5. Vertical Alignment
A. Vertical curves shall be used in charges of GRADE exceeding one (1%) percent. To provide proper sight distances, the minimum length (in feet) of vertical curves shall be as follows: for collectors, eighty - five (85) times the algebraic difference in GRADE; for local STREETS, thirty (30) times the algebraic difference in GRADE.
B. At STREET intersections, the through STREET shall be approached by side STREETS in accordance with the following standards; where the GRADE of the side STREET exceeds four (4%) percent, there shall be a leveling AREA on the side STREET within which no GRADE shall exceed a maximum of four (4%) percent for a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet (measured from the intersection of the centerlines of the STREETS). No side STREET shall intersect a through STREET when the through STREET exceeds seven (7%) percent in GRADE.
6. Intersections
A. No more than two (2) STREETS shall intersect at the same point.
B. Right angle intersections shall be used.
C. Two (2) STREETS intersecting at opposite sides of a through STREET shall intersect at their centerlines or their centerlines shall be offset by a minimum of two hundred (200) feet.
D. Intersections with COLLECTOR STREETS entering into collector and ARTERIAL STREETS shall not be located less than one thousand (1,000) feet apart as measured from centerline to centerline of the intersecting STREETS.
E. With the exception of an intersection of an ACCESS DRIVE and STREET or ACCESS DRIVE and ACCESS DRIVE, a one hundred (100) foot clear SIGHT TRIANGLE shall be provided and maintained at all intersections, the triangle shall be established by measuring one hundred (100) feet from the point of intersection of the center lines of the STREETS. These lines shall be indicated on all plans. No BUILDING, planting, fencing or other OBSTRUCTION that would obscure the vision of a motorist within the clear sight AREA shall be permitted. This
8-10
requirement shall not apply to traffic signals, traffic signs, STREET name signs, public utility poles and similar type STRUCTURES.
F. All intersections shall be designed to provide minimum Safe Stopping Sight Distance (SSSD) with regard to both horizontal and vertical alignment. The sight distance shall be measured at the centerline of the CARTWAY from a height of three and one-half (3.5) feet above the pavement and ten (10) feet from the edge of the paving to an object located along the adjacent STREET, six (6) inches above the pavement see Appendix IV which identifies the location of the measurements and Appendix III which identifies the minimum sight distances. No OBSTRUCTIONS, grading and/or plantings shall be placed within the determined sight distances that would obscure the vision of a motorist.
G. STREET name signs shall be installed at all intersections and their design shall be APPROVED by the TOWNSHIP. All signing shall identify both intersecting STREETS. Regulatory signs shall be installed at all locations identified by a traffic circulation study prepared by the DEVELOPER and deemed appropriate by the Board of COMMISSIONERS and shall conform to TOWNSHIP specifications.
H. All STREETS intersecting a State Highway shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
I. Handicapped accessible ramps shall be provided at each proposed intersection, at the principal entrances to BUILDINGS which front on PARKING LOTS, and at all CROSSWALKS. All ramps are to be in accordance with the Manheim TOWNSHIP IMPROVEMENTS Specifications Manual.
7. PRIVATE STREETS
A. PRIVATE STREETS are to be discouraged within SUBDIVISIONS, unless adequate off-STREET parking is shown to exist and the DEVELOPER provides adequate evidence to guarantee proper maintenance of all IMPROVEMENTS in the form of deed restrictions, LOT owner association agreements or other acceptable provisions.
B. STREETS providing circulation between adjacent LAND DEVELOPMENTS (existing or proposed) shall be public STREETS and shall be connected directly to another public STREET. All other STREETS within a LAND DEVELOPMENT are permitted to remain private.
C. PRIVATE STREETS shall not be offered for dedication in the future unless they meet all public STREET design standards in effect at the time of offer of dedication.
8-11
D. There shall be a note on each preliminary and FINAL PLAN indicating those STREETS that are not intended for dedication.
E. PRIVATE STREETS shall adhere to all design, CONSTRUCTION and sign standards applicable to a public STREET except for those standards which PRIVATE STREETS are specifically excluded in this ORDINANCE.
F. Traffic signals shall be prohibited at all proposed private entrances to public STREETS. Traffic signals shall also be prohibited at all intersections involving two PRIVATE STREETS.
8. ACCESS DRIVES
A. Any property which utilizes an ACCESS DRIVE shall have frontage along a public or PRIVATE STREET.
B. A note shall be included on the plan indicating that the ACCESS DRIVE will not be dedicated to the TOWNSHIP and that the owner of the property will own and maintain the ACCESS DRIVE.
C. Each travel lane shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide unless other conditions such as the intended use and function of the ACCESS DRIVE warrants additional CARTWAY or turning lanes.
D. Vertical and horizontal alignment of ACCESS DRIVES shall be designed to conform to STREET standards as stated in Section 803.4. and 803.5. and to provide for safe and convenient movement of traffic within the developed site.
E. Parking is prohibited along ACCESS DRIVES. Signage regarding the prohibition of parking along the ACCESS DRIVE shall be provided.
F. ACCESS DRIVE intersection separation requirements shall be as follows:
(1) ACCESS DRIVE intersections with STREETS shall coincide with the intersection of existing ACCESS DRIVES and STREETS located on the opposite side of the STREET. If alignment is not possible, the intersections shall be offset 100' as measured along the centerline for local STREETS and 200' for major STREETS (See Appendix I for STREET Classifications).
(2) ACCESS DRIVES located on the same side of the intersecting STREET shall maintain a separation distance of fifty (50) feet measured from centerline to centerline along local STREETS and one-hundred (100) feet measured along centerline to centerline along collector or ARTERIAL STREETS. ACCESS DRIVE intersections with other ACCESS DRIVES
8-12
within the site shall not be subject to such restrictions.
G. Wherever practical joint ACCESS DRIVES should be utilized for adjoining users to eliminate numerous ACCESS DRIVE intersections.
H. Proper sight distance shall be provided at ACCESS DRIVE intersections with existing STREETS according to the requirements of Section 803.6.F.
I. A seventy-five (75) foot clear SIGHT TRIANGLE should be provided at the intersection of an ACCESS DRIVE with an ACCESS DRIVE and at the intersection of an ACCESS DRIVE with a STREET. The triangle shall be established by measuring seventy-five (75) feet from the point of intersection of the centerlines of the ACCESS DRIVES or STREET. These lines shall be indicated on all plans. No BUILDING, planting, fencing or other OBSTRUCTION that would obscure the vision of a motorist within the clear sight AREA shall be permitted.
J. ACCESS DRIVE separation requirements shall comply with Manheim TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE
K. The CARTWAY of all ACCESS DRIVES that are located within TOWNSHIP STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall be constructed to STREET standards.
L. Curb and sidewalk should be provided along all ACCESS DRIVES.
9. STREET Widths
A. Provisions for additional RIGHT-OF-WAY and/or CARTWAY width may be required by the Board of COMMISSIONERS in specific cases for:
(1) Public safety and convenience;
(2) ACCESS to off-STREET parking in commercial and industrial AREAS and in AREAS of high DENSITY residential DEVELOPMENT.
(3) The addition of a BICYCLE LANE.
B. The extension of existing STREETS which are presently constructed with a CARTWAY different from the standards of this ORDINANCE shall be provided with a transition AREA, the design of which shall be subject to approval by the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
10. CONSTRUCTION
A. STREETS shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and standards of the TOWNSHIP as set forth in the Manheim TOWNSHIP IMPROVEMENTS
8-13
Specifications Manual or in lieu of such standards, in accordance with the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, as amended.
B. STREETS shall be finish graded to the full width of the right of way, surfaced, and improved to the GRADES and dimensions shown on the plans, profiles, and cross-sections submitted by the DEVELOPER and APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
C. Maximum slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center line of the STREET shall be three to one (3:1) in FILL AREAS and two to one (2:1) in cut AREAS beyond the RIGHT-OF-WAY limit line.
D. Prior to placement of STREET sub-base a sub-surface drainage system shall be installed in all STREETS in accordance with the Manheim TOWNSHIP Improvement Specifications Manual.
SECTION 804. CURBS
1. Curbs shall be required along all proposed STREETS in SUBDIVISIONS, along all proposed STREETS and parking compounds in LAND DEVELOPMENTS, and along all existing STREETS in and abutting both SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPMENTS. The DEVELOPER shall submit the location and GRADE of all curbs to the TOWNSHIP for consideration.
2. Curbs shall be installed to the dimensions and CONSTRUCTION standards of the TOWNSHIP or, in lieu of such standards, in accordance with the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, as amended.
3. Standard straight curb shall be required along all State Highways and along all TOWNSHIP STREETS which the TOWNSHIP has classified as collector. Standard rolled curb shall be required along all other STREETS.
4. PIPES grates and other materials shall not be placed in the curb gutters to form a DRIVEWAY ramp.
5. The transition from one type of curb to another type shall occur at a STREET intersection as directed by the TOWNSHIP Board of COMMISSIONERS.
6. Depressed straight curb at DRIVEWAYS shall be a minimum of one (1) inch above the STREET surface. The length of this depressed curb shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet without a safety island. This safety island shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in length.
7. All curbs shall conform to specifications for Class A Concrete, as specified by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, as amended, with a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch after twenty-eight (28) days.
8-14
SECTION 805. SIDEWALKS
1. Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all STREETS in all SUBDIVISIONS and along all abutting existing or new STREETS of proposed SUBDIVISIONS and LAND DEVELOPMENTS.
2. Sidewalks shall be provided along all new STREETS and parking compounds located in LAND DEVELOPMENTS unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Board of COMMISSIONERS that the sidewalk is not located close to pedestrian generator, will not continue a sidewalk on an existing road, will not provide a link between existing and/or proposed sidewalks.
3. When sidewalks are required, they shall be installed to the dimensions and CONSTRUCTION standards of the TOWNSHIP or, in lieu of such standards, in accordance with the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, as amended.
4. Sidewalks shall be four (4) feet wide, except along COLLECTOR STREETS, and adjacent to shopping centers, schools, recreation AREAS, and other community facilities, where they shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
5. Sidewalks shall be located within the STREET right of way one (1) foot from the right of way line. A grass planting strip shall be provided between the curb and sidewalk unless otherwise APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
SECTION 806. MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
1. Permanent frost-proof monuments shall be accurately placed along the streetline at least on one side of each STREET at the beginning and end of all curves and at all curves and at all angles.
2. Markers shall be set at locations shown on the FINAL PLANS as follows:
A. At all points where LOT lines intersect curves, either front or rear;
B. At all angles in property lines of LOTS;
C. At all other LOT corners.
3. Monuments shall have a flat top having a minimum width or diameter of four (4) inches and a minimum length of forty-two (42) inches. They shall also be marked on the top with a proper inscription or a drill hole. Markers shall consist of iron PIPES or steel bars at least thirty (30) inches long and not less than three-quarters (3/4) of an inch in diameter and frost-proof.
8-15
4. Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with the surface on the surrounding ground.
SECTION 807. BLOCKS
1. In general all BLOCKS in a residential SUBDIVISION shall have a maximum length of one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet. BLOCK lengths shall be measured along the STREET centerlines from intersection to intersection. BLOCKS subdivided into LOTS shall be two (2) LOT depths in width, except REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS along a collector or ARTERIAL STREET which front on a local interior STREET.
2. In all DEVELOPMENTS, the BLOCK layout shall consider the topography and character of the site, protect environmentally sensitive AREAS, minimize clearing, grading and the removal of TREES, provide for sufficient traffic circulation and ACCESS for emergency vehicles and reinforce the best design of units in the AREA. Additionally, in commercial and industrial AREAS, the BLOCK layout shall be designed to make delivery and pick-up efficient and allow for the most efficient arrangement of space for present use and future expansion, with due regard for worker and customer ACCESS and parking.
3. In large BLOCKS with interior parks and playgrounds, in exceptionally long BLOCKS where ACCESS to a school or shopping center is necessary, or where cross STREETS are impractical or unnecessary, a cross-walk with a minimum right of way width of twelve (12) feet and a minimum paved CARTWAY width of five (5) feet may be required by the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
SECTION 808. LOTS
1. LOTS proposed shall conform to the TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE.
2. All LOTS shall abut on a public STREET, or shall have ACCESS to an APPROVED PRIVATE STREET.
3. In general, side LOT lines shall be at right angles or radial to STREET LINES.
4. If, after subdividing, there exist remnants of land, they shall be included in the AREA of proposed or existing LOTS.
5. DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS are prohibited.
6. Flag LOTS are prohibited.
7. REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS are permitted.
8-16
8. LOT lines shall, where possible, follow TOWNSHIP boundary lines rather than cross them. All LOTS in the TOWNSHIP must front along a STREET in the TOWNSHIP in order to facilitate provision of services by the TOWNSHIP.
SECTION 809. PARKS AND RECREATION DEDICATION AND FEES IN LIEU OF DEDICATION (Amended by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
1. Purpose – The parks and recreation system enriches the community through the conservation of natural resources, recreation opportunities and support active healthy lifestyles, and connections that bring together people, places and our heritage. The purpose of this Section is to implement Section 501 (11) of the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE and the findings and recommendations found in the Manheim Township Comprehensive Plan of 2010, the Manheim Township Recreation, Park, Greenways & Open Space Plan of 2011 and the Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee Regional Parks and Open Space Plan, or any corresponding future laws or plans whereby this Section sets forth the regulations to:
A. Acquire parkland through the mandatory dedication of land when residential or mixed use development is proposed or expanded;
B. Secure parkland for the protection of important OPEN SPACES and natural resources through acquisition of conservation and access easements;
C. Expand existing park sites through acquisition of contiguous acreage where possible; and
D. When appropriate, collect a fee-in-lieu of dedication in order to help accomplish the following:
(1) Provide for adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve the residents of the TOWNSHIP.
(2) Provide for larger more usable recreational areas.
(3) Protect natural resources and environmentally sensitive areas.
(4) Provide residents the opportunity to engage in a variety of active and passive recreational leisure activities where residents can have fun, experience nature, socialize and exercise in harmony with nature and the environment.
(5) Provide recreational activities that include parks, playgrounds, playing fields swimming pools, golf courses, hiking and biking trails, picnic areas, scenic outlooks, and landscaped plazas, GREENWAYS and OPEN SPACES.
8-17
(6) Provide interconnectivity to OPEN SPACE within a development, to link OPEN SPACE between developments, to like OPEN SPACE with our neighboring municipalities and to create over time, a continuous system development and to the community.
(7) These requirements are intended primarily for recreation purposes rather than environmental protection purposes; however, it is not the intent to prohibit parks, OPEN SPACE or recreation facilities in environmentally sensitive areas if compatible with the primary recreation goals of this Section.
2. The provisions herein shall apply to subdivision and land development proposals that would create new or expand existing residential and missed use development.
3. The here in provisions are in addition to any clustering provisions or COMMON OPEN SPACE requirements applicable to Planned Residential Developments, Planned Commercial Developments and R-5 Overlay – Oregon Village Overlay developments that are outlined in the Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance.
4. The herein provisions shall not apply to the following:
A. Any residential subdivision or land development project or any mixed use subdivision or land development project with a residential component which protected by the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE from these intervening ordinance amendments.
B. Any residential subdivision or land development project or any mixed use subdivision or land development project with a residential component that contains less than one hundred (100) dwelling units. However the fee-in-lieu of dedication shall apply as specified in Section 809.8. If the APPLICANT or DEVELOPER is unwilling to pay the applicable fee-in-lieu of dedication, then this exemption shall not apply and land must be dedicated to the TOWNSHIP as otherwise required by this ORDINANCE.
C. Any lot add-on subdivision plans or lot line adjustments plan where no new residential or mixed use development is proposed.
5. Amount - The TOWNSHIP shall calculate the amount of land needed for park, playground, OPEN SPACE or other recreational use as follows:
A. Residential or Mixed Uses
(1) Verifying the number of DWELLING units which are proposed to be constructed or LOTS which are to be subdivided as shown on the FINAL PLAN application;
8-18
(2) For residential or mixed use SUBDIVISIONS a minimum of 0.04 acres or approximately 1,742.4 square feet of land for each LOT shall be dedicated for recreational use.
(3) For residential or mixed use LAND DEVELOPMENT, a minimum 0.04 acres or approximately 1,742.4 square feet of land for each DWELLING unit shall be dedicated for recreational use.
6. Characteristics - Land proposed to be dedicated for park and recreation purposes shall not be accepted unless the COMMISSIONERS determine that it meets the following standards:
A. The OPEN SPACE/recreational area shall provide access to existing OPEN SPACE and recreational uses and shall be conveniently accessible to residents throughout the development.
B. The OPEN SPACE/recreational area may be used to protect environmentally sensitive lands or resources with approval from the COMMISSIONERS.
C. Minimum Size. All land proposed to be dedicated for park and recreation purposes shall be of sufficient size for the proposed active or passive recreation uses.
D. Slope. At least half of any land area proposed for park and recreation purposes shall have a slope of less than ten (10) percent and shall be appropriate for active recreation uses. Steep slopes of ten (10) percent or greater, may be accepted if they are suitable for passive recreation.
E. Floodplain. At least half of any land area proposed to be dedicated for park and recreation purposes shall be above the 100 year flood elevation and shall be appropriate for active recreation uses. Up to fifty (50) percent of land below the 100-year flood elevation may be accepted if it is suitable for passive recreation activities.
F. WETLANDS. Some types of WETLANDS may also be applied towards an OPEN SPACE/recreation requirement, so long as no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the dedicated area is composed of WETLANDS.
G. Accessibility and Usability. Land shall be usable, accessible to the development required to dedicate the land and to the general public for active or passive recreation activities. No public street shall traverse the recreational area.
8-19
H. Applicants designing and developing public OPEN SPACE and recreation areas shall design such facilities in accordance with the standards established by the National Recreation and Park Association or other similar standards and provide evidence as to how these standards were incorporated into the reservation and design of the public OPEN SPACE and recreation areas.
I. Sites for public use shall be easily accessible to essential utilities, such as public water, public sewer and electric.
J. Land for dedication shall not contain stormwater management facilities.
K. Land shall be configured to serve the residents adequately and conveniently.
L. If adjacent property to the subject parcel is undeveloped, the COMMISSIONERS may require that recreation areas for the subject development be provided at the property boundary of the development so that additional lands for park and recreational purposes may be added to the lands in the future when the adjacent property is developed.
M. If adjacent property to the subject parcel is developed and recreation areas are provided at the boundary of the previously developed property, the COMMISSIONERS may require that recreation areas for the subject property be provided at the property boundary adjacent to the existing recreational land.
N. Pedestrian connections shall be provided from the subject property to adjacent parks, schools, recreational facilities, GREENWAYS, neighborhoods, shopping areas, town centers, public facilities and other destinations.
O. All publicly dedicated OPEN SPACES and recreational facilities shall be Americans with Disabilities Act compliant.
7. Private Reservation of Land or Construction of Recreational Facilities in lieu of Dedication - In lieu of dedicating land, a developer may voluntarily agree with the consent of the TOWNSHIP to construct recreational facilities or reserve private land as COMMON OPEN SPACE, subject to the standards of this subsection.
A. Construction of Recreational Facilities.
(1) Character of Facilities. A developer may construct any facilities identified in the Manheim Township Recreation, Park, Greenways and Open Space Plan or as approved by the COMMISSIONERS.
(2) Accessibility. Any recreation facility shall be accessible to residents of the subdivision or development and other members of the general public.
8-20
B. Reservation of Private OPEN SPACE.
(1) Amount. The amount of land required to be dedicated under Section 809.5, above, shall be reserved as private OPEN SPACE.
(2) Dimensions and Character. The amount, dimensions and character of the reserved OPEN SPACE shall meet the standards for dedicated OPEN SPACE, as set forth in Subsection 809.6, above.
(3) Accessibility. Private OPEN SPACE shall consist of land or water within the site, designed and intended for the use of enjoyment of residents of the subdivision or development.
(4) Ownership. Ownership shall be provided in accordance with Section 2215. OWNERSHIP OF COMMON OPEN SPACE of Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance or any corresponding future section of the Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance.
(5) Maintenance
(a) Maintenance of OPEN SPACE areas intended to remain in a natural condition is limited to removal of litter, dead trees, brush and plant materials. Natural WATERCOURSES are to be maintained as free-flowing and devoid of debris. Stream channels shall be maintained so as not to alter FLOODPLAIN levels.
(b) Trees, shrubs and other living vegetation in landscaped areas shall be properly pruned, kept in a neat appearance and removed and replaced if dead.
(c) Recreation facilities and equipment shall be kept in good repair. Concrete or asphalt surfaces shall be repaired to eliminate cracks, potholes or other potential hazards to park users.
(d) Sidewalks, bike lanes, and other pathways shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition, free of cracks, chuck holes, glass, debris and other potential hazards to users.
(e) In the event that any private owner of OPEN SPACE fails to maintain the OPEN SPACE according to the standards of this section, the TOWNSHIP may, following reasonable notice, demand that the maintenance deficiency be corrected or enter the OPEN SPACE to maintain it. The cost of such maintenance shall be charged to those persons having primary responsibility for maintenance of the OPEN SPACE and, in default of such payment,
8-21
the TOWNSHIP may cause a municipal lien to be imposed upon such OPEN SPACE.
8. Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication.
A. In lieu of dedicating land, a developer may agree with the consent of the TOWNSHIP to pay fees-in-lieu of land dedication, subject to the standards of this subsection.
(1) Amount. The amount of the fee shall be equal to the fair market value of land based on the unimproved land value.
(a) The amount of the fee in lieu of payment, shall represent the fair market value of the land required to be dedicated as specified in Section 809.5, above.
(b) The APPLICANT shall provide the TOWNSHIP with all information necessary to determine the fair market value of the land, including, but not limited to, the following:
[i] If the APPLICANT is the equitable owner, or purchased the land in fee simple less than two (2) years prior to the Preliminary or Final Plan submission, a copy of the agreement of sale or real estate transfer tax affidavit of value.
[ii] If the APPLICANT is the equitable owner, or purchased the land in fee simple more than two (2) years prior to the Preliminary or Final Plan submission, an opinion of value of the property by a state certified appraiser acceptable to the TOWNSHIP.
(c) The fair market value shall be computed by dividing the total price for the tract by the number of acres within the tract and then multiplying that number by the amount of land required to be dedicated.
(d) Any APPLICANT aggrieved by the fee established by the TOWNSHIP shall have the right to secure a second opinion of value of the property by a state certified appraiser acceptable to the TOWNSHIP. The two (2) estimated values shall be averaged, with the result being the amount upon which the fee will be based.
B. Timing of Payment. The fee-in-lieu of dedication shall be paid to the TOWNSHIP in one lump sum prior to the recording of the FINAL PLAN.
8-22
C. Earmarking. All monies paid to the TOWNSHIP in this manner shall be placed in an interest bearing-account as provided by law, which shall clearly identify the facility for which the fee was collected. Interest earned on the account shall become part of that account. Fees collected shall be expended only in properly allocable portions of the cost incurred to construct the specific recreation facilities for which the funds were collected.
D. Use of Funds. All fee-in-lieu of dedication payments received pursuant to this Section shall be used solely and exclusively for the acquisition of land for parks, playground, OPEN SPACE or other recreational sites and the CONSTRUCTION of IMPROVEMENTS thereon, and for costs incidental and ancillary to such purposes, including, but not necessarily limited to planning, engineering, and design of the park and IMPROVEMENTS, utility relocation, provision of pedestrian and/or vehicular ACCESS and purchase of park equipment. Payments received pursuant to this Section shall only be used for land or IMPROVEMENTS specifically included in the Manheim Township Recreation, Park, Greenways and Open Space Plan and accessible to the DEVELOPMENT.
E. Refunds. Upon request of any person who paid any fee-in-lieu of dedication, the TOWNSHIP shall refund such fee-in-lieu of dedication, plus interest accrued in accordance with the MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE if a timely written claim therefor is filed.
F. Waiver. An APPLICANT, DEVELOPER or other person paying any fee under this Section may waive any right to refund the fee in whole or in part, any limitations on the use of the fee, the time within which the fee must be utilized or any other requirement pertaining to the payment and use of fees-in lieu of dedication.
SECTION 810. GREENWAYS/LINEAR TRAILS
(Amended by Ordinance 2012-17, dated 11/26/12)
1. Purpose. The establishment of GREENWAYS and LINEAR TRAILS provide an important means to accomplish the following:
A. Implement the findings and recommendations found in the Manheim Township Comprehensive Plan of 2010, the Manheim Township Recreation, Park, Greenways & Open Space Plan of 2011 and the Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee Regional Parks and Open Space Plan.
B. Conservation of environmentally sensitive lands and natural resource areas.
C. Preservation of vegetation and wildlife habitat.
8-23
D. Connection between parks, schools, recreational facilities, GREENWAYS, neighborhoods, shopping areas, town centers, public facilities and other destinations.
E. Connection between OPEN SPACE and recreation areas in neighboring municipalities.
F. Coordination with neighboring municipalities, Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee and Lancaster County regarding regional GREENWAYS and other LINEAR TRAILS opportunities.
2. The establishment of GREENWAYS and LINEAR TRAILS which are available for public use also provide a variety of recreational and educational benefits. LINEAR TRAILS for walking, hiking, biking, and equestrian use, whether located within GREENWAYS or in more urban locations, are important facilities for recreation as well as for non-motorized transportation. Both GREENWAYS and LINEAR TRAILS must occupy continuous, linear land corridors and cannot be effectively contained within individual parcels of land. The purpose of this Section is therefore to provide that land which is delineated as GREENWAYS or LINEAR TRAILS in the adopted Manheim Township Comprehensive Plan of 200, Manheim Township Recreation, Park, Greenways and Open Space Plan of 2011 or on an official map of Manheim Township, be dedicated or reserved for such use when land is subdivided or developed.
3. Dedication or Reservation of Proposed GREENWAYS and LINEAR TRAILS. The COMMISSIONERS may require as a condition of final plan approval the dedication, reservation and/or improvement of LINEAR TRAILS and GREENWAYS which traverse a proposed subdivision or land development. The land and improvements required by this Section may be credited pro tanto against, but does not replace, the requirements of Section 809 of this ORDINANCE for the provision of dedication of OPEN SPACE, recreational facilities, and OPEN SPACE amenities in residential and mixed use subdivisions and land developments, or the payment of fee-in lieu thereof provided:
A. That the land offered for dedication, reservation and/or improvement is designated as a LINEAR TRAIL or GREENWAY on an adopted Manheim Township Comprehensive Plan, Manheim Township Recreation, Park, Greenways and Open Space Plan or official map of Manheim Township.
B. The ownership of the land for GREENWAYS and LINEAR TRAILS not publicly dedicated is established and is consistent with Section 2215. OWNERSHIP OF COMMON OPEN SPACE, of the Manheim Township Zoning Ordinance.
C. The agreement addressing ownership responsibilities shall also clearly define the maintenance responsibilities.
D. Any LINEAR TRAIL intended for dedication to the TOWNSHIP shall be designed in accordance with TOWNSHIP standards.
8-24
E. Any GREENWAY whether intended for dedication or intended for private reservation shall contain a vegetated riparian buffer consisting primarily of native species.
F. The minimum width of an easement containing a LINEAR TRAIL which crosses private land is twenty (20) feet. The minimum width of an easement containing a GREENWAY shall be dependent on the WATERCOURSE.
4. Limits on Requirement. The TOWNSHIP shall not require the dedication or reservation of land for GREENWAYS or LINEAR TRAILS which exceeds the requirements of Section 809 of this ORDINANCE for the provision of OPEN SPACE in residential and mixed use developments which are applicable to the property being developed.
SECTION 811. BUILDING SETBACK LINES
BUILDING SETBACK LINES shall comply with the requirements of the Manheim TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE.
SECTION 812. EASEMENTS
1. To the fullest extent possible, EASEMENTS shall be centered on or be adjacent to LOT lines.
2. Nothing shall be placed, planted, set or put within the AREA of an EASEMENT that would adversely affect the function of the EASEMENT or conflict with the EASEMENT agreement.
3. All proposed and existing utilities which are not to be dedicated shall be located outside the STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY, except for perpendicular crossing. Mainline crossings shall be encased in conduit.
4. Utility companies who have registered with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds indicating they have utilities located within the TOWNSHIP shall be contacted by the DEVELOPER prior to any CONSTRUCTION.
5. The APPLICANT shall reserve EASEMENTS where storm water or surface water management facilities are existing or proposed in accordance with the Manheim TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
6 The plans shall clearly identify who has the right of ACCESS and responsibility of maintaining all EASEMENTS.
8-25
SECTION 813. SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL
1. The method of sanitary sewage disposal shall be APPROVED by the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
2. Public sanitary sewerage IMPROVEMENTS shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of the appropriate sewer AUTHORITY. Whenever standards for such sanitary sewerage IMPROVEMENTS are not specified by the sewer AUTHORITY, the applicable standard requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall govern, and all work shall be performed in the manner prescribed in the standard specifications for sanitary sewer CONSTRUCTION of said Department for the type of CONSTRUCTION under consideration.
3. When a public sanitary sewerage system is not available, each LOT in a DEVELOPMENT shall be provided with an individual on-LOT sanitary sewage disposal system in accordance with all applicable standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
4. If an on-site sewage disposal system is to be used, APPLICANT shall certify the following:
A. That all Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection requirements then in effect for on-site sewer systems have been met.
B. Plan approval will be granted only upon such certification and upon the written verification of the TOWNSHIP Sewage Enforcement Officer.
C. If the certification/verification called for in the preceding paragraphs cannot be supplied, then APPLICANT must provide written proof that the site will be served by PUBLIC SEWER by the time any application for a CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY is filed by APPLICANT or its successors.
D. If PUBLIC SEWER is required as provided herein, no CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY shall be issued by the TOWNSHIP until the APPLICANT certifies that all fees, including, but not limited to, tapping and impact fees as may be required by this ORDINANCE, the Manheim TOWNSHIP Zoning ORDINANCE or other TOWNSHIP ORDINANCES or regulations have been paid as required therein. The CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY shall not be issued until such PUBLIC SEWER is actually available at the site.
8-26
5. Where feasibility studies of the TOWNSHIP indicate that CONSTRUCTION or extension of a public sewerage system appears probable within a reasonable time, the Board of COMMISSIONERS may require the installation of capped sewer mains and house connections in addition to the installation of individual on-LOT sanitary sewage disposal systems. It shall be the responsibility of the TOWNSHIP to inspect and approve the design and installation of such facilities.
6. Prior to the CONSTRUCTION of any PUBLIC SEWER extension, a pretreatment plant, or other similar sewer facility, a water quality management application or a sewer extension application, where applicable, shall be submitted by the DEVELOPER to the appropriate AUTHORITY.
7. Where LOTS are being served with a private force lateral sewer system, and where the ownership and maintenance of such private systems shall be the responsibility of the LANDOWNERS of the LOTS, a description of such private sewer system and the terms of the LANDOWNER'S required maintenance shall be noted on the recorded plan and shall be incorporated as part of the deed to each affected LOT.
8. Sanitary sewer EASEMENTS shall be no less than thirty (30) feet in width, the sewer PIPE shall be centered within the EASEMENT. The EASEMENT shall be reserved only for sanitary sewer.
9. All required sanitary sewer IMPROVEMENTS shall be extended to the boundary line of the DEVELOPMENT, as required, to provide ACCESS to sewer service by adjacent lands. All such IMPROVEMENTS shall be so designed as to accommodate the future needs of the TOWNSHIP with respect to sewer service.
SECTION 814. WATER SUPPLY
1. Whenever feasible, all SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT shall be provided with a complete water distribution system which will be connected to a PUBLIC WATER system. The design and installation of such system shall be subject to the approval of the appropriate municipal, governmental or private AUTHORITY.
2. When connection to an existing water supply system is proposed, the FINAL PLAN application shall include a copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement of a commitment or agreement to serve the AREA in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
3. The design and installation of any local community water distribution system shall be subject to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and such systems shall be further subject to satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof.
8-27
4. When a municipal or community water supply system is not available each LOT in a DEVELOPMENT shall be provided with an individual water supply system in accordance with all applicable standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
5. If an on-site water system is to be used, APPLICANT shall certify the following:
A. That all Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection requirements then in effect for on-site water systems have been met.
B. That the water supply on the site has been tested according to the standards of the Federal Safe Drinking Water ACT (P.L. 93-523 (1974)), as amended, and the Pennsylvania Safe Drinking Water ACT (P.L. 206, No. 43 (1984)), as amended, and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, and that the quality of the water meets the requirements of those ACTS and those rules or regulations.
C. Compliance shall include meeting both the Primary and Secondary quality levels in effect at the time the site plan is submitted. Test methods and data shall accompany the site plan. A map or drawing showing the location of any on-site water supply system and the place or places where any test wells or holes were dug to meet the requirements of the aforesaid ACTS and rules or regulations shall also accompany the site plan.
D. That there shall be adequate water pressure for the proposed use.
E. Plan approval will be granted only upon such certification and upon the written verification of the TOWNSHIP ENGINEER to the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
F. If the certifications and verifications called for in the preceding paragraphs cannot be supplied, then no BUILDING PERMIT shall be granted unless APPLICANT shall provide written proof that the site will be supplied by PUBLIC WATER by the time any application for a CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY is filed by APPLICANT or APPLICANT'S successors.
G. If PUBLIC WATER is required as provided herein, no CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY shall be issued by the TOWNSHIP until such PUBLIC WATER supply is actually available at the site.
6. The TOWNSHIP has adopted a plan to extend water lines in an orderly manner and in certain AREAS of the TOWNSHIP. Where such plan, as the same may be amended, appears probable within a reasonable time, whether or not such systems shall be owned or operated by the TOWNSHIP or other municipal or governmental AUTHORITY, the Board of COMMISSIONERS shall require the installation of a complete, capped water distribution system in addition to the installation of individual on-LOT water supply systems.
8-28
7. All required water line IMPROVEMENTS shall be extended to the boundary line of the DEVELOPMENT, as required, to provide ACCESS to water service by adjacent lands. All such IMPROVEMENTS shall be so designed as to accommodate the future needs of the TOWNSHIP with respect to water service.
SECTION 815. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
1. All storm water management facilities, including but not limited to, storm water carrying STRUCTURES, debris or SEDIMENT BASINS, and retention and detention STRUCTURES, shall be designed in accordance with the Manheim TOWNSHIP STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
SECTION 816. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
1. All earth moving activities shall be conducted in such a way as to minimize ACCELERATED EROSION and resulting sedimentation. Measures to control EROSION and sedimentation shall, at a minimum, meet the standards of the Lancaster County Conservation District and Chapter 102 (EROSION Control) of Title 25, Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, as amended.
2. The EROSION and sedimentation control plan must be available at all times at the site of the activity. When required, a permit allowing earth moving activity shall be obtained by the DEVELOPER before any CONSTRUCTION on the site shall begin.
3. Approval of an EROSION and sedimentation control plan by the TOWNSHIP shall not be construed as an indication that the plan complies with the standards of any agency of the Commonwealth.
SECTION 817. UTILITY TRANSMISSION LINES
When any natural gas line, petroleum or PETROLEUM PRODUCTS transmission line, electric transmission line or any other cable or pipeline, traverses a DEVELOPMENT, the DEVELOPER shall confer with the applicable AUTHORITIES of the utility transmission or distribution provider to determine the minimum distance which shall be required and maintained between each proposed STRUCTURE or improvement and the transmission line, cable or pipeline.
SECTION 818. STREET LIGHTING
When STREET lights are proposed by the DEVELOPER, a plan for such STREET lights, APPROVED by the appropriate utility company, shall be provided by the DEVELOPER to the PLANNING COMMISSION for review and recommendation to the Board of COMMISSIONERS.
8-29
SECTION 819. LANDSCAPING
1. All ground surfaces in a DEVELOPMENT that are neither paved nor covered with some other solid material shall be protected with vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil EROSION and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
2. Landscaping plans, when required, shall include a planting schedule and show locations, size and name of all TREES, shrubs, vegetative SCREENS and ground covers proposed to be installed in the DEVELOPMENT. Such plans shall be sealed by a LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
3. Only nursery-grown plant materials shall be acceptable, and all TREES, shrubs and ground covers shall be planted according to accepted horticultural standards. Dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the DEVELOPER during the following planting season.
4. TREES, shrubs or any such plantings shall not be permitted in any public STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY or public or private EASEMENT.
5. Maintenance of all landscaping done in accordance with permanent commercial, industrial and residential DEVELOPMENT identification signs shall be adequately secured by deed restrictions, LOT owner association agreement and/or other acceptable provision.
SECTION 820. PUBLIC UTILITIES
Except as prohibited by the Public Utility Commission, all on-site lines for public utilities, including, but not limited to, electricity, telephone, gas, and the like shall be laid underground in an APPROVED method. No FINAL PLAN approval shall be granted by the TOWNSHIP until the APPLICANT provides a letter from each such utility certifying compliance with that utilities requirement for underground lines.
SECTION 821. TREE PROTECTION
1. The TREE PROTECTION ZONE. Prior to CONSTRUCTION the TREE PROTECTION ZONE shall be delineated by the following methods:
A. The TREE PROTECTION ZONE that is delineated on the site prior to CONSTRUCTION shall conform to the APPROVED DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
B. All TREES scheduled to remain shall be marked; where groups of TREES exist, only the TREES on the edge need to be marked.
C. A forty-eight inch high snowfence mounted on steel posts, located eight feet on center, shall be placed along the boundary of the TREE PROTECTION ZONE;
8-30
D. In addition to the TREE PROTECTION ZONE, TREES may be left standing as protection between the trunks of the TREES to be retained and the limits of grading. When additional TREES are used as protection, the TREE PROTECTION ZONE on the APPROVED plan shall be marked in the field so that the additional buffer AREA is delineated. When this method of protection is used, these additional TREES shall be removed at the time of completion of the project.
E. When the snowfence has been installed the fencing along the TREE PROTECTION ZONE shall be maintained until all work/CONSTRUCTION has been completed; any damages to the protective fencing shall be replaced and repaired before further CONSTRUCTION shall begin.
F. TREE being removed shall not be felled, pushed or pulled into a TREE PROTECTION ZONE or into TREES that are to be retained.
2. Retaining Walls
A. When the original GRADE can not be retained at the TREE PROTECTION ZONE line, a retaining wall shall be constructed outside of the TREE PROTECTION ZONE.
B. In addition the following methods shall be used to ensure survival of the TREES.
(1) The top of the wall shall be four inches above the finished GRADE line.
(2) The wall shall be constructed of large stones, brick, BUILDING tile, concrete BLOCKS, or treated woodbeams not less than six inches by six inches" a means for drainage through the wall shall be provided so water will not accumulate on either side of the wall; weep holes shall be required with any wall.
(3) Any severed roots as a result of excavation shall be trimmed so that their edges are smooth and are cut back to a lateral root if exposed.
(4) A layer of clean stone (sized three-quarter to one inch) shall be placed one (1) foot out from the wall to aid to drainage.
3. Trenching and Tunneling
A. If there is no alternative but to locate a utility line through a TREE PROTECTION ZONE, tunneling shall be used instead of trenching except where the survival of the TREE would not be affected by either method.
B. Trenches shall be filled as soon as possible, and tamped lightly to avoid air space.
9-1
ARTICLE IX. MOBILEHOME PARKS
SECTION 901. REGULATIONS
In case of any DEVELOPMENT governed by the MOBILEHOME and MOBILEHOME Park ORDINANCE of Manheim TOWNSHIP, the applicable provisions of this ORDINANCE shall be as modified by such MOBILEHOME and MOBILEHOME Park ORDINANCE and the procedures which shall be followed in the approval of any plan and the rights and duties thereto shall be governed by the provisions of such MOBILEHOME and MOBILEHOME Park ORDINANCE.
10-1
ARTICLE X. PENALTIES AND REMEDIES; APPEALS
SECTION 1001. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES
1. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ORDINANCE shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the TOWNSHIP, pay a judgement of not more than $500.00 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the TOWNSHIP as a result thereof. No judgement shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by a district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgement, the TOWNSHIP may enforce the judgement pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the district justice, determining that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this ORDINANCE to have believed that there was no such violation. If the district justice makes a determination of good faith, there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of determination of a violation by the district justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute separate violation.
2. The TOWNSHIP may institute and maintain actions at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations of this ORDINANCE, to prevent unlawful CONSTRUCTION, to recover damages and/or to prevent illegal occupancy of a BUILDING, STRUCTURE or premises.
3. The TOWNSHIP may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a SUBDIVISION or a LAND DEVELOPMENT of real property in violation of this ORDINANCE. The AUTHORITY to deny such permit or approval shall apply to any of the following APPLICANTS:
A. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
B. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard to whether such vendee of lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
C. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of the violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
D. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
10-2
4. As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to any owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the DEVELOPMENT of any such real property, the TOWNSHIP may require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the APPLICANT acquired an interest in such real property.
SECTION 1002. APPEALS
1. Any person, partnership, corporation or organization aggrieved by any action of a qualified representative of the TOWNSHIP, may appeal to the Board of COMMISSIONERS within thirty (30) days of that action.
2. Any person, partnership, corporation or organization aggrieved by any action of the Board of COMMISSIONERS, may appeal to Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas within thirty (30) days of that action.
SECTION 1003. VALIDITY
Should any section, subsection, provision, sentence or part of this ORDINANCE be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ORDINANCE as a whole or any remaining section, subsection, provision, sentence or part thereof.
SECTION 1004. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ORDINANCE shall become effective immediately following its adoption by the Board of COMMISSIONERS of Manheim TOWNSHIP, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Duly Ordained this___ day of ______________, 2014.
ATTEST: MANHEIMTOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS
_______________________________ ______________________________
Sean P. Molchany, Secretary President (Vice)
1998
MANHEIM TOWNSHIP OFFICIALS
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
David R. Heck, President
Albert B. Kling, Vice President
Donna E. DiMeo
Ian G. Hodge, Jr.
Samuel M. Mecum
Sean P. Molchany, Manager-Secretary
PLANNING COMMISSION
Michel Gibeault, Chairperson
Stacie L. Reidenbaugh, Vice Chairperson
Walter B. Lee
Marryann Marotta
Donald C. Reed
John Shipman
Jeffery E. Swinehart
PLANNING & ZONING DEPARTMENT
Lisa A. Douglas, Director
Shannon Sinopoli, Land Development Administrator
Samuel L. Maurer IV, Assistant Zoning Officer
Rita Long, Administrative Assistant
SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
OF MANHEIM TOWNSHIP 1998
Revised 11/26/12 by Ordinance 2012-17
Revised 11/10/2014 by Ordinance 2014-22
DECEMBER 14, 1998, as amended
A-1
APPENDIX I
COLLECTOR TOWNSHIP ROUTE
Airport Road
Buch Avenue
Buckwalter Road
Bucky Drive
Butter Road
Carerra Drive
Citation Lane
Commerce Drive
Creek Road
Delp Road
East Roseville Road
Eden Road
Erb's Quarry Road
Euclid Drive
Falcon Lane
Farmingdale Road
Flory Mill Road
Fountain Avenue
Granite Run Drive
Grofftown Road
Hess Boulevard
Hunsicker Road
Jake Landis Road
Jetstar Drive
John Landis Road
Keller Avenue
Kissel Hill Road
Koser Road
Kreider Road
Landis Valley Road
Lausch Lane
Lititz Road
Marble Drive
Marshall Avenue
Meadow Lane
Millport Road
Murry Hill Drive
Paper Mill Road
Pinetown Road
Pleasure Road
President Avenue
Quarry Road
Richard Drive
Rutledge Avenue
Snyder Road
Stauffer Road
Wagonwheel Road
Weaver Road
West Airport Road
West Oregon Road
West Roseville Road
Wright Avenue
 Plus all future STREETS constructed in commercial and industrial zones
A-2
APPENDIX I (CONTINUED)
COLLECTOR
LEGISLATIVE
ROUTE
ARTERIAL
LEGISLATIVE
ROUTE
LIMITED ACCESS
LEGISLATIVE
ROUTE
Becker Road
Fruitville Pike
Route 30 Bypass
Bushong Road
Lititz Pike
Route 283 Bypass
Creek Road
Manheim Pike
Route 222 Bypass
East Oregon Road
New Holland Pike
East Petersburg Road
Oregon Pike
McGovernville Road
Old Harrisburg Pike
Valley Road
McGovern Avenue
A-3
APPENDIX II
- Sample Forms –
CERTIFICATION OF SURVEY ACCURACY
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the survey shown and described hereon is true and correct to the accuracy required by the SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE of Manheim TOWNSHIP.
______________________, 20___ *______________________________
**
* Signature of the registered professional responsible for the preparation of the plan.
** Seal of the individual
CERTIFICATION OF PLAN ACCURACY
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the plan shown and described hereon is true and correct to the accuracy required by the SUBDIVISION and LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE of Manheim TOWNSHIP.
__________________________ 20___ *______________________________
**
* Signature of the registered professional responsible for the preparation of the plan.
** Seal of the individual
STORM DRAINAGE PLAN CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the storm water management facilities shown and described hereon are designed in conformance with the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT and LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE of Manheim TOWNSHIP.
______________________, 20___ *______________________________
**
* Signature of the registered professional responsible for the preparation of the plan.
** Seal of the individual
A-4
APPENDIX II (CONTINUED)
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLAN,
AND OFFER OF DEDICATION
(LANDOWNER is an Individual)
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF LANCASTER
On this, the ____ day of _______________, 20___, before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared ______________________________________________who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that he is the *____________________________ of the property shown on this plan, that the plan thereof was made at his direction, that he acknowledges the same to be his ACT and plan, that he desires the same to be recorded, and that all STREETS and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those AREAS labeled "NOT FOR DEDICATION") are hereby dedicated to the public use.
**_______________________________
***_______________________________
My Commission Expires ______________, 20___
* Identify Ownership or Equitable Ownership
** Signature of the Individual
*** Signature and Seal of Notary Public or other officer authorized to acknowledge deeds.
CERTIFICATE FOR APPROVAL BY THE COMMISSIONERS
APPROVED by the Manheim TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONERS this ____ day of
______________________, 20____.
A-5
APPENDIX II (CONTINUED)
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLAN,
AND OFFER OF DEDICATION
(LANDOWNER is a Co-partnership)
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF LANCASTER
On this, the ____ day of ______________, 20___, before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared ____________________________________________, being one of the firm of ________________________________________________, who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that the co-partnership is the *_____________________________ of the property shown on this plan, that the plan thereof was made at its direction, that it acknowledges the same to be its ACT and plan and desires the same to be recorded, and that all STREET and other property identified as proposed public property (excepting those AREAS labeled "NOT FOR DEDICATION") are hereby dedicated to the public use.
**______________________________
***______________________________
My Commission Expires ______________, 20___
* Identify Ownership or Equitable Ownership
** Signature of the Individual
*** Signature and Seal of Notary Public or other officer authorized to acknowledge deeds.
CERTIFICATE FOR REVIEW BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION
Reviewed by the Manheim TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION this _____ day of
______________________, 20____.
__________________________________ _________________________________
A-6
APPENDIX II (CONTINUED)
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLAN,
AND OFFER OF DEDICATION
(LANDOWNER is a Corporation)
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF LANCASTER
On this, the ____ day of _______________, 20___, before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared _____________________________________________,
being *_____________________________ of **________________________________
who being duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that the corporation is the ***___________________________________ of the property shown on this plan, that he is authorized to execute said plan on behalf of the corporation, that the plan is the ACT and deed of the corporation, that the corporation desires the same to be recorded and on behalf of the corporation further acknowledges, that all STREETS and other property identified as proposed public property are hereby dedicated to the public use - (excepting those AREAS labeled "NOT FOR DEDICATION").
****__________________________________
*****
******__________________________________
My Commission Expires _________________, 20___
* Individual's Title
** Name of Corporation
*** Identify Ownership or Equitable Ownership
**** Signature of Individual
***** Corporate Seal
****** Signature and Seal of Notary Public or other officer authorized to acknowledge deeds.
A-7
APPENDIX II (CONTINUED)
LANCASTER COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION'S REVIEW CERTIFICATE
The Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION, as required by the Pennsylvania MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE, ACT 247 of 1968, as amended, reviewed this plan on _______________________, 20____, and a copy of the review is on file at the office of the PLANNING COMMISSION in LCPC File No. __________. This certificate does not indicate approval or disapproval of the plan by the Lancaster COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION, and the Commission does not represent nor guarantee that this plan complies with the various ORDINANCES, rules, regulations, or laws of the local MUNICIPALITY, the Commonwealth, or the Federal Government.
*___________________________________ *_______________________________
* Signatures of Chairman and Vice Chairman or their designees
CERTIFICATE FOR REVIEW BY THE TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
(If required by the TOWNSHIP)
Reviewed by the Manheim TOWNSHIP ENGINEER this ______ day of
______________________, 20____.
__________________________________
RECORDER OF DEEDS CERTIFICATE
Recorded in the office for Recording of Deeds, in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, in SUBDIVISION Plan Book _______, Volume ______, Page _______.
Witness my hand and seal of office this ____ day of ______________, A.D., 20____.
_________________________________
Recorder
A-8
APPENDIX III
Sight distances for roads with GRADES greater than thirteen (13) percent shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
SSSD = 1.47 Vt + V2/30(f + g)
SSSD = minimum safe stopping distance (feet)
V = velocity of vehicle (miles per hour)
t = perception time of a motorist (average = 2.5 seconds)
f = wet friction of pavement (average = 0.30)
g = percent GRADE of roadway divided by 100
A-9
APPENDIX IV
A-10
APPENDIX IV (CONTINUED)
Segment Definition
General Rule: A roadway segment is an interval of roadway length terminated at each end by the intersection of another roadway or a cul de sac (or dead end).
Curbline or Centerline? When determining whether to terminate a segment at the curbline of an intersecting roadway or at the centerline of the intersecting roadway one must set a priority of service level on the roadways to be measured. This is a process more simple than it sounds.
When preparing to measure new roadways look at the existing roadways to which the new roads connect. It is most likely that some or all of these roads will feed outside traffic to new roads. The roadways which feed outside traffic to the new roads (or collect traffic from the new roads and feed it to the outside) are of a higher service class then the new roads.
 A segment should terminate at the curbline of a higher class roadway and terminate at the centerline of a lower class roadway.
 Exception: Where an entire higher class roadway terminates at a lower class roadway (“T” intersection) the higher class roadway will terminate at the curbline of the lower class roadway and the segments of the lower class roadway will terminate at the centerline of the higher class roadway.

