Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Be it enacted and ordained by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Middletown, County of Dauphin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is
enacted and ordained as follows:
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],1
the codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Borough of
Middletown, County of Dauphin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 260,
is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Middletown, which shall be known and is hereby designated
as the "Code of the Borough of Middletown," hereinafter referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Middletown, and it is the
intention of said Borough Council that each such provision contained within
the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code
shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and
only changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Middletown and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
1. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3301.4 and 3301.5.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 4, 1986.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough, or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property or designating various streets as public
highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. General deletions. Sections pertaining to severability, effective dates
and repeals have been deleted, since such provisions are included in
this ordinance or are of no further effect.
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of
the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.2
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6C, the following sections were amended or added: §§ 16-11,
23-8, 23-9, 23-11, 23-12, 23-20, 23-24B, 43-4, 43-7F, 51-3, 55-32, 58-1, 58-2, 69-1, 69-2,
69-3, 84-1, 84-2C, 93-1, 93-4, 98-3, 101-4, 105-18, 113-1C, 113-3, 113-4, 113-5, 113-6,
113-7, Art. II of Ch. 113, §§ 120-2, 127-8B, 127-10C(1), 127-12A, 132-8B, 138-2, 138-3B,
142-1, 144-13, 144-14, 144-15, 144-16B and C, 144-18B, 144-19, 144-20, 144-27, 151-2,
155-1, 155-11, 158-11A, 158-12, 164-4, 164-14, 164-16, 185-1, 185-2A, 188-2, 188-3,
188-6, Ch. 190, §§ 198-1, 198-2, 198-3, 198-4, 198-5A, 198-6, Ch. 200, §§ 203-1, 203-5,
210-1, 210-2, 210-5, 210-6, 210-7, 226-5, 226-10, 226-12, 226-13B, 226-14, 226-36B(2),
235-4, 235-6, 235-10, 235-16, 235-19, 235-21, 235-22, 235-27, 235-31, 235-38,
238-28F(2), 238-33A, 238-38, 243-3, 243-4B, 243-13, 243-15, 243-16, 243-19, 243-26,
247-4E, 247-5, 250-9, Ch. 252, §§ 256-1, 256-3A, F and H, 256-5C, D and G(1), 256-6C, F
and G, 256-9, 256-11A(6), 256-15, 260-6B, 260-94H and 260-123B. The following sections
were deleted: Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 749: Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 504; Sec. 37 of Ch. XVI of 1953
Code: and Sec. 11-120 of Ord. No. 824. A complete description of each change is on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute. Other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
§ 1-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-11
1:6
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the maximum penalty
provided by law.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Borough Council that this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted
if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection,
section, article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after May 4, 1987.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Manager — See Ch. 43. Borough Secretary — See Ch. 80.
§ 3-1. Establishment and composition.
There is hereby established a Department of Administration as the
executive department of the Borough of Middletown, which shall consist of
the Borough Manager, Borough Secretary, Code Enforcement Officer and
such other employees as are assigned to the Department by the Borough
Manager.
§ 3-2. Duties.
In addition to the duties provided for the Borough Manager and the
Borough Secretary by the Code of the Borough of Middletown and by the
Pennsylvania Borough Code, the Department of Administration shall be
responsible for providing support services, clerical services and such other
office-related duties as needed at the direction of the Borough Manager.
§ 3-3. Director.
The Borough Manager shall be the Director of the Department of
Administration.
§ 3-4. Assignment of property.
All real and personal property of the Borough of Middletown not assigned
to some other department of the Borough shall be and is hereby assigned to
the Department of Administration.
§ 3-5. Employees.
The Department of Administration shall have such employees as may, from
time to time, be hired by the Borough Manager.
Chapter 5
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 5, Ambulance Service, adopted 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
804, approved 12-14-1981, amended in its entirety 5-14-1984 by Ord.
No. 877, approved 5-14-1984, was repealed 4-8-2002 by Ord. No.
1148, approved 4-8-2002.]
Chapter 8
§ 1-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 3-5
1:8
AUDITOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 77.
§ 8-1. Position established; appointment.
Chapter 12
CABLE RATES
§ 12-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Middletown Borough
Cable Rate Regulation Ordinance."
§ 12-2. Legal authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the federal Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, both of which amended the federal
Communications Act of 1934. Section 623 of the Communications Act, 47
U.S.C. § 543, states that "any franchising authority may regulate the rates
for the provisions of cable services . . . but only to the extent provided
under this section." This chapter is also enacted pursuant to the rate
regulations adopted by the FCC contained in Subpart N entitled "Cable Rate
Regulation," 47 CFR 76.900 et seq.
§ 12-3. Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — All equipment in a subscriber's home,
provided and maintained by the operator, that is used to receive the basic
service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to
receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated
A. The Borough of Middletown hereby accepts the provisions of Clause VII
of Section 1005 of Article X of the Borough Code, as amended by Act of
Assembly February 1, 1966 (No. 581),3 and hereby establishes the office
of appointed auditor in and for the Borough of Middletown.
B. The Borough Council is hereby directed, immediately following the
effective date of this chapter and annually thereafter, to appoint, by
resolution, an accountant in accordance with the provisions of the
Borough Code hereinbefore recited.
3. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1005(7).
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:9
service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to converter boxes,
remote control units and inside wiring.
BASIC SERVICE — At a minimum, all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite regardless of how such signal is ultimately received
by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental
programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and
any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier
by the cable operator.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of Middletown Borough.
CABLE OPERATOR or OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons that
provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or
more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or who
otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include:
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — A governmental or public entity that has
filed a Form 328 with the FCC and is certified by the FCC to regulate basic
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act,4 except that such
facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of
Section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers
unless the extent of that use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;
C.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the
Communications Act; or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
E.
4. Editor's Note: See generally 47 U.S.C.A. § 151 et seq.
§ 12-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 12-3
1:10
service and associated equipment rates, oversee the operations of a cable
operator and its compliance with a franchise agreement.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint-stock company,
trust, corporation or governmental entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person or entity who contracts with a cable operator
for, and lawfully receives, the video signals and applicable cable services
distributed by the cable system.
§ 12-4. Franchising authority.
The Borough has submitted a completed FCC Form 328 with the FCC and is
certified by the FCC as a franchising authority to regulate basic service and
associated equipment rates in accordance with the applicable regulations of
the FCC.
§ 12-5. Adoption of regulations.
In addition to the regulations contained in this chapter, the rate regulations
of the FCC contained in Subpart N entitled "Cable Rate Regulation," 47
CFR 76.900 et seq., as may be amended, are hereby adopted for the review
and determination of reasonable and lawful rates for basic service and
associated equipment.
§ 12-6. Presumption of no effective competition.
Only the rates of cable systems that are not subject to effective competition
may be regulated. In the absence of a demonstration by a cable operator
to the contrary, a cable system is presumed not to be subject to effective
competition.
§ 12-7. Appointment and powers of Compliance Officer.
§ 12-8. Duties of Compliance Officer.
The Compliance Officer shall be responsible for:
A. For the administration of this chapter, a Compliance Officer shall be
appointed by the Borough Council who shall meet such qualifications as
may be established by the Borough Council.
B. The Compliance Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms.
A. Taking such actions on behalf of the Borough as may from time to time
be required to obtain or maintain the Borough's certification to regulate
basic service and associated equipment rates.
B. Notifying all cable operators serving the Borough when the Borough
has become certified by the FCC to regulate basic service and
associated equipment rates and has adopted this chapter.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8
1:11
§ 12-9. Duties of cable operators.
§ 12-10. Review of basic service rates and associated equipment.
C. Receiving, filing in the public records of the Borough, reviewing for
completeness, and if appropriate, placing on the Borough Council
agenda for consideration, rate regulatory forms and other filings by
cable operators required to be submitted pursuant to applicable federal
law and regulations.
D. Enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all decisions of the
Borough Council made hereunder to the fullest extent permitted by
federal law and regulations, subject to the oversight and control of the
Borough Council.
E. Taking such other actions as may be necessary from time to time,
subject to the oversight and control of the Borough Council, to protect
the rights of the Borough to regulate basic service and associated
equipment rates to the fullest extent permitted by federal law and
regulations.
A. A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier
and associated equipment within 30 days of receiving written
notification from the Borough that is has been certified as a franchising
authority to regulate rates. The cable operator shall include rate cards
and channel line-ups with its filing and include an explanation of any
discrepancy in the figures provided in these documents and its rate
filing.
B. A cable operator shall provide written notice to each subscriber of any
increase in the rates to be charged for the basic service tier or
associated equipment at least 30 days before any increase becomes
effective.
C. A cable operator shall submit to the Borough the rate regulatory forms
required by the FCC, including, but not limited to, FCC Form 1240 and
FCC Form 1205, on a periodic basis and in a timely fashion as required
by applicable federal law and regulations. The deadlines for submission
of such forms are dependent upon the cable operator's election to
employ the annual rate adjustment method or the quarterly rate
adjustment method. Should applicable federal law and/or regulations
be amended to alter the rate adjustment methods, then the cable
operator shall comply with such amendments.
D. A cable operator shall comply with all requests for information, orders
and decisions of the Borough. No cable operator shall, in any
information submitted to the Borough in making a rate determination
pursuant to an FCC rate regulatory form filing, make any
misrepresentation or willful material omission bearing on any matter
within the Borough's jurisdiction.
§ 12-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 12-10
1:12
A. Upon receipt of FCC rate regulatory forms, including, but not limited
to, FCC Form 1240 and FCC Form 1205, from a cable operator
proposing any change in basic service and/or associated equipment
rates, the Compliance Officer shall review the forms to determine
whether the filing is complete. If the filing is incomplete, the
Compliance Officer shall notify the cable operator within the applicable
time period required by federal law and regulations and ask the cable
operator to submit such additional information as is necessary to make
the filing complete. The time period for review by the Borough shall be
extended for the cable operator to complete the filing in accordance
with applicable federal law and regulations.
B. Upon receipt of completed FCC rate regulatory forms from a cable
operator, the Compliance Officer shall make an initial determination as
to whether the proposed rate adjustments are reasonable and lawful
pursuant to applicable federal law and regulations. The Compliance
Officer may engage the services of an expert in cable rate regulation to
assist in making such initial determination.
C. Should the Compliance Officer make an initial determination that the
cable operator's proposed rates are unreasonable and unlawful, the
Compliance Officer shall place the issue on the Borough Council's
agenda for public consideration in the form of a rate-making
proceeding. The Borough Council shall provide a reasonable
opportunity for public comment and for consideration of the views of
interested parties.
D. Upon conclusion of the rate-making proceeding, the Borough Council
shall render a decision on whether the cable operator's proposed rates
are reasonable and lawful. The Borough Council shall issue a written
decision if it disapproves an initial rate for basic service and/or
associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a
rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for a rate
increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested parties.
Public notice shall be given regarding any written decision, including
releasing the text of the written decision to the public.
E. As part of the rate-making proceeding, the Borough may require the
production of proprietary information to make a rate determination.
The Borough shall state a justification for each item of information
requested and, where related to an FCC form, indicate the question or
section of the form to which the request specifically relates. Upon
request by a cable operator, the parties to a rate proceeding shall have
access to such information subject to the Borough's procedures
governing nondisclosure by the parties. Public access to such
proprietary information shall be governed by applicable state and local
law.
§ 12-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-11
1:13
§ 12-11. Enforcement.
In rendering its decisions, the Borough Council shall have the full authority
to order a cable operator to take any and all enforcement actions permitted
by applicable federal law and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
following:
§ 12-12. Violations and penalties.
In the event that a cable operator does not comply with an order or decision
made pursuant to this chapter and directed specifically toward the cable
operator, the Borough may assess a fine against the cable operator of not
more than $500 per violation. Each day of continuous violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 16
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
A. Ordering a cable operator to implement a reduction in basic service or
associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into
compliance with the standards set forth in applicable federal law and
regulations.
B. Prescribing a reasonable rate for basic service or associated equipment
after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable and unlawful.
C. Ordering a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of
previously paid rates determined to be in excess of the permitted tier
charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has
submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charged as
reasonable. Any such refund order shall be further subject to the
limitations contained in applicable federal law and regulations.
§ 12-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 12-12
1:14
ARTICLE I
Declaration of Disaster Emergency
§ 16-1. Authorization to declare local disaster emergency.
Pursuant to Act 323 enacted November 26, 1978, a local disaster
emergency shall be declared in accordance with the provisions of the
Middletown Emergency Operations Plan (EOP), which is within the
contemplation of Section 7501(b) of said Act 323 and of Section 1030 of the
Borough Code.5
§ 16-2. Consent required for continuation or renewal.
The declaration shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of
seven days, except by or with the consent of the Council.
§ 16-3. Publicity for order or proclamation.
Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt publicity and shall be filed with
the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
5. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501(b) and 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., respectively.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:15

ARTICLE II
Emergency Management Agency
§ 16-4. Establishment, authority and responsibility.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency Management Services Code,
being a part of Act 323 enacted November 26, 1978, P.L. 1332, beginning
particularly with Section 7501, sometimes cited as 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501,
the local Middletown Emergency Management Agency is hereby formally
established in accordance with the plan and program of the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency. To assure prompt, proper and effective
discharge of basic Borough responsibilities relating to civil defense and
disaster preparedness, operations and recovery, the Middletown
Emergency Management Agency is vested with authority and responsibility
for emergency management, response and recovery planning within the
territorial limits of the Borough of Middletown and for rendering advice and
assistance to the Director of Crisis Management (DCM) in the execution of
the Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for the Borough of Middletown. In
addition, it shall conduct such services outside of its jurisdictional limits as
may be required under Act 323.
§ 16-5. Coordinator of Emergency Management.
Said Middletown Emergency Management Agency shall have a Coordinator
who, subject to the direction and control of the Borough Council, shall be
responsible for civil defense and emergency planning and for providing
advice and assistance to the Director of Crisis Management in the
implementation of the Middletown Emergency Operations Plan planning,
administration and operation. Pursuant to Section 7502 of Act 323,6 the
Borough Council shall make the recommendation, as the occasion may
arise, to the Governor concerning the person to be appointed by the
Governor as such Coordinator at this local level in Middletown. Said
Coordinator, pursuant to Section 7502(g) of Act 323, shall be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. In addition, said
Coordinator may receive such compensation as the Middletown Borough
Council may, from time to time, provide. The term "Coordinator" includes
"Acting Coordinator."
§ 16-6. Powers and duties.
Said Middletown Emergency Management Agency, through said
Coordinator (subject to the direction and approval of the Borough Council
and within budgetary and other limits of funding available), shall implement
the provisions of Section 7503 of Act 323,7 requiring that each political
subdivision shall:
6. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7502.
7. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7503.
§ 16-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-6
1:17
§ 16-7. Appropriations.
Appropriations for payment of the expenses of the Middletown Emergency
Management Agency shall be made, pursuant to Section 7511 of Act 323,8
in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the ordinary
expenses of the Borough of Middletown and shall specify the amounts and
purposes for which the moneys appropriated may be used.
§ 16-8. Laws applicable.
In accordance with Section 7512 of Act 323,9 which mandates that such
"local organization shall be deemed an agency, board or commission of
A. Prepare, maintain and keep current a disaster emergency management
plan for the prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused
by disaster, prompt and effective response to disaster and disaster
emergency relief and recovery in consonance with the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Plan.
B. Establish, equip and staff an emergency operations center, consolidated
with warning and communication systems, to support government
operations in emergencies and provide other essential facilities and
equipment for agencies and activities assigned emergency functions.
C. Provide individual and organizational training programs to ensure
prompt, efficient and effective disaster emergency services.
D. Organize, prepare and coordinate all locally available manpower,
materials, supplies, equipment, facilities and services necessary for
disaster emergency readiness, response and recovery.
E. Adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the
anticipated effects of disaster.
F. Execute and enforce such rules and orders as the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency shall adopt and promulgate under the
Emergency Management Services Code or as shall be adopted and
promulgated by the Middletown Emergency Management Agency.
G. Cooperate and coordinate with any public and private agency in
achieving any purpose of Act 323.
H. Have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules and orders, whether of the
Governor or state or Middletown Emergency Management Agencies.
I. Provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth and local officials and
agencies and the general public.
8. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7511.
9. Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7512.
§ 16-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 16-8
1:18
the political subdivision," the Middletown Emergency Management Agency
shall be subject to all of the laws governing the making of contracts or
purchases, the employment of persons or the incurring of financial
obligations which apply to the Borough of Middletown.
§ 16-9. Payment of bills and claims.
All bills or claims to be paid from any appropriations made by the Borough
of Middletown, after first being approved by the Borough Council, or an
appropriate officer designated for that purpose under Section 7514 of Act
323,10 shall be paid from the Treasury of the Borough of Middletown only
upon the warrant or order of the officers designated by law to approve or
countersign warrants or orders for the payment of ordinary expenses of the
Borough of Middletown and shall be subject to audit in the same manner as
other financial transactions of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 16-10. Emergency operations plan approved.
The Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) of the Borough of Middletown, to
which much thought has been given in consultations with and by members
and committees of the Borough Council and other concerned citizens, is
hereby recognized as the current plan of the Middletown Emergency
Management Agency. It is found to be and is approved as an appropriate
implementation of the requirement set forth in the Emergency Management
Services Code (i.e., in Section 7503 of Act 323)11 that "Each political
subdivision shall . . . prepare, maintain and keep current a disaster
emergency management plan."
§ 16-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person (used in the broadest sense, and including any corporation)
violating any emergency operations plan or any plan, program or regulation
adopted and promulgated by the Middletown Emergency Management
Agency or interfering (after notice and warning) with activities or personnel
or procedures authorized by the Director of Crisis Management, the
Middletown Emergency Management Agency, by Middletown's Coordinator
of Emergency Management or by the Borough Council pursuant to the
Emergency Management Services Code or this chapter of the Code of the
Borough of Middletown, or any amendments thereto, shall, upon conviction
thereof before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $1,000 and to pay the costs of prosecution
and, upon refusal to pay such fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the jail of
Dauphin County for a period not exceeding 30 days.
10.Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7514.
11.Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7503.
§ 16-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-11
1:19
Chapter 19
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 58.
§ 19-1. Creation.
An advisory council, to be known as the "Middletown Environmental
Advisory Council," is hereby created.
§ 19-2. Composition. [Amended 1-15-1979 by Ord. No. 740,
approved 1-15-1979]
The Middletown Environmental Advisory Council shall be composed of five
residents of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 19-3. Appointment.
Environmental Advisory Council members shall be appointed in accordance
with the following procedure:
§ 19-4. Compensation and expenses.
Environmental Advisory Council members shall receive no compensation for
their services, but may be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred
A. All Environmental Advisory Council members shall be appointed by the
Middletown Borough Council.
B. Environmental Advisory Council members' terms of office shall expire
on the first Monday in January following the last year of their respective
terms of office.
C. Duly appointed Environmental Advisory Council members shall serve
terms of three years, the terms being so staggered that two terms shall
expire each year, except that in one year of three, one term may expire.
The transition from seven members to five shall be effected so that
existing members shall complete their respective three-year terms of
office by not filling, as they arise, what would otherwise be the first two
vacancies, in effect ultimately replacing, in each third year, the
appointment of three members by the appointment of one member.
[Amended 1-15-1979 by Ord. No. 740]
D. Whenever possible, one member shall attend the Planning Commission,
the Shade Tree Commission and the Recreation and Parks Board
meetings.
§ 16-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 19-4
1:20
in the performance of their duties within the annual budget for the
Environmental Advisory Council, as set by the Borough Council.
§ 19-5. Designation of Chairman.
The appointing authority shall designate the Chairman of the Council.
§ 19-6. Powers and duties.
The Middletown Environmental Advisory Council shall have the following
powers:
§ 19-7. Records and reports.
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report which shall be printed in the
annual municipal report.
§ 19-8. Request for operating expenses.
The Middletown Borough Council may require the submission of an annual
request for operating expenses, in a budget form, itemizing each major
category.
A. To identify environmental problems.
B. To recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies for the
promotion and conservation of the natural resources and for the
protection and improvement of the quality of the environment within
the area of this municipality.
C. To develop alternatives as to the possible use of open land areas of this
municipality.
D. To promote a community environmental program.
E. To keep an inventory of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including but not limited to flood-prone areas, swamps and other
unique natural areas.
F. To advise the appropriate local governmental agencies in the
acquisition of property, both real and personal.
G. To undertake such environmental tasks as requested by the Middletown
Borough Council.
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-8
1:21
Chapter 21
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 8. Purchasing — See Ch. 69.
§ 21-1. Establishment and composition.
There is hereby established a Finance Department as an executive
department of the Borough of Middletown, which shall consist of such
employees as are assigned to the Department.
§ 21-2. Duties.
The Department of Finance shall coordinate the collection of utility bills,
accounting and investment of Borough funds and such other duties as, from
time to time, shall be required.
§ 21-3. Director.
There is hereby established the office of Director of Finance, who shall be
head of the Department and shall supervise all employees assigned to the
Department. The Director of Finance shall report to the Borough Manager.
§ 21-4. Assignment of property.
All physical properties of the Borough essential to the Department and not
assigned to some other department shall be and are hereby assigned to the
Department of Finance.
§ 21-5. Employees.
The Department of Finance shall have such employees as may, from time
to time, be authorized by the Borough Council and hired by the Borough
Manager.
Chapter 23
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Fund — See Ch. 25.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 153.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 155.
§ 19-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 21-5
1:22
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Organization
[Adopted 10-19-192012; amended in its entirety 4-2-2007 by Ord.
No. 1221, approved 4-2-2007]
§ 23-1. Establishment.
§ 23-2. Fire Chief, Deputy Chief and Assistant Chief.
The Fire Department shall be under the coordination and direction of an
officer of the Borough to be styled "Chief of the Fire Department," who
shall report to the Borough Manager, and two subordinate positions: Deputy
Chief, who shall be second in command in the absence of the Chief; and
Assistant Chief, who shall be third in command in the absence of the Chief.
The Deputy Chief and Assistant Chief shall report to the Chief of the Fire
Department.
§ 23-3. Appointment of Chief, Deputy Chief, Assistant Chief and line
officers.
§ 23-4. Qualifications of Chief and assistants.
To be eligible to hold the office of Chief, Deputy Chief, or Assistant Chief of
the Fire Department, an individual must:
A. For the purposes of this Code, the Fire Department of the Borough of
Middletown shall be the Middletown Volunteer Fire Department,
incorporated October 28, 2004 (hereinafter "MVFD").
B. The Borough of Middletown acknowledges the significant and
important service provided to the Borough by the Liberty Steam Fire
Co., Rescue Hose Co., and Union Hose Co., the prior volunteer fire
companies whose members have banded together to form MVFD. These
companies shall continue to be recognized as community organizations
but shall no longer provide fire protection services to the Borough of
Middletown or any other municipality.
A. The Chief, Deputy Chief, and Assistant Chief shall first be elected in
accordance with the requirements of the bylaws of the MVFD, who then
shall submit said names for appointment by the Borough Manager, with
the consent of the Borough Council.
B. Other line officers may be selected by the members of the MVFD.
A. Have attained the age of 26 years; and
B. Be an active experienced firefighter, in good standing with MVFD for a
period of at least five years; and
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. VIII, Part 2A, of the 1953 Code of
Ordinances.
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-4
1:23
§ 23-5. Term of appointment for Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, and
Assistant Chief.
§ 23-6. Oath of office; removal from office.
Before assuming their respective duties, the officers of the organized Fire
Department shall be duly sworn before the Mayor to faithfully perform all
the duties appertaining to the office which they may hold. The Fire Chief,
Deputy Chief, and Assistant Chief elected pursuant to the bylaws of the
MVFD cannot be denied appointment nor removed from appointment as
Chiefs of the Borough unless there is just cause. Just cause shall include
dishonesty on any official matter; gross incompetence; willful misconduct;
C. Be a resident of the Borough of Royalton or the Borough of Middletown.
A. The Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, and Assistant Chief shall serve for a
period of 36 months from the date of appointment. However, should
said officer no longer serve in a similar capacity for MVFD, the Borough
appointment shall automatically terminate.
B. The Borough Manager reserves the right to remove the Fire Chief,
Deputy Chief, and Assistant Chief from office, subject to the provisions
of § 23-6 herein.
C. Vacancies in offices created in § 23-3A shall be filled by the following
procedure:
(1) MVFD shall hold an election pursuant to its internal procedures;
(2) The names of those elected by MVFD shall be submitted to the
Borough Manager;
(3) The Borough Manager shall appoint said individuals to fill the
vacancies; and
(4) The Borough Council shall ratify the Borough Manager's
appointment.
D. The Borough Manager shall appoint said individuals elected by MVFD
within 10 days of election or may, at his discretion, disqualify the
elected Chief. Should the Borough Manager reject the elected Chief,
the elected Chief must resign as Chief of MVFD and a new election
must be held by MVFD.
E. The Borough Council shall ratify the Borough Manager's appointment
at each organizational meeting of Council. Should Council fail to ratify
the appointment, the previously appointed, seated Chief shall continue
to serve until the next regularly scheduled meeting of Borough Council,
when the Borough Manager must propose an alternate appointee.
F. In the event the Fire Chief dies, resigns or is removed as Fire Chief of
the Fire Department, the Deputy Chief shall assume and exercise the
function of Fire Chief until the vacancy created is filled.
§ 23-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 23-6
1:24
breach of a fiduciary duty; intentional failure to perform stated duties;
willful violation of any federal, state or local law (other than traffic
violations or similar summary offenses); failure to pay all federal, state
or local taxes; willful disregard of an adopted Borough policy; horseplay
or similar unprofessional behavior that results in any injury or damage to
property with a value in excess of $100; conviction of any felony; conviction
of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; misappropriation of taxpayer
funds; mental or physical disability impairing the performance of official
duties of office; or material breach of any provision of this chapter. The
determination of whether just cause exists shall be made by the Borough
Manager in his sole discretion.
§ 23-7. (Reserved)
§ 23-8. (Reserved)13
§ 23-9. Citizen interference with Fire Department; violations and
penalties. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1359, approved 3-5-2019]
The Fire Chief or, in his absence, the Deputy Chief or, in his absence, the
Assistant Chief, and members of the mutual aid fire police from surrounding
communities lawfully dispatched to the Borough, while on active public
duty, together with the officers of the Borough police force, are hereby
authorized to exclude from interference with the functions of the MVFD
all persons not members of the MVFD, except owners of property in the
immediate neighborhood and persons having a pecuniary interest therein
or their agents. The personnel authorized herein shall take into custody
any and all persons persisting in such unauthorized interference. Those
taken into custody, upon conviction of an offense related to the unauthorized
interference, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of not more than $1,000 and
costs of prosecution or, in default of payment thereof, may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 23-10. Supervisory powers and duties.
A. Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall at all times have overall oversight of the
personnel and equipment of the Fire Department. In the event of a fire,
rescue, or other response or official function, the Chief shall be in
control of all personnel and equipment and shall give general directions
and provide the overall incident command in accordance with the
Incident Command System (ICS)/National Incident Management
System (NIMS) and recognized by the Dauphin County Firemen's
Association. The Chief shall also have free access at all times to all fire
stations and fire equipment for inspection and shall inspect the stations
and equipment and shall report to the Borough Council the condition of
the stations and equipment at least every year (and more frequently if
directed by the Borough Council); shall prepare and provide an annual
13.Editor’s Note: Former § 23-8, Fire police, was repealed 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1359,
approved 3-5-2019.
§ 23-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-10
1:25
§ 23-10.1. Budget and finance.
report to Borough Council at the close of each year; shall report to
the Borough Manager; shall approve any use of fire police for
nonemergency service; shall present recommendations to Borough
Council regarding Fire Department activities or issues affecting the
operation of the Fire Department; shall, within budgetary limits,
provide for the maintenance of all Borough-owned vehicles and
equipment used for emergency services, including all portable
equipment and fire/rescue apparatus; shall coordinate all major repairs
and contract maintenance with the Borough Manager; shall provide for
and supervise training for members of the Fire Department; and shall
perform other duties as may be ordinarily required of the position.
B. Deputy Fire Chief. The Deputy Chief shall aid the Fire Chief in the
performance of his duties, perform other duties as assigned by the
Chief and, in the absence of the Chief or in the event of the inability of
the Fire Chief to perform his duties, shall assume charge of the Fire
Department and act as Fire Chief.
C. Assistant Fire Chief. The Assistant Chief shall aid the Fire Chief and
Deputy Chief in the performance of their duties, perform other duties as
assigned by the Chief or Deputy Chief and, in the absence of the Chief
or Deputy Chief or in the event of their inability to perform their duties,
shall assume charge of the Fire Department and act as Fire Chief.
A. There is a separate special revenue fund of the Borough known as a
"Fire Department Operating Fund" for the purposes of providing
financial support for the Fire Department. The Fire Department
Operating Fund budget shall be prepared by the Borough Manager and
shall include, at a minimum, expenditure items for maintenance, repair
and operation of the Fire Department, including all vehicles, equipment
and apparatus operated by the Fire Department. In addition, the budget
shall include expenditure items for fire fighting, emergency medical
care, rescue and Fire Department-related training for members and
officers of the Fire Department.
B. MVFD shall maintain its own budget and funds. The annual budget of
MVFD shall be attached to the budget for the Fire Department
Operating Fund and shall include, at a minimum, expenditure items
approved by the company for the maintenance, repair and operation of
the volunteer company. In addition, each attached budget shall include
a list of expenditures for fire fighting, emergency medical care, rescue,
general operations, maintenance, and Fire Department-related training
for members and officers of the volunteer company.
C. On an annual basis, at such time as shall be determined by the Borough
Manager, the Chief of the Fire Department shall draft and submit to the
Borough Manager a budget request setting forth the financial
requirements for the Fire Department for the following year and the
adopted budget of MVFD. Borough Council shall review the Fire
§ 23-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 23-10.1
1:26
§ 23-11. Departmental rules and regulations.
The Fire Chief shall be vested with the power to make proper rules and
regulations for the operation of the Department, while in the performance
of fire services. The Middletown Volunteer Fire Department shall maintain
standard operating procedures for all instances.
§ 23-12. Firefighter complaints.
For the purposes of proper management of the Fire Department, all
grievances and matters of dispute from firefighters or members of MVFD
shall be submitted to the MVFD for resolution pursuant to the bylaws of
the MVFD. Appeals of any decision of the MVFD may be presented to the
Borough Manager for review. Orders given during an emergency incident
cannot be disputed or grieved.
Department budget request for approval as part of the annual Borough
budget review process.
D. All expenditure of Borough funds made by the Fire Chief or by the Fire
Department shall require the authorization of the Borough Manager.
Expenditures of Borough funds over $500 require verbal
preauthorization. Expenditures of Borough funds over $1,000 shall be
paid only upon presentation of a purchase order signed by the Borough
Manager or designee, or other system in conformance with the fiscal
procedures in use by all other Borough departments.
E. In addition to direct oversight control of Borough funds assigned for fire
protection, the Borough Manager shall preauthorize other capital
purchases or improvements to vehicles, equipment or facilities,
regardless of funding source, if said purchases or improvements meet
the following criteria:
(1) The purchase or improvement has a cost in excess of $7,500; or
(2) The improvement shall be to vehicles, equipment or facilities in
which Borough funds may be used for maintenance or operation of
the equipment or facilities.
F. If preauthorization is required by Subsection E and is not obtained as
required, the Borough shall withhold all funds for the unauthorized
capital purchase or improvement for the operation, maintenance or
repair of any such Fire Department vehicle, equipment or facility
affected thereby.
G. Nothing in this section is intended to restrict in any way the fire
companies from obtaining grants or other funding that may relieve the
fire companies or the Borough of expenses related to fire protection.
§ 23-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-13
1:27
§ 23-13. Use of hydrants for testing equipment.
The Fire Department, through its proper officers, shall have the right to
test the equipment, etc., by connecting to a fireplug from time to time; but
before connecting to a plug for the purpose of breaking in a driver, testing
equipment or for other fire company uses, it shall be the duty of the Fire
Department, through its proper officer or officers, to notify the Supervisor
of the Utility Maintenance/Operations Department a reasonable length of
time in advance of MVFD's intention so as to not impact the delivery of
water within the Borough.
§ 23-14. Fire Marshal.
The Fire Department of the Borough of Middletown shall also include
among its officers, who shall likewise take the oath before the Mayor
specified in § 23-6 of this article, a Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal, and
Assistant Fire Marshal, for whom provision is made in § 155-13 of Chapter
155, Fire Prevention.
§ 23-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 23-14
1:28
ARTICLE II
Firefighting Service Outside Borough Limits
[Adopted 2-11-193514]
§ 23-15. Payment agreement required.
Hereafter none of the firefighting apparatus of the Borough of Middletown
shall leave the limits of the Borough of Middletown to fight fires in any of the
Boroughs or townships of the County of Dauphin, or elsewhere, unless and
until the proper authorities of the Borough or township in which such fire or
fires may take place shall have first entered into written agreement with the
Borough of Middletown to pay for such service a stipulated sum annually,
which contract must be approved by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Middletown. The sum to be paid annually by each Borough or township
desiring to avail itself of the use of the fire apparatus of the Borough of
Middletown under this section shall be sufficient to reimburse the Borough
of Middletown for expenses incurred for such outside service as shown by
past experience.
§ 23-16. Prior written agreement.
Any Borough or township desiring to avail itself of the use of any of the
firefighting equipment of the Borough of Middletown, or any unit thereof,
shall not be entitled to receive such use or to request such firefighting
apparatus to leave the Borough of Middletown unless and until such
Borough or township shall first have entered into a written agreement with
the Borough of Middletown to pay for such use the sum approved by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Middletown as aforesaid.
§ 23-17. Priority use of equipment.
None of the aforesaid Boroughs or townships, after they have entered into
written agreements as hereinbefore provided, shall be entitled to demand
or receive the use of any of the firefighting apparatus of the Borough of
Middletown for the benefit of their respective citizens at a time when said
firefighting apparatus may be actually in use or needed for fighting a fire
within the limits of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 23-18. Violations by fire companies.
Any fire company located in the Borough of Middletown and receiving an
appropriation or other assistance from said Borough and violating any of the
regulations or requirements of this article shall forfeit all or such part of its
annual appropriation as the Borough Council may determine as a penalty.
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. VIII, Part 2B, of the 1953 Code of
Ordinances.
§ 23-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-19
1:29
§ 23-19. Compensation for injured firemen. [Added 4-12-1949;
amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 311, approved 2-9-1953]
Any volunteer fireman of the Borough of Middletown who may be injured or
incapacitated while fighting a fire in the Borough of Royalton or in any of
the townships adjacent to the Borough of Middletown which pays an annual
sum to the Borough of Middletown for the use of said Borough's firefighting
equipment, if otherwise entitled to receive the same, shall be entitled to
receive for such injury or incapacity proper legal remuneration, which shall
be paid out of and from funds paid to the Borough of Middletown by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania out of foreign fire insurance premiums.15
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 25, Firemen's Relief Fund.
§ 23-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 23-19
1:30
ARTICLE III
Complaint Board
[Adopted 10-2-1967 by Ord. No. 523]
§ 23-20. Creation and composition. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 1175, approved
4-5-2004]
There is hereby created a Complaint Board of the Middletown Fire
Department, which shall be composed of the following: the Fire Chief; each
of the presidents of the three volunteer fire companies; and the Chairman
of the Public Safety Committee of the Borough Council, who shall be the
Chairman of the Complaint Board.
§ 23-21. Manner of filing complaints.
Complaints against fire companies and individual firemen may be filed
with the Complaint Board by individuals or companies, whether firemen or
not. All complaints must be in writing and must set forth each complaint
in numbered paragraphs. Single or multiple complaints may be filed, but
multiple complaints may be disposed of by a single decision of the
Complaint Board. The decision of a majority of the Board shall constitute its
ruling. That is to say, a majority shall constitute four votes in favor of or in
opposition to a proposition. The Complaint Board shall make all other rules
and regulations governing the filing of complaints and appearances before
the Board and the conduct of its hearings as may be necessary to dispose of
the complaint in a fair and equitable manner.
§ 23-22. Meetings.
All meetings of the Complaint Board shall be at the Middletown Community
Building and shall be held when called by the Chairman of the Board
or within 10 days after a complaint is filed. All parties in interest may
appear, in person or by their counsel, and after the meeting is convened
and the complaint read or copies given to all parties in writing, the Board
shall then consider the complaint. After hearing said complaint, the Board
shall consider the complaint and, within 30 days, render its decision and
disposition thereof and give notice to all parties. The complaints shall be
numbered in consecutive order from one upward and shall be kept as a
public record of the Borough open to inspection at all times.
§ 23-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-22
1:31

ARTICLE IV
Use of Equipment Outside Borough
[Adopted 9-9-1968 by Ord. No. 539, approved 9-9-1968]
§ 23-23. Request for nonemergency use.
Request for fire, rescue or ambulance equipment to leave the Borough for
purposes other than fire or emergency calls will be initiated by action of
each fire company and presented, in writing, to the Borough Fire Chief.
Such request must set forth the purpose for which the equipment is to be
used, the location of the activity and the dates of departure from and return
to the Borough.
§ 23-24. Approval authority and procedure.
A. For requests of a fire company where the one-way distance is 12 miles
or less, the Borough Fire Chief has the authority to approve or
disapprove the request of the company. The details to be followed are
enumerated in Regulation No. 4, approved by the Borough Council on
April 8, 1968.16
B. For request of a fire company where the one-way distance is more than
12 miles, the Borough Fire Chief may approve or disapprove the
request within a reasonable time, and the request is then forwarded to
the Borough Manager. The Borough Manager, upon receipt of the Fire
Chief's action, will forward the request to the Public Safety Committee
of the Borough Council for action. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987]
16.Editor's Note: The Fire Department regulations are on file in the office of Borough
Secretary.
§ 23-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-24
1:33
Chapter 24
FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance Department — See Ch. 21. Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
§ 24-1. Purpose.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has enacted Act 98 of 1992, effective
on September 7, 1992, amending the Insurance Company Law of 1921 to
provide procedures for the payment of certain fire loss claims. It is the
purpose of said legislation to deter the commission of arson and related
crimes, to discourage the abandonment of property and to prevent urban
blight and deterioration. The Borough Council desires to adopt an ordinance
pursuant to Section 508 of the Insurance Company Law of 192117 to provide
for the payment of proceeds from certain fire loss claims to the Borough of
Middletown, Pennsylvania, and to this end, the Council enacts this chapter.
§ 24-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
FINANCE DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the Borough of
Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
INSURING AGENT — Any insurance company, association or exchange.
NAMED INSURED — The person or persons who are insured for the
building or structure where the fire occurred.
§ 24-3. Designated officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee is hereby appointed as the
designated person who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 24-4. Payment of claims.
No insuring agency doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located
within the Borough where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to
the structure under all policies exceeds $5,000, unless the named insured
17.Editor's Note: See 40. P.S. § 638.
§ 23-24 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 24-4
1:34
or insuring agent is furnished by the Finance Director with a municipal
certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 199218 and unless there is
compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992 and the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 24-5. Limits of liability.
Pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,19 the Finance Director
shall issue a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, and the
insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however,
that if the loss that is agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring
agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
polices covering the building restructure, the following procedures must be
followed:
§ 24-6. Responsibilities of Borough.
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Borough in the aggregate of $1,000 for each $20,000 of a claim and for
each fraction of that amount of a claim, this section to be applied such
that if the claim is $20,000 or less, the amount transferred to the
Borough shall be $1,000.
B. If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
Borough from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insuring
agents insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
funds transferred to the Borough in excess of the estimate to the named
insured, if the Borough has not commenced to remove, repair or secure
the building or other structure.
A. Upon receipt of proceeds under § 24-5, the Borough shall do the
following:
(1) The Finance Director shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to
be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the Borough. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
18.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
19.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 24-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-6
1:35
§ 24-7. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the Borough
to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the Borough and the named insured from entering an
agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured of some
other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 24-8. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent violating
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than $100 per offense nor more than $1,000 per offense, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not
more than 90 days.
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Borough
in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Borough with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the designated officer shall
contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the Borough and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Borough and the required proof of
such completion received by the Code Enforcement Officer, and if
the Borough has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
Borough has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the
building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund,
and if excess funds remain, the Borough shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured.
B. To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the Borough
pursuant to this section and not returned to the named insured, such
interest shall belong to the Borough. To the extent that proceeds are
returned to the named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall
be distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds are
returned.
§ 24-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 24-8
1:36
Chapter 25
FIREMEN'S RELIEF FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
§ 25-1. Recipient of funds designated.
All such sums of money as may be received by the Borough Treasurer in
accordance with the Act of Assembly approved June 28, 1895,20 be and are
hereby declared to be received for the benefit of the Middletown Firemen's
Relief Association.
§ 25-2. Receipt and distribution of moneys.
The Borough Treasurer is hereby directed to enter such sums, upon the
receipt thereof, under a special account and to report said amount annually
to the Borough Council, which shall thereupon direct a warrant to issue
therefor in favor of the Treasurer of the Middletown Firemen's Relief
Association of the Borough of Middletown immediately after the receipt
thereof.
Chapter 30
HISTORICAL RESTORATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
§ 30-1. Creation and composition. [Amended 7-9-1973 by Ord. No.
629, approved 7-9-1973; 5-1-2018 by Ord. No. 1349, approved
5-1-2018]
A. Pursuant to the power set forth in Section 1202, Subsection 48 of the
Borough Code,21 and for the purpose of carrying said section into effect,
there is created in the Borough of Middletown an Historical Restoration
Commission, which Commission shall be composed of seven persons,
one of whom shall be appointed to serve for a term of one year from
January 1, 1969, two persons to serve for a period of two years, one
person to serve for three years, two persons to serve for four years and
one person to serve for five years. Thereafter, following the original
20.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
21.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202.
§ 24-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-1
1:37
§ 30-2. Powers and duties.
appointments, the terms of the members of the Historical Restoration
Commission shall be for a term of five years. These members shall
serve from the date of their appointment by the Borough Council for the
terms herein stated and until their successors are duly appointed and
qualified.
B. In the event that a member of the Commission shall resign their
appointment prior to the natural expiration of their term, any individual
appointed in replacement thereof shall be appointed to serve the
remaining period of the resigning member's term. Only upon the
natural expiration of the resigning member's term shall the
replacement member be eligible for subsequent appointment to a full
five-year term.
A. The Commission shall seek out and maintain a written catalogue file of
all property of historical or antiquarian interest within the Borough of
Middletown.
B. The Commission shall encourage private property owners who own
property of an historical or antiquarian value to maintain, restore and
repair this property.
C. The Historical Restoration Commission is directed and authorized to
maintain public ancient landmarks and other public property of
historical or antiquarian interest located in the Borough of Middletown
and to seek the technical assistance that may be provided by the
Pennsylvania State Historical Commission. It shall adopt rules and
regulations controlling the maintenance, restoration, repair, operation
and supervision of ancient public landmarks and other property of
historical or antiquarian interest.
D. The Commission shall have the power to promote the preservation of
historic sites, landmarks and other property of an historical or
antiquarian nature associated with the history of the Borough of
Middletown and also to promote educational interest in all such
historical matters.
E. The Commission shall have the power to recommend to the Borough
Council that certain historical or ancient sites and landmarks be
acquired by the Borough, either by gift or purchase.
F. The Commission shall have the power to designate historical and
antiquarian sites and landmarks and to administer and control such
sites and landmarks as may be acquired by the Borough of Middletown.
It shall also have the power to transfer, with the approval of the
Borough Council, any object of historical or antiquarian value or
significance which the Commission may decide it does not desire to use
or display to the proper state agency or other historical society or
§ 30-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 30-2
1:38
§ 30-3. Certifications and markers.
§ 30-4. Custody and control.
The Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of all ancient
public landmarks and other property of historical or antiquarian interest
committed to it by the Borough Council or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania under any statute or ordinance placing the same under the
supervision and under the control of the Pennsylvania State Historical
Commission. The Commission shall have no power to expend any funds of
the Borough without those funds first being appropriated by the Borough
Council by proper ordinance or motion. Requests for funds shall be
submitted to the Borough Council by the Commission no later than
September 1 of any year for inclusion in the following year's budget.
§ 30-5. Meetings. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Ord. No. 1349, approved
5-1-2018]
association which may use it for such purpose or purposes as may be
needed.
G. The Commission shall have the power to accept on behalf of the
Borough of Middletown, with the approval of the Borough Council, all
gifts, consisting of documents, paintings and other objects of historical
or antiquarian value, as well as money for the uses and purposes as set
out in this chapter or any amendment hereto.
H. The Commission shall have the power to administer the operation of
any museum or museums that may be established by said Commission
after first receiving approval for its or their establishment from the
Borough Council.
A. The Historical Restoration Commission shall have the right, subject to
the approval of the present property owner and to Council consent, to
certify various structures or sites of historical, artistic, architectural or
antiquarian value and worthy of preservation. The Borough will finance
all costs pertaining to certification and recording fees.
B. Buildings or sites thus certified shall be marked with appropriate
plaques or markers. The Borough will finance the cost of the plaques or
markers from Borough funds or from donations from service clubs or
private interests.
C. Buildings or sites thus certified may not be destroyed or externally
denatured without consent of the Borough Council, acting upon the
advice of the Historical Restoration Commission.
A. The Historical Restoration Commission shall meet regularly at a stated
time and place at least four times annually and shall hold such other
meetings as may be required to perform the duties prescribed in this
§ 30-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-5
1:39
§ 30-6. Rules, regulations and orders.
The Historical Restoration Commission may, from time to time, adopt such
rules and regulations and issue such reasonable orders as may be needful
for the protection and care of such ancient landmarks and other property
of historical or antiquarian interest which may come under its care and
protection and as may be needful for the protection of said property so
that its cultural aspect may be maintained for the people of the Borough,
State of Pennsylvania and all others who may have interest in said ancient
landmarks or other property of historical or antiquarian interest located in
the Borough of Middletown. It may adopt rules as to when said property
will be open for inspection by the public and when said property may be
inspected by students or others studying the cultural aspect of the historical
property, and said notices shall be posted in the offices of the Borough and
all such ancient landmarks and other property of historical or antiquarian
interest which may be opened to the public. Before these rules become
operative or any amendment thereto shall become operative, they shall be
approved by the majority vote by the members of the Borough Council as
provided for in the Borough Code.
§ 30-7. Nuisances.
The Historical Restoration Commission shall have general supervision over
the sanitary conditions of the ancient landmarks and other property of
historical or antiquarian interest, and it shall be its duty to maintain said
property in a clean and sanitary condition and allow no nuisance to be
created, and if one should be created, the Commission shall abate said
nuisance immediately in accordance with the Borough Code and the laws of
the state and ordinances of the Borough of Middletown.
Chapter 33
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
chapter. The Historical Commission shall submit an annual report of its
activities to the Borough Council.
B. Special meetings of the Historical Restoration Commission may be held
at the call of the Chairman or any three members, at which meeting no
other business shall be transacted except that specified in the call.
C. The ordinary rules of order shall govern the transaction of all business,
and four members shall constitute a quorum. The order of business
shall be conducted in accordance with such rules and regulations as the
Historical Restoration Commission shall adopt.
§ 30-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 33-1
1:40
§ 33-1. Establishment and composition. [Amended 8-20-1979 by
Ord. No. 755, approved 8-20-1979; 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1341,
approved 6-6-2017]
There is hereby established the Human Relations Commission of the
Borough of Middletown, composed of five members who shall be residents
of the Borough of Middletown, three to be appointed by the Mayor from
the Borough at large, subject to the approval and confirmation of the
Borough Council, and two to be appointed at large by the three members
aforesaid, said two names likewise being submitted to the Borough Council
for approval and confirmation. All members shall serve without
compensation. Of the original appointees to the Commission, one shall serve
for a term of five years, one for four years and one for three years (being
the three appointed by the Mayor) and one shall be appointed for a term
of two years and one for one year. At the expiration of each such term, a
successor shall be appointed for a term of five years, all terms thereafter
being for five years. Each successor shall be appointed and any vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for
the original appointment to such sear, and provided further that the Mayor,
with the approval of the Borough Council, may remove any members with
cause assigned.
§ 33-2. Chairman, other officers and rules of procedure.
The Commission shall elect one of its members as Chairman, may elect such
other officers within its group as it may deem necessary and may adopt such
rules of procedure as are necessary to accomplish the duties prescribed in
§ 33-3 hereof.
§ 33-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall:
A. Promote mutual understanding, respect and cooperation among all
racial, cultural, religious, ethnic, nationality and other groups within
the Borough of Middletown.
B. Make studies into the status of human relations in the Borough of
Middletown.
C. Cooperate with and assist other organizations, public or private, to
improve relationships among the citizens of the Borough of
Middletown.
D. Encourage and conduct an educational program for furtherance of the
improvement of human relations in the Borough of Middletown,
especially through public and private school systems as well as
religious groups.
E. Act as a referral group for complaints of alleged discrimination within
the Borough of Middletown, and whenever, in the opinion of the
Commission, a referral is indicated, the Commission shall refer the
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:41
§ 33-4. Prevention of unlawful housing practices. [Added 6-4-1979
by Ord. No. 751, approved 6-4-1979]
The Commission shall be responsible for ensuring that unlawful housing
practices within the Borough of Middletown are prevented.
complainants to appropriate social, civic or government agencies for
further action.
F. Prepare and submit periodic reports of its activities to the Borough
Council and make such other reports or recommendations to the
Borough Council from time to time as it may determine necessary for
the furtherance of improved human relations in the Borough of
Middletown.
G. Make recommendations to the Borough Council concerning
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications to this chapter.22
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL HOUSING — Housing accommodations held or offered
for sale or rent by a real estate broker, salesman or agent or any
other person pursuant to authorization of the owner, by the owner
himself or by legal representatives, but shall not include any personal
residence offered for rent by the owner or lessee thereof or by his
broker, salesman, agent, legal representative or employee.
COMMISSION — The Human Relations Commission of the Borough of
Middletown.
DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION — Any difference in treatment
in the sale, lease, rental or financing of housing units or housing
accommodations because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age,
national origin, marital status, handicap or use of a guide dog because
of the blindness of the user.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any building, structure or portion
thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed
to be used or occupied as the home residence or sleeping place of one
or more individuals, groups or families and any vacant land offered for
sale or lease for housing.
LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings and
loan association or any other person or organization regularly engaged
in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans.
OWNER — Includes the lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager, agent or
any other person having the right of ownership or possession or the
authority to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation, including
the Borough and its departments, boards and commissions.
22.Editor's Note: Original Section 4, which followed this subsection, was repealed 4-6-1987
by Ord. No. 943.
§ 33-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 33-4
1:42
PERSONAL RESIDENCE — A building or structure containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than two
individuals, two groups or two families living independently of each
other and used by the owner thereof as a bona fide residence for
himself and any members of his family forming his household.
REAL ESTATE BROKER — Any natural person, partnership, association
or corporation who, for a fee or other valuable consideration, or other
purposes, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents or negotiates or offers or
attempts to negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of the real
property of another or holds himself or herself out as engaged in the
business of selling, purchasing, exchanging or renting the real property
of another or collects rent for the use of the real property of another.
REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON OR AGENT — Any person employed by
a real estate broker to perform or to assist in the performance of any or
all of the functions of a real estate broker or providing any services in
connection therewith.
B. Prohibited acts.
(1) The following shall be unlawful housing practices:
(a) No real estate broker or real estate salesperson or agent or
owner or other person shall refuse to sell, lease, sublease, rent,
assign or otherwise transfer or refuse to negotiate for the sale,
lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of the
title, leasehold or other interest in any commercial housing
unit to any person or represent that a commercial housing unit
is not available for inspection, sale, lease, sublease, rental,
assignment or other transfer when in fact it is so available or
otherwise deny or withhold any commercial housing unit from
any person because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry,
age, sex, national origin, marital status, handicap or use of a
guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
(b) No owner shall refuse to sell, lease, sublease, rent, assign or
otherwise transfer the title, leasehold or other interest in any
commercial housing unit which is part of a housing
accommodation to any person or otherwise deny or withhold
such commercial housing unit or deny or withhold the
furnishing of services in connection therewith from any person
because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, sex,
national origin, marital status, handicap or use of a guide dog
because of the blindness of the user.
(c) No real estate broker or real estate salesperson or agent shall
include in the terms, conditions or privileges or services in
connection therewith, of any sale, lease, sublease, rental,
assignment or other transfer of any commercial housing unit
any clause, condition or restriction discriminating against any
person in the use or occupancy of such commercial housing
§ 33-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:43
unit because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, sex,
national origin, marital status, physical handicap or use of a
guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
(d) No person shall include in the terms, conditions or privileges of
the sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer
of a commercial housing unit which is part of a housing
accommodation any clause, condition or restriction
discriminating against any person in the use or occupancy of
such commercial housing unit because of race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, marital status,
handicap or use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the
user.
(e) No person shall discriminate in the furnishing of any facilities
or services for a commercial housing unit which is part of a
housing accommodation because of race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, age, sex, national origin, marital status, handicap or
use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
(f) No real estate broker, real estate salesperson or agent, owner
or any other person or any lending institution shall publish or
circulate or cause to published or circulated any form of
application for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of any
commercial housing or make any record or inquiry in
connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of
any commercial housing which expresses, directly or
indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to
race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin,
marital status, handicap or use of a guide dog because of the
blindness of the user or any intent to make any such limitation,
specification or discrimination.
(g) No person, whether or not a real estate broker, real estate
salesperson or agent, owner or lending institution, shall aid,
incite, compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any act
declared to be an unlawful housing practice under this section
or obstruct or prevent enforcement or compliance with the
provisions of this section or of any rule, regulation or order of
the Commission or attempt, directly or indirectly, to commit
any act declared by this section to be an unlawful housing
practice.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution
or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association or
society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings
which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose
§ 33-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 33-4
1:44
to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to
such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted
on account of race, color, creed, ancestry, age, sex, national
origin, marital status, handicap or use of a guide dog because
of the blindness of the user.
(b) Nothing herein contained shall bar any organization which has
designed, constructed and made available housing designated
for the retired elderly from restricting such housing to that
class of person.
C. Additional powers and duties of the Commission. The Commission, in
order to ensure fair housing practices within the Borough of
Middletown, shall have the following additional powers and duties:
(1) To meet and function within the Borough.
(2) To recommend to the Borough Council the adoption, promulgation,
amendment and rescindment of rules and regulations which are
intended to effectuate the policies and provisions of this section.
(3) To initiate, receive and refer to the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission all complaints charging unlawful discriminatory
practices within 90 days after the occurrence of the alleged
unlawful practice.
(4) To study the problems of discrimination in all or specific fields of
human relationships and foster, through community effort or
otherwise, goodwill among the groups and elements of the
population of the Borough.
(5) To issue such publications and such results of investigations and
research as, in its judgment, will tend to promote goodwill and
minimize or eliminate discrimination.
(6) From time to time, but not less than once a year, to report to the
Borough Council or the Borough Manager of the Borough of
Middletown describing in detail the work it has performed and any
recommendations for further legislation concerning abuses and
discrimination.
D. Procedure.
(1) Any individual claiming to be aggrieved by unlawful housing
practices may make, sign and, with the assistance of the
Commission, file a verified complaint, in writing, to the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission (PHRC). The complaint
shall state the name and address of the person or persons alleged
to have committed the unlawful practice, the particulars thereof
and such other information as may be required by the PHRC. The
Commission, upon its own initiative, may, in like manner, sign and
file a complaint with the PHRC. The Commission, however, shall not
§ 33-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:45
Chapter 37
LIBRARY
§ 37-1. Management of library.
The authority to operate, maintain, and manage the affairs of the
Middletown Public Library are hereby exclusively granted to and vested in
the Library Board.
§ 37-2. Library Board composition; appointment.
The Library Board shall be composed of seven members, whose terms shall
be as follows: two members for terms of one year, two members for terms
of two years, and three members for terms of three years. The Borough
Council shall appoint all members to the Library Board and fill all vacancies
by a majority vote. Appointments made under authority of this section shall
be effective immediately upon appointment, but shall date from January
1, 1965, for the purpose of determining the date of expiration of their
accept a complaint from any person who has previously or
simultaneously filed a complaint with either the PHRC or any state
or federal court of record with respect to the same grievance.
(2) When a complaint is received by the Commission, the Commission
shall make every effort to assist the complainant to properly file his
or her complaint with the PHRC. The Commission or the
complainant shall have the power, reasonably and fairly, to amend
any complaint.
(3) Upon receipt of the complaint, the PHRC shall undertake the
execution of the pertinent procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act.23 No complaint shall be considered unless it
is filed with the Commission and subsequently referred to and filed
with the PHRC, or filed directly with the PHRC, within 90 days after
the occurrence of the alleged unlawful practice. Any complaint may
be withdrawn at any time by the party filing the complaint.
E. Conflict. Where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any other ordinance of the Borough of Middletown
existing on the effective date of this section or with any regulation
issued under the authority of such ordinance, provisions which
establish the higher standard for the protection of health, safety and
welfare shall prevail.
F. Penalty. Any owner, occupant, person, firm or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine levied in accordance with the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act and the Civil Rights Act of 1968.
23.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ 33-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 37-2
1:46
respective terms. All appointments to fill the places of those whose terms
expire shall be for terms of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired terms. No member of the Board shall receive any compensation
or salary for his service as such.
§ 37-3. Powers of Library Board.
The Library Board shall exercise the powers, duties, and obligations
granted by this chapter in accordance with the Library Code of 1961, P.L.
324 (24 P.S. § 4101 et seq.),24 and regulations thereto. The Library Board
shall have the power to adopt bylaws for the conduct of its own business
and set policy for the Middletown Public Library not inconsistent with the
Library Code.
§ 37-4. Library funding.
Effective January 1, 2013, the Borough of Middletown shall cease to
appropriate any monies for the operation, maintenance, and management
of the Middletown Public Library, which thereafter shall be funded by
donations; state funding, as may be available; funding from other sources
that may be available from time to time; and such contributions as the
Borough may make from time to time. All contributions and donations for
the operation of the library shall be made to the Library Board, which shall
establish an independent operating fund for the Middletown Public Library.
Such funds shall be spent for library purposes at the direction of the Library
Board and consistent with the Library Code.
§ 37-5. Elimination of Library Services Department and office of
Director of Library Services.
The Library Services Department and the office of Director of Library
Services are hereby eliminated, and Middletown Public Library shall no
longer be operated as an executive department of the Borough of
Middletown. The Middletown Public Library shall be operated
independently by the Library Board, and the Borough of Middletown shall
not be responsible for the operations or staffing of the Middletown Public
Library or for the actions of the Library Board.
§ 37-6. Assignment of property.
All physical properties of the Borough that heretofore have been essential
to the operation of the Middletown Public Library and that have not been
put to other use shall be assigned to the Library Board for library use.
Chapter 40
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
24.Editor's Note: See now 24 Pa.C.S.A. § 9301 et seq.
§ 37-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1
1:47
§ 40-1. Authority and findings.
The Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust, a nonprofit entity
designed by the Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs as a common
law trust, has been formed, in accordance with the authorization, pursuant
to Article 9, Section 5, of the Pennsylvania Constitution, contained in the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of July 12, 1972, P.L. 762 (53 P.S. § 481
et seq.),25 initially by the Boroughs of Chambersburg and Emmaus. The
Declaration of Trust of 23 pages, dated as of February 1, 1981, is herein
incorporated by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this and subsequent sections, and a copy shall be filed with the
minutes of the Council, along with a copy of the sixteen-page information
statement dated March 11, 1981. The Trust has received a no-action letter
from the Securities and Exchange Commission. This will make available a
convenient method of making, if and when desired, temporary investments
with advantageous liquidity, higher yield and clear audit trail, all within the
safeguards and authority of Act No. 94 of November 2, 1979, P.L. 458 (53
P.S. § 46316).26
§ 40-2. Adoption of Trust.
Said Declaration of Trust is hereby adopted, and the Borough of Middletown
now becomes a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment
Trust. In compliance with Section 7 of the aforesaid Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, it is specified that:
A. The agreement, conditions and terms of such intergovernmental
cooperation appear in the Declaration of Trust and information
statement aforesaid.
B. At any time, by ordinance, this Borough may terminate its participation.
C. The purpose of the Declaration of Trust and of the purchase of shares
thereunder is to invest Borough funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments for the Borough as part of a pooled
arrangement with other governmental units in order to achieve
economic and other advantages of pooled investment.
D. Financing is not necessary (except through the purchase of shares from
Borough funds at the discretion of the Borough), and the cost is an
indirect cost as a percentage of daily interest yield as specified.
E. Organizational structure is in terms of management by a Board of
Trustees as set forth in the Declaration of Trust and in the bylaws
therein provided for.
F. Property management, as it concerns this Borough, shall consist of
discretionary purchase of shares from time to time and redemption
thereof as necessary to meet the cash needs of the Borough.
25.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1316.
§ 40-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 40-3
1:48
§ 40-3. Purchase and redemption of shares; custody of funds.
The Administrative Officer of the Borough of Middletown is authorized to
purchase shares of the Trust from Borough funds and to redeem shares
from time to time under general or specific instructions by the Council.
Custody of funds represented by any shares thus purchased shall be vested
in the trustees of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust.
Chapter 41
SCHOOL DISTRICT LIQUID ASSET FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance Department — See Ch. 23.
Borough Secretary — See Ch. 80.
Chapter name — See Ch. X.
§ 41-1. Authority.
The Borough of Middletown (the "Governmental Entity") shall become a
settlor of the Fund in accordance with the Declaration of Trust by hereby
adopting and entering into the Declaration of Trust in accordance with the
terms of the Declaration of Trust and the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act27 as now in effect, and a copy of the
Declaration of Trust shall be filed in the records of this Governmental Entity.
§ 41-2. Adoption of Trust.
This Governmental Entity may invest and withdraw funds pursuant to the
investment program of the Fund in accordance with the provisions of the
Declaration of Trust. The following officers or officials and their respective
successors in office are hereby authorized, directed and empowered to take
such actions and execute any and all such documents as they may deem
necessary and appropriate to effectuate and evident:
A. The entry by this Governmental Entity into the Declaration of Trust;
B. The investment and withdrawal of funds of this Governmental Entity
pursuant to the investment program of the Fund; and
C. The exercise of the rights, powers and privileges of this Governmental
Entity as a settlor of the Fund, including, without limitation, voting
rights, pursuant to the Declaration of Trust:
(1) President Borough Council;
(2) Borough Secretary;
27.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 40-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-2
1:49
§ 41-3. Custody of funds.
The trustees of the Fund are hereby designated as having official custody of
this Governmental Entity's funds which are invested in accordance with the
Declaration of Trust.
§ 41-4. Declaration of Trust provisions.
As required and provided by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act (Section 1 of the Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No.
177),28 the following matters are specified:
Chapter 43
(3) Finance Director.
A. The conditions of the agreement regarding intergovernmental
cooperation are set forth in the Declaration of Trust;
B. This Governmental Entity's participation in the Fund shall be
terminable at any time by the delivery of a notice thereof to the Fund in
accordance with the Declaration of Trust, and the Fund shall be
terminable in accordance with the Declaration of Trust;
C. The purpose and objectives of the Declaration of Trust are the
investment of funds of this Governmental Entity in obligations and
securities in which funds of this Governmental Entity may be legally
invested as a part of a pooled arrangement with other Pennsylvania
entitles that constitute local governments as such term is defined in the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (Section 1 of the Act
of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177) in order to achieve thereby
economic and other advantages of such investments;
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this Governmental Entity except through the temporary
investment of funds in accordance with the Declaration of Trust;
E. The organizational structure necessary to implement the Declaration of
Trust shall be as set forth in the Declaration of Trust and the affairs of
the Fund shall be managed by the Trustees of the Fund;
F. Funds of this Governmental Entity may be invested and withdrawn in
accordance with the terms of the Declaration of Trust as this
Governmental Entity may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its investment requirements; and
G. If the Trustees of the Fund deem it to be appropriate, the Fund shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee benefits, including social security, for such employees, if any,
as it may have from time to time.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 41-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 41-4
1:50
MANAGER, BOROUGH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
Purchasing — See Ch. 69.
Residency requirement — See Ch. 73.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 77.
§ 43-1. Position created.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Middletown, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance, at any time
to abolish such office.
§ 43-2. Appointment and term. [Amended 1-8-1962 by Ord. No. 425,
approved 1-8-1962]
As soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter, the Borough
Council shall elect, by a majority vote of all its members, one person to fill
the office of Borough Manager, who shall serve until his successor is elected
and qualifies. In the case of a vacancy, the Council shall fill said office by
majority vote of all its members. The Borough Manager shall, however, be
subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of all of the members of
the Council.
§ 43-3. Qualifications. [Amended 1-8-1962 by Ord. No. 425,
approved 1-8-1962; 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 913, approved 5-5-1986;
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 1102, approved 7-7-1997; 7-1-2002 by Ord. No.
1149, approved 7-1-2002; 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. 1277, approved
3-8-2011; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1284; 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1323,
approved 5-3-2016; 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1345, approved
10-10-2017]
The Manager shall be chosen on the basis of his or her executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his or her actual
experience in, or his or her knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to
the duties of his or her office. The Manager need not be a resident of the
Borough, but the Manager must reside within a twenty-five-mile radius of
the Middletown Borough Hall building.
§ 43-4. Bond. [Amended 1-8-1962 by Ord. No. 425, approved
1-8-1962; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943; approved 4-6-1987]
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Council,
in an amount to be determined by the Council, conditioned for the faithful
performance of his duties. The premium shall be paid by the Borough.
§ 41-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-5
1:51
§ 43-5. Compensation. [Amended 1-8-1962 by Ord. No. 425,
approved 1-8-1962; 4-12-1965 by Ord. No. 486, approved
4-12-1965;5-9-1966 by Ord. No. 500, approved 5-9-1966]
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the Borough Council of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 43-6. General authority.
The Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Borough, and
he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and duties shall
relate to the general management of all Borough business not expressly,
by statute or ordinance, imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager,
subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative
and nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 43-7. Powers and duties.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Manager shall
include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, except such departments the supervision of which shall
not have been delegated to the Manager by the Mayor or by the
Council, as the case may be.
B. He shall hire and, when he shall deem it necessary for the good of the
service, shall suspend or discharge all employees under his supervision,
provided that persons covered by the civil service provisions of the
Borough Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged in accordance
with such provisions; provided, further, that the Manager shall report,
at the next regular meeting thereafter of the Council, any action taken
by authority of this subsection.
C. He shall prepare and submit to the Council before the close of the fiscal
year, or on such alternate date as the Council shall determine, a budget
for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In
preparing the budget, the Manager, or an officer designated by him,
shall obtain from the head of each department, agency, board or office
estimates of revenues and expenditures and other supporting data as
he requests. The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise
them before submitting the budget to the Council.
D. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
E. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, execute and enforce the laws
of the commonwealth and ordinances, resolutions and bylaws of the
Borough.
§ 43-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 43-7
1:52
F. He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of the
municipal departments as the Council may from time to time direct.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
G. He shall attend all meetings of the Borough Council and of its
committees, with the right to take part in the discussion, and he shall
receive notice of all special meetings of the Council and of its
committees.
H. He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Council and supply
facts pertinent thereto.
I. He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs,
submit periodic reports on the condition of the Borough finances and
such other reports as the Council shall request and shall make such
recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
J. He shall submit to the Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
K. He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
L. He may employ, by and with the approval of the Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the
functions of the Borough.
M. He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same,
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other
Borough officer by statute.
N. He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the
Borough's claims.
O. He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, all
supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by the Council,
make a full written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of the Council, governing the
requisition and purchasing of all municipal supplies and equipment.
(1) The Manager, in his capacity as Purchasing Officer of the Borough,
shall ensure that the Borough's established written code or
standards of conduct governing the actions of Borough employees
or agents of the Borough involved in the award and administration
of all Borough contracts is enforced so that no Borough employee
or agent of the Borough participates in any contract award or
§ 43-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-7
1:53
administration if a conflict of interest exists between that employee
or agent, either through his personal and/or financial interests
outside of his Borough employment or through the personal and/or
financial interests of any member of his immediate family. [Added
10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 778, approved 10-20-1980]
(2) The Manager shall further ensure that no Borough officer,
employee or agent shall solicit or accept any gratuity, favor or
anything of monetary value from organizations under actual or
potential contracts with the Borough. The Borough Manager shall
initiate disciplinary action in accordance with the Borough's
personnel policy regulations for any employee found to be in
noncompliance with this subsection. [Added 10-20-1980 by Ord.
No. 778, approved 10-20-1980]
(3) The Manager shall establish procurement procedures for
designated purchasing officials to follow. These procedures shall, at
a minimum, require authorized Borough purchasing officials to
make reviews of their purchases to avoid the purchase of
unnecessary or duplicative items. In addition, the Manager shall
encourage each authorized purchasing official to consider the
consolidation or breaking out of purchases to obtain more
economical purchases. [Added 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 778,
approved 10-20-1980]
(4) The Manager shall ensure that all Borough procurement
transactions are conducted in an open manner and that the
procurement procedures used by the Borough do not restrict or
eliminate competition.
(5) The Manager shall establish and shall maintain written selection
procedures which, at a minimum, include the following
requirements: [Added 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 778, approved
10-20-1980]
(a) Solicitations of offer, which include clear and accurate
technical requirements which do not restrict competition.
Brand names may only be included if an "or equal" provision is
included as well. Solicitations of offer shall also include the
factors which shall be used in evaluating a particular bid or
proposal.
(b) Awards shall only be made to responsible contractors.
(6) The Manager shall appoint a Contract Administration Officer upon
the award of each Borough contract. The Contract Administration
Officer shall then be responsible for monitoring contractors to
ensure compliance with contracts. When the Contract
Administration Officer finds evidence of contractor noncompliance
with a Borough contract, he shall notify the Borough Manager
immediately so that action(s) may be taken to protect the
§ 43-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 43-7
1:54
§ 43-8. Acting Manager.
In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the Borough, he shall
delegate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform such duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of the Council.
Chapter 46
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
§ 46-1. Intent to organize.
The Borough of Middletown does hereby signify intention to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945.29
§ 46-2. Authorization to organize.
The proper officers are hereby authorized and directed to organize said
Authority, to execute the Articles of Incorporation and to file the same with
the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as provided by law.
§ 46-3. Articles of Incorporation. [Amended 11-8-1965 by Ord. No.
494, approved 11-8-1965]
Said Articles of Incorporation shall be as follows:30
§ 46-4. Purpose.
The Authority is incorporated for the purpose of undertaking such project
or projects as are permitted under the provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945.
Chapter 51
Borough's interests. [Added 10-20-1980 by Ord. No. 778,
approved 10-20-1980]
P. He shall cooperate with the Borough Council at all times and in all
matters that the best interests of the Borough and of the general public
may be maintained.
Q. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. He, or an officer designated by
him, shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager
shall report thereon to the Council.
29.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
§ 43-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-4
1:55
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirement — See Ch. 73. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 77.
§ 46-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 46-4
1:56
ARTICLE I
Authority Over Appointees
[Adopted 2-12-189431]
§ 51-1. Authority of Council to fix salaries. [Amended 2-9-1953 by
Ord. No. 291, approved 2-9-1953]
The Borough Council, subject to any restrictions set forth in this article,
shall fix the salaries, wages or other compensation of all officers and
employees of the Borough not elected by vote of the people. At any time,
and from time to time, the Council may change any salary, wage or other
compensation so fixed.
§ 51-2. Authority of Council to remove appointees. [Amended
2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 291, approved 2-9-1953]
The Council reserves the right to remove any and all officers and employees
appointed or elected by said Council.
§ 51-3. Limitation on Council's authority. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord.
No. 943]
The authority of the Council contained in §§ 51-1 and 51-2 is limited to the
extent that the subject matter is controlled by any ordinance, contract or
collective bargaining agreement.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. 1, Part 4, of the 1953 Code of Ordinances.
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-3
1:57
Chapter 55
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Fund — See Ch. 25.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
Police Department — See Ch. 60.
§ 51-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 51-3
1:58
ARTICLE I
Social Security
[Adopted 7-13-1953 by Ord. No. 323, approved 7-13-1953]
§ 55-1. Coverage extended.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute known as "Act No. 491,"
which is the enabling act provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734,
81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency to implement
the coverage of employees and officers under the Old Age and Survivors
Insurance System. The Borough of Middletown is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver to the state agency a plan or plans and agreement,
required under Section 6 of said enabling act and the Social Security Act,32
to extend coverage to employees and officers of the Borough of Middletown
and to do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees
and officers under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 55-2. Payments into fund. [Amended 11-11-1963 by Ord. No. 450,
approved 11-11-1963]
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions to be matched by payments by the Borough of Middletown to be
made into the contribution fund of the Social Security Act through the office
of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or funds
from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees and officers of
the Borough of Middletown. Such payments are to be made in accordance
with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state
agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are
delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such
time as payments are made.
§ 55-3. Appropriation and agreement.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Middletown in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund,
as provided in Section 4 of the enabling act33 and in accordance with the
plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the President and the
Secretary of the Borough of Middletown to enter into an agreement with the
state agency, which agreement shall be in accordance with Act. No. 491 and
with Paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement
shall provide that the participation of the Borough of Middletown shall
commence as of January 1, 1951.
32.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206 and 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq., respectively.
33.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-3
1:59

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
§ 55-4. through § 55-10. (Reserved)
§ 55-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-4
1:61

ARTICLE III
Retirement System
[Adopted 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1020, approved 9-9-1991; amended
in its entirety 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 1211, approved 8-7-2006]
§ 55-11. Vote to withdraw from PMRS.
The Borough hereby certifies that an affirmative new vote to withdraw the
Pension Plan has been obtained from at least 75% of all active, vested and
retired members of the Pension Plan, including all part-time employees, and
hereby elects to withdraw from the PMRS, which administers the Pension
Plan for nonuniformed municipal employees and retirees of the Borough.
The results of the vote are as follows:
Percent Yes DNV Possible
94% 45 3 48 FT
100% 2 0 2 PT electing to enroll upon
completion of transfer to new
administrator
100% 3 0 3 PT electing not to enroll in
Pension Plan
100% 9 0 9 PT failed to make an election
as of date of vote
76% 25 8 33 Retired/survivor
0% 0 2 2 Vested
87% 84 13 97 Total
§ 55-12. Application to withdraw.
The Borough hereby confirms its withdrawal from PMRS set forth in
Ordinance No. 1161 for the Year 2003 and Ordinance No. 1171 for the
Year 2004. The Borough's application to withdraw shall remain in force and
effect until which time the Board of Trustees of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System authorize said withdrawal.
§ 55-13. Agreement.
The Borough Council President is hereby authorized to enter into an
agreement with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System which
would terminate the contractual relationship between the Borough and
PMRS and fix the respective rights of the parties.
§ 55-14. Waivers.
A. The Borough shall, upon mutual agreement of the Borough and PMRS,
waive all claims, and hold the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System harmless from all such claims caused by the departure from
§ 55-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-14
1:63
§ 55-15. Establishment of new retirement plan.
PMRS and for benefits from current and future nonuniformed
employees of the Borough.
B. Further, the Borough acknowledges to the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System responsibility for the Nonuniformed Pension Plan
and assumes responsibility for the providing of all future benefit
payments for the existing retired members and beneficiaries, effective
with the withdrawal from PMRS and return of those funds on deposit at
PMRS.
A. This article hereby establishes a new retirement plan document for the
nonuniformed employees of the Borough of Middletown.34
B. The Borough hereby adopts the Pension Plan document as prepared by
StanCorp Financial Group, Inc. ("Stancorp"), and its wholly owned
subsidiaries: Standard Insurance Company and The Standard Life
Insurance Company of New York.
C. Upon termination of the contractual relationship between the Borough
and PMRS and the transfer of the pension assets herein described, the
PMRS plan documentation shall no longer be effective, but rather, the
plan document drafted by Stancorp shall be the controlling document.
The Borough of Middletown Nonuniformed Pension Plan shall at no
time in this process be terminated, but rather, its features shall be
described in a new plan document and the related funds will be held by
Stancorp in place of PMRS. The Borough hereby authorizes the transfer
of all funds, to the extent that such transfer is required, from PMRS, the
present custodian of the pension funds, to the successor custodian of
funds, Stancorp Financial Group, Inc., via direct transfer.
D. Amendments to Stancorp plan document. [Added 4-13-2010 by Ord.
No. 1266, approved 4-13-201035]
(1) In order to clarify the calculation of the cost-of-living adjustment,
the Stancorp plan document referred to above shall be amended to
delete the existing plan Section 7.7 and to replace it with the
following:
34.Editor's Note: The Nonuniform Pension Plan document is available in the office of the
Borough Secretary.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that benefit changes calculated hereunder, if
any, would be retroactive to 1-1-2010 and would be paid in accordance with past practices
in the plan.
§ 55-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 55-15
1:64
§ 55-16. Deposits in good standing.
The Borough hereby certifies to the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System that all deposits at PMRS are sufficient to cover anticipated
expenses as determined by actuarial studies compliant with the
requirements of Act 205, (53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.). Should the deposits
be shown to be insufficient, the Borough shall assume responsibility for the
collection and contribution of funds necessary for the Pension Plan pursuant
to the requirements of Act 205.
§ 55-17. Collective bargaining agreement; savings provision;
repealer; effective date.
7.7. Normal retirement benefit cost-of-living adjustment
(COLA).
A post-retirement COLA shall be applied to the amount of any
normal retirement benefit of each retired participant, surviving
spouse or other beneficiary. The adjustment shall be made as of
the anniversary of each participant's annuity starting date, which
shall be referred to as the "adjustment date."
The annual adjustment shall be determined by a percentage equal
to the consumer price index (CPI) (Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers) for the fourth month prior to the beginning of
the current plan year divided by the CPI for the fourth month prior
to the immediately preceding plan year. This percentage, rounded
to the nearest 0.1%, shall be multiplied by the current benefit level
to determine the benefit level commencing at the adjustment date.
In any event, the COLA shall be limited to a maximum annual
increase of 3% and a maximum total increase of 30%. In no event
shall the COLA cause a reduction in benefit.
In the event that an individual would have otherwise been subject
to a negative adjustment for the 2010 adjustment date due to
the preceding calculation (meaning that the CPI decreased during
the measurement period), no adjustment shall be made to the
normal retirement benefit on that adjustment date. The COLA
for the subsequent adjustment date shall be calculated on the
basis of the CPI from the fourth month preceding the subsequent
anniversary date divided by the CPI on the fourth month preceding
the anniversary date of the last plan year which produced a
positive adjustment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
this plan, the intent of this paragraph is to prevent a negative
COLA adjustment for the 2010 adjustment date only. This
paragraph shall not operate to prevent a negative COLA
adjustment for any adjustment date subsequent to 2010.
This shall be calculated as a compound interest COLA.
The COLA shall be recognized in any lump sum payments made
under the plan.
§ 55-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-17
1:65
A. Nothing in this article shall in any way amend or repeal any clause or
part of the collective bargaining agreement in effect between the
Borough and Local 776 Teamsters.
B. In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
article or the Pension Plan document, shall be held to be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section,
sentence, clause or part of this article or the Pension Plan document, it
being the intent of the Borough that such remainder shall be and
remain in full force and effect.
C. All prior ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
D. Contingent upon the approval of the withdrawal of the Borough from
PMRS and contingent upon the execution of the aforementioned
agreement between the Borough and PMRS, this article shall be
effective immediately.36
36.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1340 (adopted and approved 5-2-2017)
amended and restated the Borough of Middletown Employees Other Post-Employment
Benefit (OPEB) Retiree Benefits Plan and the Borough of Middletown OPEB Integral Part
Trust, both originally effective 4-7-2008 as adopted by Ord. No. 1251. Complete copies of
the ordinances, plans, and any amendments thereto are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 55-17 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 55-17
1:66
ARTICLE IV
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 3-17-1980 by Ord. No. 771, approved 3-17-1980]
§ 55-18. Establishment.
A Police Pension Plan is hereby established pursuant to the Act of May
29, 1956, P.L. 1804 (widely known as "Act 600"), as amended (53 P.S.
§ 767 et seq.). Such fund shall be under the direction of the Borough of
Middletown, herein referred to as the "Borough," and shall be applied under
such regulations as the Borough may prescribe.
§ 55-19. Eligibility for participation.
Each full-time policeman now or hereafter employed by the Borough shall
be eligible to participate and shall be a participant in the Police Pension
Plan.
§ 55-20. Age and service requirements. [Amended 8-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 973, approved 8-1-1988]
Each participant who has been in the employ of the Borough as a police
officer for 25 years in the aggregate and who has attained the age of 50
years may retire and shall, upon actual retirement from employment with
the Borough, be entitled to receive pension or retirement benefits as are
hereinafter provided. Also, participants who were members of the police
force of the Borough prior to December 21, 1965, may retire upon attaining
the age of 60 years after a period of total service of 20 years.
§ 55-21. Military leave credit.
Any member of the police force employed by the Borough who has been
a regular appointed policeman of the Borough for a period of at least six
months and who, thereafter, shall enter into the military service of the
United States shall have credited to the employment record of such member
for pension or retirement benefits all of the time spent by such member in
said military service, if such person returns (or has heretofore returned) to
said Borough employment as a member of the police force within six months
after such separation from said service.
§ 55-22. Benefits. [Amended 1-4-1988 by Ord. No. 955, approved
1-4-1988]
A. The pension or retirement benefits shall be payable during the balance
of the participant's life following actual retirement and after fulfillment
of the age and service requirements set forth in § 55-20. The monthly
benefit shall be a sum equal to 1/2 of the average monthly
compensation of the participant during the last 36 months of said
participant's employment by the Borough as a member of the police
§ 55-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-22
1:67
force. [Amended 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 966, approved 4-4-1988;
12-4-1995 by Ord. No. 1077, approved 12-4-1995]
B. Effective January 1, 1987, the offset as provided in Act 600, as
amended, for any social security old age insurance benefits which a
participant might receive shall be computed on the following basis:
(1) Effective January 1, 1987, 67.5% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(2) Effective January 1, 1988, 60.0% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(3) Effective January 1, 1989, 52.5% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(4) Effective January 1, 1990, 45.0% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(5) Effective January 1, 1991, 37.5% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(6) Effective January 1, 1992, 30.0% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(7) Effective January 1, 1993, 22.5% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(8) Effective January 1, 1994, 15.0% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(9) Effective January 1, 1995, 7.5% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
(10) Effective January 1, 1996, 0% of the primary social security
benefits for a participant.
C. Effective January 1, 1987, the widow of a member of the police force or
of a member who retires on pension and dies shall, during her lifetime,
so long as she does not remarry, be entitled to receive a pension
calculated at the rate of 50% of the pension the member was receiving
or would have been receiving had he been retired at the time of his
death. In the event of a member of the police force or a member who
retires on pension dies and is not survived by a widow, then the child or
children under the age of 18 of said member shall be entitled to receive
a pension calculated at the rate of 50% of the pension the member was
receiving or would have been receiving had he been retired at the time
of his death.
D. Effective January 1, 1987, a participant shall be entitled to applicable
benefits under this chapter on account of any service-connected
permanent disability which he may suffer. [Amended 12-4-1995 by
Ord. No. 1078, approved 12-4-1995]
§ 55-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 55-22
1:68
E. Effective January 1, 1987, should a participant, before completing the
retirement age and service requirements but after having completed 12
years of total service to the Borough as a member of the police force, for
any reason cease to be employed as a full-time police officer by the
Borough, he shall be entitled to vest his retirement benefits by filing
with the Borough Council, within 90 days of the date he ceases to be a
full-time police officer, a written notice of his intention to vest. Upon
reaching the date which would have been his normal retirement date, if
he had continued to be employed as a full-time officer, he shall be paid a
partial retirement allowance determined by applying the percentage
his years of service bears to the years of service which he would have
rendered had he continued to work until his retirement date to the
gross pension, using the monthly average salary during the appropriate
period prior to his termination of employment.
F. Such pension or retirement benefits shall be payable from the assets of
the fund established pursuant to this article, and the pension or
retirement benefit shall be computed as the sum of:
(1) All pension benefits from pension plans heretofore established by a
private organization or association for the member of the police
force, but only to the extent that the commonwealth or Borough
shall have contributed to such pension plan moneys raised by
taxation;
(2) The primary benefits under the federal social security laws for
which the member may be eligible because of age in accordance
with § 55-22B; and
(3) Benefits from the police pension fund hereby established to the
extent necessary to bring the total benefits in any month to 1/2 of
the aforesaid monthly average salary.
G. Effective January 1, 1988, a service increment for each completed year
of service in excess of 25 years shall be paid to a participant at the rate
of 1.25% of the participant's average monthly pay multiplied by the
number of years of service completed by the participant in excess of 25
years. Such service increments shall be paid in addition to other
pension or retirement benefits, but not to exceed $100 per month.
[Added 8-1-1988 by Ord. No. 973, approved 8-1-1988; amended
2-5-1990 by Ord. No. 995, approved 2-5-1990]
H. Effective January 1, 1991, the surviving spouse or the surviving
dependent children under the age of 18 if there is no surviving spouse
or upon the remarriage of the surviving spouse of an active police
officer who is killed in the line of duty as a police officer for the Borough
of Middletown prior to being eligible for retirement shall be entitled to
a monthly benefit equal to 100% of the benefit the police officer would
have been receiving had he been retired at the time of death. In the
case of payments to surviving dependent children, the one-hundredpercent
benefit shall be divided equally between all eligible dependent
§ 55-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-22
1:69
§ 55-23. Contribution rate. [Amended 1-4-1988 by Ord. No. 955,
approved 1-4-1988]
§ 55-24. Allocation of commonwealth funds.
Payments by the State Treasurer to the Borough from the moneys received
from taxes paid upon the premiums of foreign casualty insurance companies
for purposes of pension or retirement shall be used in the following order:
children under the age of 18. [Added 1-7-1991 by Ord. No. 1012,
approved 1-7-1991]
A. Effective January 1, 1987, members shall pay into the fund, biweekly, an
amount in accordance with the following table, on all compensation on
which social security taxes are payable. In any event, the contribution
rate shall be 5% on that portion of compensation that exceeds the
amount on which social security taxes are payable, except that there
shall be no such contribution by members for the years 1988, 1989 and
1990. The Borough shall allocate from the subsidy funding moneys
received under Act 205 of 1984 to the Police Pension Fund an amount
equal to what would have been contributed by members at the rate of
3.2% for 1988, 3.425% for 1989, and 3.65% for 1990 of all
compensation on which social security taxes are payable, plus 5% for
each year on compensation that exceeds the amount on which social
security taxes are payable. [Amended 8-1-1988 by Ord. No. 973,
approved 8-1-1988]
Effective Amount
January 1, 1987 2.975%
January 1, 1988 0.000%
January 1, 1989 0.000%
January 1, 1990 0.000%
January 1, 1991 3.875%
January 1, 1992 4.100%
January 1, 1993 4.325%
January 1, 1994 4.550%
January 1, 1995 4.775%
January 1, 1996 5.000%
B. Effective January 1, 1987, the Borough Council may, by annual
resolution, reduce or eliminate the required contribution rate for all
members, provided that an actuarial study has determined that such
action will not adversely affect the actual soundness of the Police
Pension Plan.
A. To reduce the unfunded liability, if any.
§ 55-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 55-24
1:70
§ 55-25. Gifts.
The Borough shall be authorized to take, by gift, grant, devise or bequest,
any money or property, real, personal or mixed, in trust, for the benefit of
such fund, and the care, management, investment and disposal of such trust
funds or property shall be vested in the Borough, and said trust funds shall
be governed thereby subject to such directions not inconsistent therewith
as the donors of such funds and property may prescribe.
§ 55-26. Return of member contributions with interest.
Any member of the police force who, for any reason whatsoever, shall be
ineligible to receive a pension after having contributed any charges to the
Police Pension Fund (or to a supplanted police pension fund as Section
9 of Act 600 further provides37) shall be entitled to a refund of all such
moneys paid by him into such fund, plus interest earned on such moneys,
calculated at the rate of 5%, immediately upon discontinuance of such
member's employment with the police force. If such discontinuance is due
to death, a refund of such moneys, with interest as determined above, shall
be made to the beneficiary designated by such member or, in the absence
thereof, to the estate of such member.
§ 55-27. Pension benefits not subject to legal process.
The pension or retirement payments herein provided for shall not be subject
to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process, shall
not be subject to assignment or transfer and shall be payable only to the
member or to the designated beneficiary or estate thereof.
§ 55-28. Pension contract.
The pension contract with the insurance company agreed upon by the
Borough Council is hereby approved, and the appropriate Borough officials,
President or Vice President and Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are
authorized to execute the official copies of the same.
§ 55-29. Pension trust revoked.
The revocation of the Police Pension Trust Agreement of September 14,
1967, amicably concluded pursuant to Article XI, Section (a), thereof, with
ensuing transfer pursuant to Section (c) of said Article XI by the trustee to
the Borough of all contracts, is hereby ratified and confirmed.
B. To apply against the annual obligation of the Borough for future service
costs or to the extent that the payment may be in excess of such
obligation.
C. To reduce member contributions.
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 775.
§ 55-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-30
1:71
§ 55-30. Transfer of assets and liabilities.
To the Police Pension Fund established pursuant to the provisions of this
article are transferred the members' assets and liabilities of the police
pension fund of the Borough heretofore existing, under Ordinance No. 378,
Year of 1958, as amended by Ordinance No. 516, Year of 1967, to which
had been transferred all benefits, assets and liabilities under a predecessor
pension trust agreement, and the enabling provisions and requirements of
Section 7 of Act 600, 53 P.S. § 773, are incorporated by reference.
§ 55-31. Delegation of authority to perfect details.
The Borough Manager, or as he may delegate to the Borough Administrative
Officer, after consultation with the President and appropriate committee
Chairman of the Borough Council, is authorized to work out the sundry
details incident to the transition from the Police Pension Trust to the
Pension Contract, the continuance of the insurance contracts and the
method of continuing payment of premiums thereon separate and apart
from the Pension Contract and to harmonize administration and reporting
of the Police Pension Fund hereby established with a calendar-year basis,
the initial calendar year being 1980, and with governmental requirements,
including regulations of the Auditor General of Pennsylvania.
§ 55-32. Service by retired police employees. [Amended 4-6-1987 by
Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
A retired police employee shall be subject to service, from time to time, as
police reserve in cases of riot, tumult or preservation of the public peace,
until unfit for such service, when he may be finally discharged by reason of
age or disability.38
§ 55-33. Amendments to plan.39
A. All amendments to the Police Pension Plan shall be made by the
Borough Council sitting as the Committee on the Police Pension Plan.
An affirmative vote of the majority of all Borough Council Committee
members shall be required to alter, amend or revoke any or all terms of
the Police Pension Plan. Where an ordinance is required to make
effective the action of the Borough Council or its Committee, the
Borough Council shall pass such ordinance in addition to the motion
passed by the Borough Council sitting as the Committee on the Police
Pension Plan.
B. Ordinances shall only be required where the action taken involves the
payment of insurance premiums or other charges which are the legal
obligation of the Borough, designation of the trustee or custodian of the
38.Editor's Note: Originally derived from Ord. No. 334, adopted 4-28-1954, this section, as
amended 7-11-1960 by Ord. No. 397, was continued in effect by Section 15 of Ord. No.
771.
39.Editor's Note: Originally derived from Ord. No. 398, adopted 7-11-1960, this section was
continued in effect and amended by Section 15 of Ord. No. 771.
§ 55-30 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 55-33
1:72
§ 55-34. Consent for lump-sum distributions. [Added 1-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 1204, approved 1-3-2006]
Effective January 1, 2006, notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan,
any distribution to a participant made prior to the earlier of age 62 or
normal retirement age of an amount in excess of $1,000 that is an eligible
rollover distribution as set forth in the Plan and the Code shall be made only
upon consent of the participant.
§ 55-35. Amendment and restatement of plan. [Added 8-7-2006 by
Ord. No. 1210, approved 8-7-2006]
Effective for participants who terminate employment on or after January 1,
2005, the plan, now known as the "Borough of Middletown Police Pension
Plan," is hereby amended and restated in its entirety by substituting the
attached amendment and restatement of the Borough of Middletown Police
Pension Plan40 in its place. Participants who terminate employment prior
to January 1, 2005, shall have their pension benefits determined by the
pension arrangement that was in effect on the date that they terminated
employment.
Police Pension Plan assets and in any other area where, in the judgment
of the Borough Solicitor, an ordinance is required. Amendments
changing terms of the trust agreement dealing with its procedural and
administrative aspects shall not originate nor require the passage of an
ordinance.
C. All amendments to the Police Pension Plan shall be signed by the
Borough President, attested to by the Borough Secretary and shall bear
the Seal of the Borough of Middletown and be approved by the Mayor.
D. It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary to keep on file an officially
executed copy of the Police Pension Plan and all amendments thereto.
40.Editor's Note: A complete and current copy of the Police Pension Plan is on file in the
Borough's offices.
§ 55-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-35
1:73
Chapter 58
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
§ 58-1. Planning Commission.
Pursuant to Article II of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10201 et seq., there is hereby created a Planning Commission for the
Borough of Middletown. Said Planning Commission shall be comprised of
members appointed from the Borough Council in accordance with law.
§ 58-2. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have and exercise all powers and duties
conferred by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq., and Borough ordinances. The Planning Commission shall have
access to the Borough Solicitor and the Borough Engineer to secure legal
advice and engineering advice, respectively, relating to the business and
operation of the Planning Commission.
Chapter 60
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Plan — See Ch. 55, Art. IV. Public Safety Department — See Ch. 64.
§ 60-1. Establishment and supervision.41
The existing Police Department is hereby recognized and reestablished
in and for the Borough of Middletown. The Chief of Police shall be the
Chief Executive of the Police Department. He shall, under the direction of
the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and have supervision over its
members in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
41.Editor's Note: See also Ch. A265, Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
§ 55-35 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 60-2
1:74
§ 60-2. Department regulations. [Added 3-19-1979 by Ord. No. 743,
approved 3-19-1979]
The Middletown Police Department regulations of February 1975 are
hereby approved. It is (severably) provided that such approval relates back
to 1975, when first approved.
§ 60-3. Subordinate classifications. [Amended 2-9-1976 by Ord. No.
681, approved 2-9-1976; 4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 814, approved
4-12-1982]
Subordinate to the Chief of Police, in the Police Department, the following
classifications are recognized and established: Sergeants, corporals,
patrolmen, part-time patrolmen, Detective Sergeants and Detectives. The
number of persons to serve in each subordinate classification, on a full-time
or a part-time basis, and the compensation of each shall be as determined
by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 60-4. (Reserved)42
§ 60-5. Authority to appoint special policemen.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen.
§ 60-6. Police Sinking Fund. [Added 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 1289]
A. There is hereby created, in accordance with Section 1313.1 of the
Pennsylvania Borough Code,43 a sinking fund for the accumulation of
capital to repair and replace capital equipment used by the Police
Department as it becomes obsolete. The sinking fund shall be known as
the "Police Sinking Fund."
B. The Police Sinking Fund shall be used solely to finance the purchase of
new police equipment to be used by the Police Department in the
provision of law enforcement services; repairs to and replacements of
equipment used by the Police Department in the provision of law
enforcement services; construction, renovation, and improvement of
buildings and facilities utilized by the Police Department for police
business; updates to technology infrastructure; and such other capital
improvements as may from time to time be necessary.
C. The Police Sinking Fund shall be funded by income generated by the
Police Department through the collection of fines, fees, and
assessments.
D. The Police Sinking Fund shall be under the direction of Borough
Council, in consultation with the Public Safety Committee, and money
42.Editor's Note: Former § 60-4, Police Secretary, added 2-4-1985 by Ord. No. 889, approved
2-4-1985, was repealed 1-5-1987 by Ord. No. 933, approved 1-5-1987.
43.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1313.1.
§ 60-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-6
1:75
Chapter 62
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 62, Police Equipment Fund, adopted 12-1-1986 by Ord.
No. 927, approved 12-1-1986, as amended, was repealed 2-6-1989 by
Ord. No. 980.]
Chapter 64
PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 16.
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Police Department — See Ch. 60.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 77.
§ 64-1. Creation; responsibility.
There is hereby created an office within the Department of Administration
to be known as the "Office of Public Safety." Said office shall have the
responsibility for coordinating administration of emergency medical
service, fire services, and emergency management; provide all computer,
telephone, and radio support services within the Borough; mitigate the
results and render aid in the case of a disaster or accident; and coordinate
the Emergency Operations Center with other Borough operations.
§ 64-2. Emergency Management Agency.
The Borough Emergency Management Agency is under the direction and
control of the Mayor, pursuant to Chapter 16 of the Borough of Middletown
Code of Ordinances.
§ 64-3. Administrative Assistant for Public Safety.
from the Police Sinking Fund shall be paid out only upon approval of
Borough Council.
A. The Borough may maintain the position of Administrative Assistant for
Public Safety, who shall report to the Borough Manager of the Borough
of Middletown. The Administrative Assistant shall serve at the
discretion of the Borough Manager.
B. Duties of the Administrative Assistant shall be:
(1) To assist the Borough Manager with proper management of the
Fire Department operating budget, including but not limited to
assisting the Borough Manager and Fire Chiefs with Fire
Department procurement and Fire Department grants; and
§ 60-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 64-3
1:76
Chapter 66
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Manager — See Ch. 43.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
Electric service — See Ch. 144.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 236.
Water — See Ch. 256.
§ 66-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Department of Public Works.
§ 66-2. Duties.
The Department of Public Works shall have the authority of and provide
the services currently provided by the Department of Highway/Property, the
Department of Utility Maintenance/Operation, and the Electric Department.
To that end, the Department of Public Works shall have the charge and
supervision of:
(2) To assist the Borough Manager with proper management of
contracts related to the provision of emergency medical service;
and
(3) To assist with management of the Emergency Operations Center;
and
(4) To assist with contracts related to computers, telephones, and
radios; and
(5) To assist with coordination between the fire police, the Police
Department, and the Director of the Emergency Management
Agency.
C. The Borough Council may, from time to time, set compensation for this
position.
A. The construction, operation, and maintenance of all Borough streets,
alleys, public ways and stormwater facilities;
B. The construction, operation, and maintenance of all Borough buildings
and properties;
C. The construction, operation, and maintenance of all water and
sanitation sewer lines, sewage treatment facilities, and water supply,
§ 64-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:77
§ 66-3. Director.
The Borough Manager shall serve as the Director of the Department of
Public Works and shall have full charge and supervision over all operations
and employees of the Department of Public Works.
§ 66-4. Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent.
There is hereby established the offices of Superintendent and Assistant
Superintendent, which shall be responsible for performing those duties
assigned by the Director of the Department of Public Works. The Borough
Council may appoint by resolution the Superintendent and Assistant
Superintendent who shall each report to the Director of the Department of
Public Works.
§ 66-5. Assignment of property.
Those physical assets of the water, sanitary sewer lines and the sanitary
sewer plant formerly the property of the Middletown and Royalton Water
Company shall be owned by the Middletown Borough Authority and shall
be leased to the Borough for operation by the Department of Public Works.
All physical properties of the Borough, including the rights-of-way, parks,
playgrounds and all municipal utilities facilities, shall be and are hereby
assigned to the Department of Public Works.
§ 66-6. Employees.
storage, and distribution facilities owned or operated by the Borough;
and
D. The construction, operation, and maintenance of all Borough electric
distribution systems and facilities.
A. The Department of Public Works shall have such employees as may,
from time to time, be authorized by Council and hired by the Borough
Manager. The Borough Manager shall maintain and distribute job
classifications/descriptions, educational and/or skill requirements, and
pay levels. Nothing contained herein shall require the Borough to fill
any vacancy existing in any job classification or to maintain a minimum
number of employees within a classification.
B. All employees, regardless of job classification or description, shall be
available to perform duties within the Department of Public Works as
may be assigned to them from time to time by the Borough Manager or
his designee.
§ 66-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 66-6
1:78
Chapter 69
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Manager — See Ch. 43.
§ 69-1. (Reserved)44
§ 69-2. Inventory of equipment. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No.
778, approved 10-20-1980; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943]
All foremen and supervisors shall keep a complete up-to-date list of tools,
vehicles and equipment on hand. They shall annually, between October 15
and October 25, take inventory of all tools, vehicles and equipment and
submit the complete list to the Borough Manager prior to November 1.
Each foreman and supervisor shall be responsible for the safekeeping and
accounting of all tools, vehicles and equipment in his department.
§ 69-3. Records of equipment. [Amended 10-20-1980 by Ord. No.
778, approved 10-20-1980; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943]
The Borough Manager shall keep a complete record of all tools, vehicles
and equipment in each department, with signed receipts from the foremen
and supervisors acknowledging receipt and liability of all items shown on
the record.
§ 69-4. System of property inventory and control. [Added
12-12-1983 by Ord. No. 870, approved 12-12-1983]
Chapter 71
RECORDS
A. Property inventory and control. The Borough Manager is authorized to
institute and maintain a system of property control cards or records, to
be kept current at all times by indicating each assignment of custody
and responsibility as made with respect to each item or classification,
as appropriate. Regulations from time to time found necessary and
proper for the implementation of this authority may be prescribed by
the Borough Manager.
B. Property custody forms. Persons entrusted with Borough property shall
sign a receipt therefor on a property custody form approved by the
Borough Manager.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 69-1, Purchase order required, as amended, was repealed 3-2-1987
by Ord. No. 940, approved 3-2-1987.
§ 66-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-4
1:79

ARTICLE I
Disposition of Records
[Adopted 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1326, approved 7-19-2016]
§ 71-1. Intent to follow Municipal Records Manual.
The Borough of Middletown intends to follow the schedules and procedures
for disposition of records as set forth in the Municipal Records Manual
approved on December 16, 2008, as amended on July 23, 2009, which
shall include the approval of each individual act of records disposition by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 71-2. Amendments to Manual.
Should the Municipal Records Manual be amended while this article is
in force and effect, no such amendment shall be effective in the Borough
unless and until this article is amended to reflect the application of any such
revised Manual.
§ 71-3. Severability.
If any section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction,
sentence, clause, phrase or word in this article is declared by any reason
to be illegal, unconstitutional, or invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect or impair the validity of this
article as a whole, or any other section, subsection, provision, regulation,
limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, word or remaining portion
of this article. Borough Council hereby declares that it would have adopted
this article and each section, subsection, phrase and word thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections,
provisions, regulations, limitations, restrictions, sentences, clauses, phrases
or words may be declared illegal, unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-3
1:81
Chapter 73
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Manager — See Ch. 43. Police Department — See Ch. 60.
§ 73-1. Residency required for certain employees. [Amended
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 1102, approved 7-7-1997; 3-8-2011 by Ord. No.
1277, approved 3-8-2011]
§ 73-2. Rules for determining residency.
In determining the residence of a person, the following rules shall be
followed so far as they may be applicable:
A. Chief of Police. Any Police Chief of the Borough originally appointed
and employed after the effective date of this section must be a bona fide
resident of the Borough of Middletown, except at the time of such
appointment or employment, when they need not be a resident of the
Borough of Middletown, provided that within 15 months after
appointment or employment, they shall establish a residence and
remain during their tenure a resident of the Borough of Middletown. A
Police Chief of the Borough originally appointed and employed prior to
the effective date of this section shall be exempt from the requirement
of residency in the Borough so long as they remain during their tenure
as Police Chief a resident of the Middletown Area School District.
B. Borough Manager. The Borough Manager must be a bona fide resident
of the Borough of Middletown, except at the time of appointment or
employment, when they need not be a resident of the Borough of
Middletown, provided that within 15 months after appointment or
employment, they shall establish a residence and remain during their
tenure as Borough Manager a resident of the Borough of Middletown.
A. That place shall be considered the residence of a person in which his or
her habitation is fixed and to which, whenever he or she is absent, he or
she has the intention of returning.
B. A person shall not be considered to have changed his residence who
leaves his or her home for another place of abode for temporary
purposes only, with the intention of returning.
C. A person shall not be considered to have gained a residence in any
place into which he or she comes for temporary purposes only, without
the intention of making such place his permanent place of abode.
D. The place where the family of a married man or woman resides shall be
considered to be his or her place of residence, except where the
§ 71-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 73-2
1:82
§ 73-3. Waiver.
Chapter 77
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51. Pensions — See Ch. 55.
husband and wife have actually separated and live apart, in which case
the place where he or she has resided for two or more months shall be
considered and held to be his or her place of residence.
A. An individual may make a request for a waiver. Such request shall be
submitted, in writing, to the Borough Council. The Borough Council
shall review the request and, upon reaching a decision, shall notify the
individual, in writing, of its decision.
B. A waiver, once granted, shall continue in effect for a period of six
months. The waiver may be renewed by the Borough Council for an
additional six-month period.
§ 73-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-3
1:83

ARTICLE I
Mayor
[Adopted 12-9-192945]
§ 77-1. Monthly salary established. [Last amended 3-20-1978 by
Ord. No. 72546]
The salary of the Mayor shall be $175 per month.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. 1, Part 2, of the 1953 Code of Ordinances.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance was passed over the veto of the Mayor.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-1
1:85

ARTICLE II
Council
[Adopted 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 33047]
§ 77-2. Salary of Council members and President. [Last amended
3-20-1978 by Ord. No. 72548]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 1001 of the Act of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, February 1, 1966, as
last reenacted, revised and amended,49 compensation shall be paid to the
lawfully qualified and acting members of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, at the rate of $125
per month, and the President of the Borough Council shall also receive an
additional $50 per month so that his total monthly compensation shall be
$175.
§ 77-3. Conditions for payment. [Amended 3-14-1960 by Ord. No.
391, approved 3-14-1960; 2-6-1967 by Ord. No. 508, approved
2-6-1967]
Compensation shall be paid in any month to such Councilman who either
attends the Council meeting or committee meetings or performs
councilmanic work of any nature, and it shall not be deemed a reason for
nonpayment of compensation by reason of the fact that the Councilman, for
good cause shown, has failed to attend the regular meeting of the Borough
Council; provided, however, that he has performed such other duties as are
herewith enumerated.50
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance was passed over the veto of the Mayor.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance was passed over the veto of the Mayor.
49.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1001.
50.Editor's Note: The salaries and compensation of other officers and employees of the
Borough are set periodically by the Borough Council. Current salary figures are on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 77-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-3
1:87
Chapter 80
SECRETARY, BOROUGH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 3.
Borough Manager — See Ch. 43.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
§ 80-1. General duties.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the duties of the Borough Secretary shall
include the following:
§ 80-2. Supervision of Borough Secretary.
The Borough Secretary shall report to the Borough Manager.
Chapter 84
STABILIZATION FUND
A. Those duties prescribed by the Code of the Borough of Middletown, the
Pennsylvania Borough Code51 and other laws of the commonwealth.
B. Executive Secretary to the Borough Manager.
C. Maintenance of all files and records of the Borough of Middletown,
including but not limited to:
(1) Agendas and true and correct record (minutes) of all regular,
special and adjourned meetings of the Borough Council.
(2) Ordinances and resolutions proposed and/or adopted by the
Borough Council.
(3) Decisions of the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board,
Code Hearing Board, Shade Tree Commission or other such
boards, commissions or committees established by or appointed by
the Borough Council.
(4) Personnel records of the Borough, excepting those of sworn Police
Officers.
D. The signature of the Borough Secretary shall be affixed to all
resolutions, ordinances, vouchers, checks and all other legal documents
of the Borough.
E. Other such duties which may be assigned by the Borough Manager.
51.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 77-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 80-2
1:88
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Administration
[Adopted 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 1360, approved 4-2-2019]
§ 84-1. Establishment.
There shall be established in the Borough of Middletown (hereinafter the
"Borough") a stabilization fund pursuant to the authority set forth in 8
Pa.C.S.A. § 1202(23) for the creation of an operating reserve fund and 8
Pa.C.S.A. § 1313.1 for the creation of special funds and investments. The
Borough shall set aside money in the stabilization fund for the payment of
unforeseen and unfunded emergency expenses of the Borough related to
the health, safety and welfare of Borough residents. The administration,
control, investment and expenditure of the stabilization fund by Borough
Council shall be in accordance with this chapter.
§ 84-2. Administration.
A. Deposits.
(1) The stabilization fund shall be funded by annual contributions from
the Borough's general fund and electric fund. Transfers shall be
made to the stabilization fund from the general fund and electric
fund each year that there is an end-of-year surplus in either or both
contributing funds. A transfer equal to 10% of each fund's surplus
shall be made after receipt by the Borough of the audited financial
statements for the fiscal year for which there was a year-end
surplus.
(2) There shall be no maximum placed on the total stabilization fund
balance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1202(23), no appropriation may be made to the stabilization fund
if said appropriation would cause the stabilization fund balance to
exceed 25% of the estimated revenues of the Borough's general
fund in the current fiscal year.
B. Expenditures. Payments out of the stabilization fund shall be for
unforeseen and unfunded emergency expenses of the Borough related
to the health, safety and welfare of Borough residents. Such
expenditures are those that would result in significant unanticipated
revenue shortfalls if paid out of the general fund. Stabilization funds
may also be used for any lawful municipal purpose under the
Pennsylvania Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. Consistent with
Council's authority set forth in 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1313.1 to expend funds in
the manner as may be determined by action of Council under this
article, a majority vote of all elected Borough Council members plus one
is required to spend money out of the stabilization fund for the payment
of authorized expenses.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:89
C. Investments. Money deposited into the stabilization fund shall be
subject to the investment rules governing Borough funds set forth
under 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1316, Investment of funds.
§ 84-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 84-2
1:90
Chapter 88
WARDS; BOROUGH COUNCIL
§ 88-1. Wards established; boundaries.
The wards of the Borough of Middletown hereinafter described by metes
and bounds shall be the new wards in the Borough of Middletown, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania, being bounded and described as follows:
A. First Ward. Beginning at the intersection of the center line of West Main
Street and the center line of Apple Avenue; thence east along the center
line of West Main Street to the center line of North Union Street; thence
south along the center line of North Union Street to the center line of
Water Street; thence east along the center line of East Water Street to
the center line of Pine Street; thence south along the center line of Pine
Street to the center line of East Emaus Street; thence east along the
center line of East Emaus Street to the center line of Race Street;
thence south along the center line of Race Street and an open area to
the Borough boundary line in the center of Swatara Creek; thence
southwesterly along the center line of Swatara Creek to the north bank
of the Susquehanna River; thence west along the Susquehanna River to
the west Borough boundary line; thence north along the western
Borough boundary line to the northern boundary line of the Penn
Central right-of-way; thence east along the northern boundary of the
Penn Central right-of-way to the east edge of Wilson Street Bridge;
thence east along the center line of West Main Street to the point of
beginning.
B. Second Ward. Beginning at the intersection of the center line of West
Main Street and the center line of Apple Avenue; thence north to the
center line of Wharton Avenue of Wharton Avenue Extension; thence
east on the center line of Wharton Avenue to the center line of North
Union Street; thence north on the center line of North Union Street to
the center line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence east on the center line of
East Roosevelt Avenue to the center line of Briarcliff Road; thence south
on the center line of Briarcliff Road to the center line of High Street;
thence east on the center line of High Street to the center line of Race
Street; thence south on the center line of Race Street to the center line
of East Main Street; thence east on the center line of East Main Street
to the center line of Swatara Creek; thence south and west on the
center line of Swatara Creek to the center line of South Race Street
extended to the Swatara Creek; thence north on the center line of Race
Street to the center line of East Emaus Street; thence west on the
center line of East Emaus Street to the center line of Pine Street;
thence north on the center line of Pine Street to the center line of East
Water Street; thence west on the center line of East Water Street to the
center line of North Union Street; thence north on the center line of
North Union Street to the center line of Main Street; thence west on the
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-1
1:91
§ 88-2. Election of members of Council. [Amended 6-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 1209, approved 6-5-2006; 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 1328, approved
9-6-2016]
Seven members of the Council shall be elected at large in a manner as not
to interfere with the terms of those ward members of the Council previously
elected as set forth in Section 816 of the Pennsylvania Borough Code, 8
Pa.C.S.A. § 816, and as provided below:
center line of West Main Street to the center line of Apple Avenue, the
point of beginning.
C. Third Ward. Beginning at the intersection of Wharton Avenue extended
to the western Borough line; thence north to the northern boundary line
of the Borough, Grandview Addition; thence east at the northern
boundary line of the Borough to the east right-of-way line of North
Union Street; thence north along the east right-of-way line of North
Union Street to the south right-of-way line of the Pennsylvania
Turnpike; thence north along the center line of North Union Street
approximately 3,000 feet; thence north and east across open country to
the west right-of-way boundary line of the Reading Company right-ofway;
thence south along the Reading Company right-of-way and west of
Swatara Park to the center line of Vine Street; thence south along the
center line of Vine Street to the southern boundary line of the right-ofway
of the Pennsylvania Turnpike; thence east along the southern rightof-
way boundary line of the Pennsylvania Turnpike to the center line of
Swatara Creek; thence south along the center line of Swatara Creek to
the center line of East Main Street; thence west along the center line of
East Main Street to the center line of Race Street; thence north on the
center line of Race Street to the center line of East High Street; thence
west along the center line of East High Street to the center line of
Briarcliff Road; thence north on the center line of Briarcliff Road to the
center line of East Roosevelt Avenue; thence west along the center line
of East Roosevelt Avenue to the center line of North Union Street;
thence south along the center line of North Union Street to the center
line of Wharton Avenue; thence west along the center line of Wharton
Avenue to the western Borough line, the point of beginning.
A. At the first municipal election following the effective date of Ord. No.
1328, the electors of the Borough shall elect a sufficient number of
members of the Council that, when added to the number of members of
the Council already in office whose terms are not about to expire, will
bring the membership of the Council to seven.
B. In addition, the following shall apply:
(1) The newly elected members of the Council shall serve for terms of
four years from the first Monday of January following the first
municipal election following the effective date of Ord. No. 1328. At
the second municipal election after the effective date of Ord. No.
1328, the electors of the Borough shall elect a sufficient number of
§ 88-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 88-2
1:92
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 93
ADULT BOOKSTORES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 93-1. Location restricted. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943]
It shall be unlawful to establish or maintain any adult bookstore within
500 feet of any area zoned for residential use, such as the R-1, R-2 or R-3
Districts.
§ 93-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade, including but not limited to books, magazines,
periodicals, visual representations or writings, distinguished or
characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to
specified anatomical areas or to specified sexual activities or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
members of Council, that, when added to the number of members
of the Council elected at the previous municipal election, shall
bring the membership of the Council to its full complement of
seven. If necessary, some of the members of the Council elected
at the second municipal election shall serve for a four-year term
from the first Monday of January following the municipal election,
and the remainder shall serve for a two-year term, in an amount
to bring the number to be elected in the Borough in succeeding
municipal elections into conformity with the number elected in the
other boroughs of the Commonwealth not divided into wards.
(2) In the third and all subsequent municipal elections following the
effective date of Ord. No. 1328, the electors of the Borough shall
elect three or four members of the Council, as the case may be,
each to serve for a term of four years from the first Monday of
January following the municipal election.
A. Human genitals, pubic region.
§ 88-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-2
1:93
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
§ 93-3. Approval of applications to locate in restricted areas.
Well aware of the deleterious effects as well as economic blight to which
adult bookstores give rise and finding a compelling public interest in the
preservation of residential neighborhoods, the Borough Council
nevertheless delegates to its Community Development Committee authority
to approve an application to locate an adult bookstore within 500 feet of any
area zoned for residential use if the applicant presents satisfactory evidence
from which said Committee finds as a fact that:
§ 93-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
When written notice has been served by the Mayor, acting through a
Borough policeman, of a violation of this chapter upon the person in charge
of such adult bookstore and/or upon the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises or agent thereof, such violation shall be discontinued immediately.
Any owner, lessee or occupant of such adult bookstore in which such
violation exists and any person who knowingly commits, participates in or
permits any such violation shall, upon conviction before the District Justice
in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000
for each such violation and also the costs of prosecution and, upon refusal
to pay such fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the jail of Dauphin County
B. Buttocks.
C. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state of sexual stimulation
or arousal.
A.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
C.
A. The public health, safety and general welfare will not be adversely
affected.
B. Property located within the distance sought to be permitted will not be
injuriously affected as to continuing long-term residential occupancy, as
to value or otherwise.
C. Deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood will not be contributed
to, encouraged or enlarged.
D. That such location will be in harmony both with constitutional
requirements, if any, the applicability of which the applicant has
demonstrated, and with the spirit and purpose of this chapter.
§ 93-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 93-4
1:94
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day after notice that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation hereof, punishable as such.
Chapter 96
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 96, Alarms, Art. I, False Alarms, adopted 10-8-1984
by Ord. No. 880, approved 10-8-1984, as amended, was repealed
4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1113, approved 4-5-1999.]
Chapter 98
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 195. Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 93-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-4
1:95

ARTICLE I
Use by Minors
[Adopted 4-13-1964 by Ord. No. 464, approved 4-13-1964]
§ 98-1. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for:
§ 98-2. Posting of prohibitions required.
Any licensee of any premises licensed as aforesaid for the sale of malt or
alcoholic beverages within the Borough of Middletown shall post a copy or a
summary of this article in a conspicuous and visible place on said premises.
§ 98-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $1,000 for each offense and costs of
prosecution, to be collected as other fines and costs are, by law, collectible,
and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be imprisoned in the
Dauphin County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. A minor (a person less than 21 years of age) to enter any premises in
the Borough of Middletown licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board for the sale of malt or alcoholic beverages for the purposes of
purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her any malt or
alcoholic beverage.
B. A minor to consume any malt or alcoholic beverage on premises
licensed as aforesaid for the sale of malt or alcoholic beverages or to
purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase for him or her
any malt or alcoholic beverage.
C. Any adult to give or deliver, in and upon any such licensed premises,
any malt or alcoholic beverage to a minor.
D. A minor to have in his possession or under his control any malt or
alcoholic beverage.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:97

ARTICLE II
Open Containers
[Adopted 2-14-1983 by Ord. No. 846, approved 2-14-1983]
§ 98-4. Possession or transport restricted. [Amended 7-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 1350, approved 7-9-2018]
Except as provided in § 98-4.1 below, no person shall transport or possess
any alcoholic beverage in or upon any street or parking area within the
Borough of Middletown or upon the property of another (unless that person
is, for that purpose, a guest, licensee or invitee of the owner thereof) in an
open container. No person shall consume, drink, furnish or use any alcoholic
beverage at such locations. Such locations include vehicles thereon, and the
proscribed possession extends to possession on the person or in a vehicle
(whether being operated, parked or otherwise there located) occupied, used
or under the control of such person.
§ 98-4.1. Lawful sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
[Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1350, approved 7-9-2018]
§ 98-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Includes but are not limited to malt or brewed
beverages and liquor, as defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code,52 also
A. A restaurant sidewalk dining area authorized pursuant to Chapter 235,
Streets and Sidewalks, Article IX, Sidewalk Obstructions, if duly
licensed for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, shall not be subject to Chapter 98,
Alcoholic Beverages, Article II, Open Containers, of the Code of the
Borough of Middletown and the restrictions set forth.
B. A special event wherein alcoholic beverages may be consumed from an
open container may be authorized at the discretion of the Borough
Council upon the application to and approval by the Borough Council of
a permit to hold a special event in or upon a street or parking area
within the Borough or upon the property of another open to public use
without violating this article. The special event wherein alcoholic
beverages may be consumed from an open container must comply with
all applicable laws and regulations of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board, including, but not limited to, the possession of any and all
licenses and permits required by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board for the special event. [Added 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1361,
approved 3-19-2019]
C. The restrictions on alcoholic beverages in open containers in vehicles
stated in § 98-4, above, are not waived. [Added 3-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 1361, approved 3-19-2019]
§ 98-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-5
1:99
potable distilled spirits and ethyl alcohol and wine, being used in the
broadest sense, irrespective of percentage of alcohol by volume.
CONTAINER — Includes bottle, can and any receptacle paralleling but not
limited to the Liquor Code, 47 P.S. § 1-102, definition of "container."
OPEN CONTAINER — One not (or no longer) securely capped, corked or
sealed, and includes a can or similar container which has been perforated
or a container on which the secure capping, sealing or corking (normally
provided by the manufacturer of alcoholic beverages) has been disturbed,
as would be exemplified by containers on which the cap has been loosened
or the cork displaced or the seal torn or mutilated.
PARKING AREAS — Includes but are not limited to municipal parking lots,
private parking lots open to the public, parking areas of private shopping
centers and parking areas of planned residential developments, housing for
the elderly and retirement villages.
STREET — Used in the broadest sense, includes cartway, gutter, curb,
sidewalk, grass and entire right-of-way, whether public or used, as in
Pineford Drive, by the public.
§ 98-6. Arrests.
Any police officer is authorized to arrest, on view and without warrant, any
person violating this article.
§ 98-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No.
972, approved 7-11-1988]
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 nor less than $50 and costs of
prosecution and, upon refusal to pay such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
52.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 98-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 98-7
1:100
ARTICLE III
Bring-Your-Own-Bottle (BYOB) Clubs
[Adopted 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1007, approved 9-10-1990]
§ 98-8. Purpose.
The Council of the Borough of Middletown hereby declares the purpose of
the within this article is to regulate the hours of operation of a BYOB club
in order to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods and protect
the right of its citizens to the quiet enjoyment of the same.
§ 98-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any and all beverages, including malt
beverages, which contain alcohol, liquor or such other intoxicating
substances as are further defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, 47 P.S.
§ 1-101 et seq.
BYOB CLUB — Any business facility, such as a dance hall, club or
association, not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, wherein
patrons 21 years of age and older may, after payment of any entry fee, cover
charge or membership fee, consume alcoholic beverages which said patrons
have carried onto the premises; also commonly referred to as "bring-yourown-
bottle clubs," provided that a facility which is rented for a limited
period of time, not to exceed 12 hours, by individual(s) or an organization
for the purpose of a private party in which alcoholic beverages are carried
onto the premises shall not be considered a "BYOB club" under the terms of
this article.
RESIDENCE — A building or structure wholly or partially used for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation by human occupants.
RESIDENCE ZONE — Those classes of residential zones specified in
Chapter 260, Zoning, of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of
Middletown.
§ 98-10. Restrictions. [Amended 6-3-1991 by Ord. No. 1017,
approved 6-3-1991]
A. It shall be unlawful to establish or maintain any BYOB club within 500
feet of any residence zone.
B. In any zone in which BYOB clubs are otherwise permitted, it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons who own, operate, lease, manage or
control a BYOB club to:
(1) Remain open and/or to transact business between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, of each day if said BYOB club is
located within 500 feet of a residence, school or hospital; or
§ 98-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-10
1:101
§ 98-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 98-12. Requirements.
Any and all BYOB clubs, as that term is defined in § 98-9 of this article, shall
comply with the following requirements:
§ 98-13. Permits.
(2) Conduct activities to which this article applies without possessing a
valid club permit.
A. In the event of any of the unlawful activities specified in § 98-10 of this
article is conducted by or in the name of a corporation, partnership,
joint venture, trust, firm or association, in addition to entity liability, the
officers, agents or principals of said corporation, partnership, joint
venture, trust, firm or association shall be deemed in violation of
§ 98-10, as well as the person or persons engaged in the unlawful
activity.
B. In addition to any monetary penalties involved, the Chief of Police shall
revoke the club permit required by § 98-12C upon conviction of any
unlawful activities specified in § 98-10.
C. The unlawful activities specified herein shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses for each and every day in which said activities are
conducted.
A. They shall obtain and carry broad-form general liability coverage,
$1,000,000 single limit per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed
with the Chief of Police.
B. They shall possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and the Borough of
Middletown Code Enforcement Officer and shall prominently display
said certificate as required.
C. They shall obtain a valid BYOB club permit pursuant to this article and
shall prominently display said permit as required.
D. They shall conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business
premises such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of the same.
A. Any person or persons desiring to operate a BYOB club shall file with
the Chief of Police an application for a BYOB club permit, which
application shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the BYOB club;
(2) A statement as to whether the business premises is leased or
owned by the BYOB club;
§ 98-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 98-13
1:102
§ 98-14. Additional penalties. [Amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 1096,
approved 2-3-1997]
Any person, persons or entity violating the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
nor less than $300 and costs of prosecution (to include cost of prosecution
and attorney fees related to prosecution of the matter) and, upon refusal
to pay such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
(3) The name and address of the lessor of the business premises, if
applicable;
(4) The nature of the ownership of the BYOB club, i.e., corporation,
partnership, joint venture or association;
(5) The names and addresses of the officers and/or agents of the BYOB
club;
(6) The names and addresses of any and all persons who possess an
ownership and/or financial interest in the BYOB club; and
(7) A notarized statement that the BYOB club complies with the
requirements of § 98-10 of this article.
B. The Chief of Police shall determine whether the BYOB club fully and
completely complies with the provisions and requirements of this
article within 10 days following the date on which the application is
received. If the Chief of Police determines that the applicant fully and
completely complies with the provisions hereof, he shall issue a BYOB
club permit; if the Chief of Police determines that the applicant does not
fully and completely comply with the provisions hereof, he shall deny
the issuance of a BYOB club permit and shall furnish written evidence
of the same to the applicant, together with the reason(s) for denial.
C. The club shall pay an administrative fee of $125 for a BYOB club permit
and $75 for each renewal thereof. Said BYOB club permit shall be
effective for a period of one year following the date of issuance,
provided that in the event the BYOB club fails to fully and completely
comply with the provisions hereof or is convicted of any unlawful
activities, as defined in § 98-10, during the term the BYOB club permit
is issued, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke the BYOB
club permit due to the BYOB club's lack of compliance. [Amended
4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1039, approved 4-5-1993]
§ 98-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-14
1:103
Chapter 101
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise by animals — See Ch. 185, Art. I.
Animals in parks — See Ch. 195.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 98-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 98-14
1:104
ARTICLE I
Control of Dogs
[Adopted 6-13-1955 by Ord. No. 342, approved 6-13-1955; amended
in its entirety 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1022, approved 9-9-1991]
§ 101-1. Running at large.
No owner, custodian or keeper of any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to
run at large in the Borough of Middletown, either upon the public streets
and highways of the Borough or upon the property of another.
§ 101-2. Borough park property.
Dogs are not permitted on any Borough park or recreational property. No
owner, custodian or keeper of any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to
enter or remain on any Borough park or recreational property.
§ 101-3. Noise and disturbances.
No owner, custodian or keeper of any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to
make any loud or harsh noise or disturbance which shall interfere with or
deprive the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person.
§ 101-3.1. Desecrations and nuisances.
§ 101-3.2. Inoculation with rabies vaccine required.
§ 101-3.3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine for the first offense of $25;
for the second offense, of $50; for the third offense, of $100; and for the
A. No owner, custodian or keeper of any dog shall suffer or permit such
dog to defile, befoul, corrupt or otherwise desecrate any sidewalk,
walkway or other property of another.
B. Every owner, custodian or keeper of any dog which defecates on any
sidewalk, public street, any highway or property of another shall
promptly clean up and remove all feces discharged and dispose of such
feces in a lawful and sanitary manner.
A. No owner, custodian or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog to enter
or remain in the Borough of Middletown unless such dog has been
inoculated with rabies shots.
B. Proof of such inoculation shall be presented to any police officer or
Borough Health Officer upon demand. No person shall be convicted of
violation of this subsection if he or she produces proof that the dog was
inoculated at the time of the demand, to the office of the Borough or the
issuing authority, within five days after the demand.
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-3.3
1:105
fourth offense, of $200; and for the fifth and each subsequent offense, of
$400, plus costs of prosecution. Each calendar day of 24 hours that such
violation is observed shall constitute a separate offense, but each calendar
year shall constitute a separate unit for determining the number of offenses
and the appropriate penalty, which shall in no event be less than $25, and,
in the event that successive proceedings are pending before the District
Justice at the time of imposing sentence in any given proceeding, he may
treat each notice of violation or further notice as prima facia evidence
that, with respect thereto, an offense has been committed, for the purpose
of determining an appropriate penalty designed to effectuate the intent
and purpose of this article. In default of payment of such fine and costs,
such person shall be committed, as said sentence shall duly provide, to the
Dauphin County Jail for a period of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 101-3.3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 101-3.3
1:106
ARTICLE II
Redemption of Impounded Animals
[Adopted 4-14-1969 by Ord. No. 547, approved 4-14-1969]
§ 101-4. Fee. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987]
Whoever shall own an animal impounded by the Borough in a kennel kept
for that purpose, said owners shall pay to the Borough the sum of $25
before the animal is released to the owner. The aforesaid payment shall be
in lieu of any other penalty or payment for the care and feeding of said
animal.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:107

ARTICLE III
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 1-21-1980 by Ord. No. 769, approved 2-18-1980]
§ 101-5. Keeping of certain animals restricted.
No animals other than household pets shall be kept or permitted to remain
on any premises or in any area of the Borough of Middletown,53 nor shall
any structures be erected or maintained for keeping three or more animals
that are more than six months old. Severability is intended as to the varied
applications and the several parts of this § 101-5.
§ 101-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall knowingly violate or who shall, after notice, persist in
violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties and
all of the provisions set forth in § 101-3.3 of this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 101-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-6
1:109

ARTICLE IV
Control of Other Animals
[Adopted 9-9-1991 by Section 2 of Ord. No. 1022, approved
9-9-1991]
§ 101-6.1. Running at large.
No owner, custodian or keeper of any animal shall suffer or permit such
animal to run at large in the Borough of Middletown, either upon the public
streets and highways of the Borough or upon the property of another.
§ 101-7. Borough park property.
Animals are not permitted on any Borough park or recreational property. No
owner, custodian or keeper of any animal shall suffer or permit such animal
to enter or remain on any Borough park or recreational property.
§ 101-8. Noise and disturbances.
No owner, custodian or keeper of any animal shall suffer or permit such
animal to make any loud or harsh noise or disturbance which shall interfere
with or deprive the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person.
§ 101-9. Desecration and nuisances.
§ 101-10. Cats to be inoculated with rabies vaccine.
§ 101-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine for the first offense of $25;
for the second offense, of $50; for the third offense, of $100; and for the
A. No owner, custodian or keeper of any animal shall suffer or permit such
animal to defile, befoul, corrupt or otherwise desecrate any sidewalk,
walkway or other property of another.
B. Every owner, custodian or keeper of any animal which defecates on any
sidewalk, public street, any highway or property of another shall
promptly clean up and remove all feces discharged and dispose of such
feces in a lawful and sanitary manner.
A. No owner, custodian or keeper of any cat shall permit such cat to enter
or remain in the Borough of Middletown unless such cat has been
inoculated with rabies shots.
B. Proof of such inoculation shall be presented to any police officer or
Borough Health Officer upon demand. No person shall be convicted of
violation of this subsection if he or she produces proof that the cat was
inoculated at the time of the demand, to the office of the Borough or the
issuing authority, within five days after the demand.
§ 101-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-11
1:111
fourth offense, of $200; and for the fifth and each subsequent offense, of
$400, plus costs of prosecution. Each calendar day of 24 hours that such
violation is observed shall constitute a separate offense, but each calendar
year shall constitute a separate unit for determining the number of offenses
and the appropriate penalty, which shall in no event be less than $25, and,
in the event that successive proceedings are pending before the District
Justice at the time of imposing sentence in any given proceeding, he may
treat each notice of violation or further notice as prima facia evidence
that, with respect thereto, an offense has been committed, for the purpose
of determining an appropriate penalty designed to effectuate the intent
and purpose of this article. In default of payment of such fine and costs,
such person shall be committed, as said sentence shall duly provide, to the
Dauphin County Jail for a period of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 101-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby
repealed.
§ 101-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 101-12
1:112
Chapter 105
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles in parks — See Ch. 195.
Skateboards, roller blades and scooters — See
Ch. 229.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 252.
§ 105-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Includes every device propelled by human power upon which
any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is over 20
inches in diameter.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, association or corporation.
§ 105-2. Reports of purchases and sales. [Amended 5-6-1985 by
Ord. No. 892, approved 5-6-1985]
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the Chief of Police of every
bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of
the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such
bicycle by name or make and the frame number thereof.
§ 105-3. Operation subject to traffic laws.
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of the traffic ordinances of this Borough applicable to the driver
of a vehicle,54 except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as
to those provisions of the ordinances which, by their nature, can have no
application.55
§ 105-4. Obedience to signals.
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic
signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 105-5. Operation and riding restrictions.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 252, Vehicles and Traffic.
55.Editor's Note: See also Part III, Ch. 35, Subchapter A of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3501 et seq.
§ 101-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:113
§ 105-6. Speed.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
§ 105-7. Riding to right; passing.
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near the
right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
§ 105-8. Yielding right-of-way.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
§ 105-9. Hitching to other vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
§ 105-10. Riding two abreast.
Persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadway set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.
§ 105-11. Carrying packages.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handlebars.
§ 105-12. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon a sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
A. A person operating a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride
the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry any other
person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat thereon, nor shall any person ride upon a bicycle other than as
above authorized.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
C. No person shall operate a bicycle at any time without keeping both
hands upon the handlebars.
§ 105-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 105-12
1:114
against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 105-13. Use of bicycle paths.
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
§ 105-14. Riding on sidewalks.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the Borough of
Middletown, Pennsylvania.
§ 105-15. Audible signaling devices.
No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet,
except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
§ 105-16. Brakes.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator
to make the braked wheel skid on a dry, level, clean pavement.
§ 105-17. Lights.
Every bicycle when in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front exhibiting a headlight visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to
the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear, except that an approved reflector meeting
the minimum requirements of the State Uniform Highway Traffic Act may
be used in lieu of a rear light.
§ 105-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
$10.
§ 105-19. License required. [Added 4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1039,
approved 4-5-1993]
No resident of the Borough of Middletown shall operate a bicycle without
first obtaining a bicycle license from the Borough Police Department. Said
license shall be a lifetime license. Fee for said license is $1.
§ 105-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-19
1:115
Chapter 108
BILLS FOR BOROUGH SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electric service — See Ch. 144.
Garbage collection — See Ch. 164.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Water — See Ch. 256.
§ 105-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 105-19
1:116
ARTICLE I
Collection
[Adopted 11-4-1985 by Ord. No. 901, approved 11-4-1985]
§ 108-1. Staggering of electric, refuse, water and sewer bills.
All bills for the collection of electric, refuse, water and sewer service
payments may be billed to the users of such services on a staggered basis
at the discretion of the Administrative Officer or other designated employee
of the Borough.
§ 108-2. Payment due date.
All bills for such services shall be due and payable within 15 days of the date
billed. Any payment that is delinquent after that period shall be subject to
the same penalties as are now provided for in the Code of the Borough of
Middletown.
§ 108-3. Restrictions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to allow for billing for such services
more frequently than is now provided for by the Code of the Borough of
Middletown.
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-3
1:117

ARTICLE II
Charge for Bad Checks
[Adopted 4-7-1986 by Ord. No. 909, approved 4-7-198656]
§ 108-4. Procedure upon receipt of bad checks.
Whenever the Borough or its designee has made a presentment of a check
or similar sight draft for the payment of money which has been dishonored
by the drawee, the Borough shall:
§ 108-5. Posting of regulation.
There shall be placed a sign, at least 12 inches by 12 inches, that may be
plainly seen in the area where payments are to be made to the Borough
for services and taxes, that there will be a service charge of $20 for bad
checks. If the amount allowed for such a service charge is increased, then
the Borough shall be allowed to increase the amount, and the sign shall be
amended to reflect that increase.
§ 108-6. Inclusion of notice in bills.
All bills for services or taxes sent out by the Borough shall contain a
provision that any check or sight draft for the payment of money for such
services or taxes which is dishonored is subject to a service charge. That
service charge shall be $20 or an amount which is specifically allowed by
law.
A. Re-present the check or similar sight draft to the drawee.
B. If the instrument is again dishonored by the drawee, the Borough or its
designee shall inform the drawer, either orally or in writing, of the
refusal to honor said instrument. If such notice is given in writing, it
shall be by first class mail.
C. The drawer shall be further notified that he or she shall be responsible
for lawful interest from the date of the second dishonor by the drawee,
and that he or she will be charged a service charge of $20 or such
amount as is duly allowed by law.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it take effect 1-1-1987.
§ 108-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-6
1:119
Chapter 113
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 113, Building Construction, consisting of Art. I,
Building Permits, adopted 12-9-1963 by Ord. No. 452, approved
12-9-1963, as amended, was repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1330.
See now Ch. 114, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 127, Code
Enforcement.]
Chapter 114
CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 127.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 155.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 114-1. Uniform Construction Code (UCC) adopted. [Amended
7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194, approved 7-11-200557]
§ 114-2. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of
Middletown shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined
by the Council of the Borough of Middletown from time to time by
resolution:
A. Pursuant to Ordinance No. 1177 of 2004, the Borough of Middletown
hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101
et seq., and its regulations, as amended from time to time. The Uniform
Construction Code, as contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein
and shall be referenced as the "Municipal Building Code of the Borough
of Middletown." [Amended 10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 1226, approved
10-1-2007; 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1330, approved 11-1-2016]
B. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Middletown not governed by the code shall remain in full force and
effect.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Middletown to
serve as the Building Code Official to act on behalf of the Borough of
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 113-16 through 113-19 as
§§ 114-1 through 114-4, respectively.
§ 108-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 114-2
1:120
§ 114-3. Appeals. [Amended 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1330, approved
11-1-2016]
The Joint Board of Appeals operated by the West Shore Council of
Governments (the "JBA-WSCOG"), or its successors, shall be the appellate
body for the purposes of this chapter. Should the JBA-WSCOG or its
successors become defunct and without a successor, Borough Council shall
establish a Board of Appeals by resolution in conformity with the
requirements of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time
to time.
§ 114-4. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Middletown for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by the Council of the Borough of Middletown by resolution.
§ 114-5. Code review reimbursement. [Added 12-3-2007 by Ord. No.
1228, approved 12-3-2007; amended 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1330,
approved 11-1-2016]
Any costs associated with code review by the Borough, including thirdparty
review of plans, proposals, specifications, or documents, shall be
reimbursed to the Borough, by applicants; applicant being the party that
executes the documents being submitted. The Building Code Official may
ask for reasonable funds to be deposited at the time of application, to be
held in escrow, in order that expenses associated with code review are
properly reimbursed.
Middletown; [Amended 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1330, approved
11-1-2016]
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Middletown;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Borough of
Middletown;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 114-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-5
1:121
Chapter 120
CEMETERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 120-1. Use of land for cemetery purposes.
Hereafter, it shall not be lawful for any person or persons, firm, association,
organization or corporation to lay out and use any ground within the
Borough limits as a cemetery or burying ground, provided that existing
cemeteries may be authorized to extend their grounds within the Borough
and to use such extended grounds for burial purposes if special authority
therefor is granted by resolution.
§ 120-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No.
287, approved 2-9-1953; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved 7-11-1988]
Any person or persons, firm, association, organization or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation of this chapter shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 127
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Police Department — See Ch. 60.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
§ 114-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 120-2
1:122
ARTICLE I
Office of Code Enforcement
§ 127-1. Creation; responsibility. [Amended 9-7-2004 by Ord. No.
1183, approved 9-7-2004; 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1331, approved
11-1-2016]
There is hereby created by the Borough Council an office within the
Department of Administration to be known as the "Office of Code
Enforcement." Said Office shall have the responsibility for administering
and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and of those other codes and/
or ordinances of the Borough of Middletown (herein referred to as the
"applicable codes and ordinances") which designate said Office of Code
Enforcement as their official administration and enforcement agency. This
Chapter 127 of the Code shall not apply to Chapter 114 (Construction Code,
Uniform) or Chapter 210 (Property Maintenance) of the Code. See Chapter
114 or Chapter 210, respectively, for the relevant enforcement provisions of
those chapters.
§ 127-2. Borough Engineer; Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended
9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1183, approved 9-7-2004]
The Borough Manager shall appoint a Code Enforcement Officer, who shall
be in charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of
Middletown. The Code Enforcement Officer shall supervise such other
employees or assistants as shall be necessary for the administration and
execution of the responsibilities of said Office. The Borough Engineer, as
appointed by resolution of Borough Council, may be designated as Code
Enforcement Officer by Borough Council.58
§ 127-3. Relief from personal liability.
The Code Enforcement Officer or other official or employee shall not, while
acting for the municipality, render himself liable personally because of any
act or omission as required or permitted in the discharge of his official
duties. Any suit instituted against such Code Enforcement Officer, official or
employee because of any act performed by him in the lawful discharge of
his duties shall be defended by the Solicitor of the municipality, and in no
case will said officer, official or employee be liable for costs in any action,
suit or proceeding.
§ 127-4. Official records.
An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the Office
of Code Enforcement, and all such records shall be open to the public
for inspection at all appropriate times, except that no individual, owner,
operator, occupant or other person shall be subject to unwarranted invasion
of privacy, and except that all evidence or information obtained in the
58.Editor's Note: Original Section 1.3, Fire Chief, which followed this section, was repealed
12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 765, approved 12-17-1979.
§ 127-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-4
1:123
course of any inspection shall be considered privileged information and
shall be kept confidential. Such evidence or information shall not be
disclosed except as may be necessary, in the judgment of the Code
Enforcement Officer, for the proper and effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and shall not otherwise be
made public without the consent of the owner, occupant, operator or other
person in charge of the unit, structure or premises inspected.
§ 127-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-4
1:124
ARTICLE II
Powers and Duties of Code Enforcement Officer
§ 127-5. Enforcement of codes and ordinances.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce and administer all of the
provisions of this chapter and of those other applicable codes and
ordinances which establish the Office of Code Enforcement as their official
administration and enforcement agency.
§ 127-6. General duties.
The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include the receipt of
applications; the issuance of permits, notices, certificates and orders; the
making of inspections to determine conformance with applicable codes
and ordinances; the undertaking of systematic inspection programs; the
undertaking of research and investigations; the recommendation of
appropriate administrative rules for review and adoption by the Code
Hearing Board; the keeping of records; the issuance of written annual
reports; and such other activities as may be required.
§ 127-7. Right of entry.
A. In the discharge of his duties, the Code Enforcement Officer or his
authorized representative, upon showing proper identification where
requested, is hereby authorized to enter and inspect, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., any structure or premises in the
municipality to enforce the provisions of this chapter and of those other
applicable codes and ordinances. The assistance and cooperation of all
other municipal officials, including Police and Fire Department
personnel, shall be available to the Code Enforcement Officer to assist
in the performance of his duties and in securing right-of-entry.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer and the owner, operator or occupant or
other person in charge of any structure or premises subject to the
provisions of this chapter may agree to an inspection by appointment at
a mutually convenient time.
C. The owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge of any
structure or premises shall give the Code Enforcement Officer entry
and free access thereto and to every part of the structure or to the
premises surrounding the structure.
D. If any owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge fails or
refuses to permit entry and free access to the structure or premises
under his control, or to any part thereof, with respect to any authorized
inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the inspection, file a complaint and petition
for and obtain an order directing compliance with the inspection
requirements of this chapter from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Any person who refuses to comply with such an order issued pursuant
§ 127-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-7
1:125
to this section shall be subject to such penalties as may be authorized
by law for violation of a court order.
§ 127-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-7
1:126
ARTICLE III
Permits, Certificates and Fees
§ 127-8. Application for permit.
§ 127-9. Action on application.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall examine said application to determine
compliance with those other applicable codes and ordinances of the
municipality and shall, within 30 days after filing, either approve or reject
said application. If said application is rejected, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall inform the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for such
rejection.
§ 127-10. Fees. [Last amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1178, approved
5-3-2004]
The Borough Council shall establish fees and charges in a fee schedule
adopted by resolution.
§ 127-11. (Reserved)59
§ 127-12. Certificates. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987; 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 1105, approved 3-2-1998;
7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194, approved 7-11-2005]
A. An application for a permit shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of those applicable codes and ordinances which the Office of
Code Enforcement has the responsibility to administer. Said application
shall be submitted in such form as may be prescribed by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by any required fee. The
responsibility for applying and obtaining a required permit in
accordance with various ordinances rests solely with the person/
persons doing the work.
B. Borough, township, county, state and federal governments, volunteer
fire companies, churches and schools (public and private) are excluded
from paying any fees as prescribed by this chapter. The above agencies
are required to meet the zoning requirements of the municipality and
must obtain building, plumbing and electrical permits before starting
construction. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987]
A. Business certificate.
(1) Any person or entity establishing a business location within the
Borough of Middletown shall obtain a business certificate from the
Borough for each location prior to the opening of the business.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 127-11, Term of permit; extensions, was repealed 7-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 1194, approved 7-11-2005.
§ 127-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-12
1:127
(2) An application for a business location shall be made to the Borough
and shall be accompanied by a fee ("application fee") as established
by the Borough Manager. The application shall include:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owners of the business.
(c) The trade name of the business.
(d) The address of the business.
(e) The nature of the business.
(f) Name, address and telephone number of two individuals to be
contacted in case of emergency.
(g) Fire alarm and/or security system company name, address and
phone number (if applicable).
(3) Provided that all applicable requirements are met, the business
certificate shall be issued within 30 days after receipt of a
completed application and application fee. The business certificate
shall bear a certificate number, date and location of the business.
The business certificate shall be prominently displayed at the
business location.
(4) Any person or entity establishing a business location within the
Borough of Middletown that fails to obtain a business certificate or
conducts a type of business different from that identified in the
application for business certificate shall violate this subsection.
(5) Any person or entity relocating an existing business within the
Borough of Middletown shall obtain and file a business certificate
application within five days of the date of relocation, in accordance
with the provisions above. If such person or entity relocating an
existing business within the Borough of Middletown fails to file a
business certificate application, then such person or entity shall
violate this subsection.
(6) Changes in the information provided in the application for business
certificate shall, within 30 days of the date of change, be reported
to the Borough.
(7) Within five days of notification of violation of this subsection, the
person or entity notified shall obtain and file a business certificate
application with the Borough. If the person or entity fails to file a
business certificate application within the five-day period following
notification by the Borough, such person or entity shall be fined $25
a month for every month that the person or entity fails to file a
business certificate application with the Borough.
§ 127-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-12
1:128
B. Other certificates. Any other permits, certificates or licenses, as
required by the applicable codes and ordinances, shall be obtained by
the applicant in accordance with the provisions of said applicable codes
and ordinances. Application for such permits, certificates or licenses
shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 127-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-12
1:129

ARTICLE IV
Violations
§ 127-13. Procedure in case of violations.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of the other applicable codes and ordinances or
of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, he shall proceed as
follows:
§ 127-14. Violations and penalties.
A. Serve notice, in writing, of the alleged violation, which shall be signed
by the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative. Said
notice shall be served personally to the responsible owner, occupant,
operator or other person in charge; or served by registered mail with a
return receipt requested or, as a permissible substitute for such
registered mail, served by certified mail, return receipt requested; or
where such responsible person in charge cannot be found, service may
be made by posting a notice in or about the structure or premises or by
publishing such notice in a newspaper of general circulation for a
period of three consecutive days; or served by any other method
authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Amended 10-11-1982 by Ord. No. 835, approved 10-11-1982]
B. Said notice shall include a statement of the reasons why the notice is
being issued, the sections of the code and/or ordinances which have
been violated and the remedial actions required.
C. Said notice shall allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 120 days, for
the initiation and correction of the violation alleged or of the remedial
actions required, except where emergency conditions exist which
require immediate corrective action.
D. Said notice shall contain a statement indicating that the notice will
become an order if no request and approval for an extension of time is
made to the Code Enforcement Officer or if no petition for an appeal or
hearing is requested before the Code Hearing Board within 10 days
from the receipt of said notice.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant a request for a reasonable
extension of time where he has evidence to believe that the responsible
person is attempting to remove the alleged violation. However, no such
extension of time may exceed a period of 90 days unless authorized by
the Code Hearing Board upon appeal of the responsible owner,
operator, occupant or other person in charge.
A. Any person who fails to correct a violation or institute a remedial action
as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer or who violates a provision
or fails to comply with any requirements of this chapter or of any of the
§ 127-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-14
1:131
§ 127-15. (Reserved)60
other applicable codes or ordinances shall be subject, for each
violation, to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; and each day's failure
to comply with any such provision or requirement or any such order
shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No.
972, approved 7-11-1988]
B. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Solicitor representing the municipality from initiating, and he is hereby
ordered to initiate appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in
equity to effect the purposes of this chapter.
60.Editor's Note: Former § 127-15, Dangerous or unsafe structures, dwellings unfit for human
habitation, as amended, was repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1330, approved 11-1-2016.
§ 127-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-15
1:132
ARTICLE V
Variances and Appeals
§ 127-16. Board of Appeals. [Amended 8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 1195,
approved 8-1-2005; 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1331, approved
11-1-2016]
For purposes of this chapter, all chapters to which this chapter applies, and
any reference to the Code Hearing Board within the Code, the Council of
the Borough of Middletown shall act as the Code Hearing Board and be the
appellate body.
§ 127-17. Powers and duties of Code Hearing Board.
The Code Hearing Board shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 127-18. Requests for appeals or variances; fees.
A. Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer or on request of any municipal official, the Code
Hearing Board shall decide any questions involving the interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or of those other applicable codes and
ordinances.
B. Variances. The Code Hearing Board may grant a variance from the
strict application of this chapter or of those other applicable codes.
Such variances may be granted only in those cases which would result
in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and where the public
health and safety shall not be jeopardized.
C. Decide appeals. The Code Hearing Board shall hear all appeals made to
it and, depending on its findings, shall decide whether such appeals
shall be granted.
A. Any person requesting a variance or aggrieved by a decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer or by any other employee or official charged
with the administration and enforcement of this chapter and of those
other applicable codes or ordinances may take an appeal to the Code
Hearing Board. All appeals shall be made in writing, stating the
grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be transmitted to the
Office of Code Enforcement. An appeal must be taken within 10 days of
the action or of the receipt of written notice of any decision or ruling
which is being appealed.
B. The fee for an appeal to the Borough Council of the Borough of
Middletown or for a request for variance or similar relief, such as a
special exception, shall be established, from time to time, by resolution
of the Borough Council and shall be in keeping with the policies and
procedures established by the Borough Council. The fees shall be
collected by the Code Enforcement Office at the time of the filing of the
appeal or at the request for a variance or a special exception. The fee
§ 127-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-18
1:133
§ 127-19. Appeal and variance procedure.
§ 127-20. Appeal from decision of Board.
Any person or persons aggrieved by any final order or decision of the
Code Hearing Board may appeal such order or decision, within 30 days,
to the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with, as far as practicable,
the Rules of Civil Procedure of the Supreme Court regarding appeals from
administrative agencies.
§ 127-21. (Reserved)61
shall be used in each case by the Code Enforcement Office to cover
stenographic services and compensation to personnel required to
attend hearings on behalf of the Code Enforcement Office and to help
defray the other necessary and legal expenses of the Borough Council
pertaining to the appeal. No appeal shall be considered complete and in
compliance with the filing requirements unless and until the fee is paid
in full. [Added 6-13-1977 by Ord. No. 706, approved 6-13-1977;
amended 4-17-1978 by Ord. No. 726, approved 4-17-1978;
4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1039, approved 4-5-1993; 8-1-2005 by Ord.
No. 1195, approved 8-1-2005]
A. Public hearing. The Code Hearing Board shall meet and conduct a
hearing within 30 days of the receipt of an appeal or a request for a
variance. All hearings shall be public, and all persons whose interest
may be affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A record
shall be kept of all evidence and testimony presented at the hearing.
B. Decision of the Board. All decisions of the Board shall be in writing, and
a copy of each decision shall be sent to the applicant and to the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Hearing Board shall also retain in its
files a copy of each decision, which files shall be available for inspection
by the public. Each decision shall set forth fully the reasons for the
decision of the Code Hearing Board and the findings of fact on which
the decision was based. The Code Hearing Board shall make an order
on its decision, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall take immediate
action to carry out said order.
C. The Borough Council of the Borough of Middletown may, from time to
time, adopt policies and procedures necessary for the proper
administration of the code appeal and code variance process. [Added
8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 1195, approved 8-1-2005]
61.Editor's Note: Former § 127-21, Reports by Code Hearing Board, was repealed 11-1-2016
by Ord. No. 1331, approved 11-1-2016.
§ 127-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-21
1:134
ARTICLE VI
Interpretation; Title
§ 127-22. Interpretation.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any
cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any act or ordinance
repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired
or affected by this chapter.
§ 127-23. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Code Enforcement
Ordinance of Middletown."
§ 127-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-23
1:135
Chapter 132
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 179.
Hours of park use — See Ch. 195.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 132-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Ordinance."
§ 132-2. Purposes and findings.
This is an updating of the Borough Curfew Ordinance of 1943 prescribing,
in accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations for the
conduct of minors on streets at night, effectively enforced, taught in the
homes, internalized and adhered to for generations, all for the good of
minors, for the furtherance of family responsibility and for the public good,
safety and welfare.
A. The Council finds that the curfew meets a very real local need, has
been, over the years, a significant factor in minimizing juvenile
delinquency and should be updated and amplified in the light of
Middletown's local situation and facts, including the following.
Middletown, the oldest community in (and antedating) Dauphin County,
with clearly defined boundaries at the confluence of the Susquehanna
River and Swatara Creek to its south and east and crossed at the north
by the Pennsylvania Turnpike, has a compact built up area largely
within a mile, and much of it within a half mile, of its Police Station at
the 60 West Emaus Street Borough offices. It has, near its Police
Station, a small central business district and a few manufacturing
establishments. It is a residential community in an area traditionally
classified as Pennsylvania Dutch. After 9:00 p.m. in this quiet
community, as its people say, the sidewalks are rolled up. This
community sense of the proper time for cessation of outdoor activities
by minors on the streets is reflected in the curfew hours declared by
this chapter, which take into consideration also the danger hours for
nocturnal crime and for accumulations of minors with potential risks
incident to immaturity.
B. The Council finds that compact Middletown is not overcrowded.
Population density, as reflected in the Borough Comprehensive Plan,
varies by neighborhoods from 43.7 per acre to 35 to 18.4 persons per
acre. The total area is 1,304.7 acres; streets occupy 228.8 acres, 163.8
acres are devoted to public and semipublic uses, residential land use
predominates and single-family dwellings occupy the largest portion of
§ 127-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 132-2
1:136
§ 132-3. Definitions.
the residential area. The population density is 30 persons per acre in
that portion of the Second Ward in eastern Middletown south of East
Main Street, overlooking the Swatara Creek, now known as the Village
of Pineford, a fifty-acre tract which the United States Government had
acquired, while still undeveloped, by eminent domain proceedings in
1941; this unique fifty-acre tract is a planned residential development,
with high-rise apartments, all owned by one firm, providing ample open
spaces. Adequate indoor living space permits minors in Middletown to
healthfully occupy their time. Commercial recreational facilities (one
movie) are almost nonexistent, and there is little or nothing for minors
to do outdoors, but roam the streets, after the curfew hours which this
chapter declares. [Amended 8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 863, approved
8-8-1983]
C. The Council finds that there are 2,841 minors, the 1970 census figure
for persons under 18 years of age, residing in Middletown. There are
fewer than 200 minors for each school grade. Middletown has three
elementary schools, one in each of its three wards, one junior high
school for Grades 7 and 8 in the central Second Ward, and one area
high school in Lower Swatara Township which adjoins Middletown on
the west and north. The comparatively few minors who reside in the
Village of Pineford include 32 in high school and (attending the
following schools nearby in the same Second Ward) 25 in junior high
and 112 in elementary school.
D. The Council further finds that the Middletown population (1970 census)
is 9,080. There are 3,059 households (averaging two and 2.96 persons
per household) and as many heads of households. In 2,069 households
there are husband and wife. Of the 2,841 minors, 2,686 are classified in
the 1970 census as "own child" of the head of the household in which
they reside. Middletown is a stable family community. Parental
responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the norm; legal
sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had a demonstrated
effectiveness over the years; as parental control increases, the
likelihood of juvenile delinquency decreases; and there is a continuing
need for the nocturnal curfew for minors, which has achieved and will
continue to achieve, under local conditions, the purposes hereinbefore
stated.
A. For the purposes of the Curfew Ordinance, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, with administrative offices at 60 West Emaus Street,
Middletown, Pennsylvania 17057.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 or, in equivalent phrasing
often herein employed, any person 17 or fewer years of age.
§ 132-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:137
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor:
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons, in which any minor involved would not
be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes, such as mere
passage or going home. To implement that thought with additional
precision and precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined
in § 132-5. More and more exceptions become available with increasing
years as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulation which
is intended by use of the meaningful phrase "be or remain" found
constitutional in Baker v. Borough of Steelton, 17 Dauph. 17
(1912).[Amended 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 701, approved 5-9-1977]
STREET — A way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk
thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal rightof-
way, including but not limited to the cartway of traffic lanes, the
curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots
or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The
term "street" also applies, for curfew purposes, to ways the public is
privileged to use over private property so long as the owner permits,
including sidewalks and grassplots similarly open at the time to public
use, and to parking areas of any type (residential, municipal or
commercial) open to public use or from such "street" or any type of
street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what it is called or
formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise, or
whether it is maintained by the Borough and irrespective of whether
it is open to the use of the public as a matter of right.[Amended
8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 863, approved 8-8-1983]
TIME OF NIGHT — Based upon the prevailing standard of time,
whether Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time,
generally observed at that hour by the public in the Borough, prima
facie the time then observed in the Borough administrative offices and
Police Station.
YEAR OF AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth,
to (but not including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth
birthday, making it clear that 17 or fewer years of age is herein treated
as equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years of age," the latter phrase in
practice, unfortunately, having confused a number of persons into the
mistaken thought that eighteen-year olds might be involved. Similarly,
for example, 11 or fewer years of age means "under 12 years of age."
(1) As a natural or adoptive parent;
(2) As a legal guardian;
(3) As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of
court.
(4)
§ 132-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 132-3
1:138
§ 132-4. Curfew for minors established.
It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or fewer years of age (under 18) to be
or remain in or upon the streets within the Borough of Middletown at night
during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
§ 132-5. Exceptions.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and
words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. At 10:00 p.m. for minors 11 or fewer years of age.
B. At 10:30 p.m. for minors 12 years or 13 years of age.
C. At 11:00 p.m. for minors 14 or more years of age.
A. In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a street within the
Borough during the nocturnal hours for which § 132-4 is intended to
provide the maximum limits of regulation (and a clear general guide for
minors, their parents and their fellow citizens) shall not, however, be
considered in violation of the Curfew Ordinance: [Amended 5-9-1977
by Ord. No. 701, approved 5-9-1977; 8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 863,
approved 8-8-1983]
(1) When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
(2) When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such
minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a
designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.
(3) When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom
of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the
bona fides of such exercise by first delivering to communications
center personnel at the Borough Municipal Building at 60 West
Emaus Street, where and by whom high priority messages to the
Mayor are regularly received, a written communication, signed by
such minor and countersigned, if practicable, by a parent of such
minor, with their home address and telephone number, addressed
to the Mayor of the Borough, specifying when, where and in what
manner said minor will be on the streets at night (during hours
when the Curfew Ordinance is otherwise applicable to said minor)
in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
communication.
(4) In case of reasonable necessity, but only after such minor's parent
has communicated to the Borough Police Station personnel the
facts establishing such reasonable necessity, relating to specified
streets at a designated time for a described purpose, including
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:139
points of origin and destination. A copy of such communication, or
of the police record thereof, duly certified by the Chief of Police to
be correct, with an appropriate notation of the time it was received
and of the names and address of such parent and minor, shall be
admissible evidence.
(5) When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not
communicating an objection to the police officer.
(6) When returning home, by a direct route from (and within 30
minutes of the termination of) a school activity or an activity of a
religious or other voluntary association of which prior notice,
indicating the place and probable time of termination, has been
given in writing to and duly filed for immediate reference by the
Chief of Police or the officer assigned by him on duty at the Police
Station, thus encouraging (here as in other exceptional situations)
conduct on the part of minors involved in such activities and
striking a fair balance for any somewhat conflicting interests.
(7) When authorized, by special permit from the Mayor, carried on the
person of the minor thus authorized, as follows. When necessary
nighttime activities of a minor may be inadequately provided for by
other provisions of this chapter, then recourse may be had to the
Mayor of the Borough, either for a regulation as provided in
Subsection A(8) or for a special permit as the circumstances
warrant. Upon the Mayor's finding of necessity for the use of the
streets to the extent warranted by a written application (as
judicially approved in People v. Walton, 161 P.2d 498, 502-503, Cal.
App. 1945), signed by a minor and by a parent of such minor, if
feasible, stating the name, age and address of such minor; the
name, address and telephone number of a parent thereof; the
height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and other physical
characteristics of such minor; the necessity which requires such
minor to remain upon the streets during the curfew hours
otherwise applicable; and the street or route and the beginning and
ending of the period of time involved by date and hour, the Mayor
may grant a permit, in writing, for the use by such minor of such
streets at such hours as, in the Mayor's opinion, may reasonably be
necessary. In an emergency, this may be handled by telephone or
other effective communication, with a corresponding record being
made contemporaneously, either to the Mayor or, if unavailable, to
the police officer authorized by the Mayor to act on his behalf in an
emergency at the Police Station.
(8) When authorized, by regulation issued by the Mayor, in other
similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted
to necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily
be dealt with on an individual special permit basis. Normally such
regulation by the Mayor permitting use of the streets should be
issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity
§ 132-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 132-5
1:140
through news media and through other agencies such as the
schools and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the
streets permitted, the period of time involved, not to extend more
than 30 minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity,
and the reason for finding that such regulation is reasonably
necessary and is consistent with the purposes of this Curfew
Ordinance.
(9) When the minor carries a certified card of employment, renewable
each calendar month when the current facts so warrant, dated or
reissued not more than 45 days previously, signed by the Chief of
Police, and briefly identifying the minor, the addresses of his home
and of his place of employment and his hours of employment.
(10) When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. From excess of caution, this clearly
exempts bona fide interstate movement through Middletown,
particularly on normal routes such as the Pennsylvania Turnpike,
Route 230 (Main Street), Vine Street to connect with Route 283,
Route 441 or, at times, Ann Street and the Wilson Street bridge.
This also exempts interstate travel beginning or ending in
Middletown.
(11) When the minor is 17 years of age, if and when the Mayor shall
have determined, by formal rule first reported to the Borough
Council, spread upon its minutes and so reported in the press,
finding the facts as to the extent (minimal) of juvenile delinquency
in such age group permitting such rule, currently, in the best
interest of said minors and of the Borough, then the Mayor, by such
formal rule, covering a period of time designated therein or until
recision thereof, not exceeding one year from the date thereof, may
take appropriate action excepting designated minors, minors in a
defined group or area or all minors (as the current facts may
warrant) 17 years of age at the date or attaining 17 years of age
during the period that such formal rule is and remains in effect.
B. Each of the foregoing exceptions and their several limitations, such as
provisions for notification, are severable, as hereinafter provided but
here reemphasized; and additional, also severable, exceptions,
broadening with the progress toward maturity of minors enrolled
respectively in elementary, junior high and high schools, will be
considered by the Council as warranted by future experience
illuminated by the views of student government associations; school
personnel; citizens; associations; ward, precinct and neighborhood
spokesmen; parents; officers; and persons in authority concerned
positively with minors as well as with juvenile delinquency.
§ 132-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-6
1:141
§ 132-6. Parental responsibility. [Amended 8-8-1983 by Ord. No.
863, approved 8-8-1983]
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain
upon any street within the Borough under circumstances not constituting an
exception to or otherwise beyond the scope of the Curfew Ordinance. The
term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's
legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless
parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility
through an objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
minor.
§ 132-7. Police procedures.
A. A policeman of the Borough, upon finding or having attention called to
any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of the Curfew
Ordinance, normally shall take the minor to the Borough Police Station,
where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor,
whereupon they shall be interrogated. This is intended to permit
ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to
centralize responsibility in the Sergeant there and then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and
recording, thus making available experienced supervisory personnel,
the best of facilities and access to information and records. In the
absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate, a policeman
on the street shall, in the first instance, use his best judgment in
determining age.
B. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide, inter alia, that the policeman may deliver to a parent
thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example a minor
of tender age near home whose identity and address may readily be
ascertained or are known.
C. In any event, such policeman shall, within 24 hours, file a written report
with the Chief of Police or shall participate, to the extent of the
information for which he is responsible, in the preparation, by himself
and the Sergeant involved in such case, and in the filing of such report
within 24 hours.
D. When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor
shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be
located or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be
released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that, in
accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile
authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative,
neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent, assume the
§ 132-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 132-7
1:142
§ 132-8. Violations and penalties.
Prevailing community standards and the real internalization thereof or
interpersonal sanctions therefor that, in practice, count for much, as to
when minors should be off the streets, reflected in this Curfew Ordinance,
are hereby undergirded with the following legal sanctions.
§ 132-9. Construal of provisions.
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance. If any provision, including inter alia any exception, part, phrase
or term or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held
invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby, and the validity of the Curfew Ordinance, in any and all
other respects, shall not be affected thereby. From excess of caution, the
Mayor is authorized to give advisory opinions, in writing or immediately
reduced to writing, which shall be binding and shall be adhered to by
responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival
of a parent.
E. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall, by
certified mail, send to a parent written notice of said violation, with a
warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the Curfew Ordinance, including enforcement of parental responsibility
and of applicable penalties.
A. If, after the warning notice pursuant to § 132-7 of a first violation by a
minor, a parent violates § 132-6 (in connection with a second violation
by said minor), this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For
such first parental offense, a parent shall be fined $25, and for each
subsequent offense by a parent, the fine shall be increased by an
additional $25 (e.g., $50 for the second, $75 for the third offense). The
District Justice, upon finding a parent guilty, shall sentence the parent
to pay such fine and the costs of prosecution and, upon refusal to pay
such fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the jail of Dauphin County for a
period not exceeding 10 days.
B. Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance more than three times shall be reported by the Mayor to a
society or organization whose purpose it is to take charge of
incorrigibles and delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken,
under the Juvenile Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq., before the juvenile
court for the treatment, supervision and rehabilitation of such minor.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943]
C. A like procedure before the juvenile authorities shall be followed in any
case where the imposing of a fine or fines upon a parent shall not be
effective or where, for any other reason, the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance cannot be made effective by the imposing of penalties under
this section.
§ 132-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-9
1:143
the police until the ordinance is amended in such respect, interpreting
terms, phrases, parts or any provisions. Normally such advisory opinions
shall be in response to good faith, signed letters, addressed to him at the
Borough administration building, questioning as ambiguous, as having a
potentially chilling effect on constitutional rights specifically invoked or as
otherwise invalid, in all three categories with respect to proposed conduct
definitely described. This administrative remedy must be exhausted prior
to presenting to any court a question in any of said three categories.
The Borough Council does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible
of execution or unreasonable. It is intended that the Curfew Ordinance
be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would
be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is intended and shall
be given. The Council does not intend to violate the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Constitution of the United States of
America.
§ 132-10. Continuing evaluation.
The Borough Council will continue its evaluation and updating of the
Curfew Ordinance.
A. Accordingly, there shall be compiled and informally reported to the
Borough Council through effective channels (such as the normal
monthly distribution by the Borough Manager and Borough Secretary
to each Councilman, the Mayor and the Borough Solicitor of noteworthy
material) all exceptional cases hereunder of reasonable necessity, the
notices of school and other activities, the Mayor's special permits and
the Mayor's regulations hereinbefore authorized, and the Mayor's
advisory opinions, for consideration by the appropriate committee and
by the Borough Council in further updating and continuing evaluation
of the Curfew Ordinance.
B. For the same reasons, as well as for the implementation beyond these
legal aspects of the basic purposes hereof, the Mayor and relevant
committees of the Borough Council, through their respective Chairmen,
in coordinated efforts, shall work with existing and may organize
voluntary groups and shall stimulate volunteer leadership in programs
of research and of action dealing constructively, on neighborhood and
local bases, with juvenile delinquency and the prevention, control or
containment thereof in all its ramifications and with practicable steps
toward the good life and a better life for minors 17 or fewer years of age
and with the working of the Curfew Ordinance, community-wise and in
individual cases, as one much needed legal tool toward that end as well
as for continuing present protection of minors and of other persons and
of property and other interests important to the welfare of the people of
the Borough of Middletown.
§ 132-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 132-10
1:144
Chapter 138
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 138-1. Location of head shops restricted. [Amended 4-4-2017 by
Ord. No. 1338, approved 4-21-2017]
This Chapter 138 shall not apply to the sale of electric cigarettes or "ecigarettes"
intended for smoking tobacco, an act commonly referred to as
"vaping." It shall be unlawful to establish or maintain any head shop within
500 feet of any area zoned for residential use.
§ 138-2. Definitions. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987; 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 1338, approved 4-21-2017]
As used in this Chapter 138, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEAD SHOP — An establishment which includes in its stock-in-trade, with
intent to deliver or sell for use with drugs or controlled substances, or
advertises drug paraphernalia intended for use with drugs, such as scales;
small spoons; sieves; gelatin capsules; hashish heads; water pipes intended
for use with marijuana, hashish, hashish oil or cocaine; roach clips; smoking
and carburetion masks; separating pins for use or intended for use in
cleaning marijuana pipes, cocaine vials, hypodermic syringes and needles;
or any other drug paraphernalia as such term is defined in 35 P.S.
§ 780-12.62 Notwithstanding the foregoing, a retail shop selling or
advertising the sale of electric cigarettes or "e-cigarettes" intended for
smoking tobacco, an act commonly referred to as "vaping," shall not be a
"head shop" merely because of such sales or advertisements.
§ 138-3. Violations and penalties.
A. When written notice has been served by the Mayor, acting through a
Borough policeman, of a violation of this chapter, upon the person in
charge of such head shop and/or upon the owner, lessee or occupant of
the establishment, premises, place or location, or agent thereof, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately to protect the compelling
public interest in the preservation of residential neighborhoods, to
prevent economic blight and to minimize opportunities for exposing
minors, schoolchildren and other susceptible persons to the deleterious
effects of drugs with accompanying adverse consequences to the
community.
62.Editor's Note: See now 35 P.S. § 780-102.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-3
1:145
Chapter 142
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 142, Electrical Standards, adopted 7-1-1996 by Ord. No.
1088, approved 7-1-1996, as amended, was repealed 11-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 1330. See now Ch. 114, Construction Codes, Uniform, and
Ch. 127, Code Enforcement.]
Chapter 144
ELECTRIC SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Staggering of electric bills — See Ch. 108,
Art. I.
Service charge for bad checks — See Ch. 108,
Art. II.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
§ 144-1. Responsibility for electrical connections. [Amended
11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979; 5-3-1993 by Ord.
No. 1040, approved 5-3-1993; 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1106, approved
6-1-1998; 12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 1201, approved 12-5-2005;
11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1258, approved 11-17-2009]
B. Any owner, lessee or occupant of such head shop in which such violation
exists and any person who knowingly commits, participates in or
permits any such violation shall, upon conviction before the District
Justice in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000 for each such violation (each day of continuance
thereof after such written notice constituting a separate violation) and
also the costs of prosecution and, upon refusal to pay such fine and
costs, to be imprisoned in the jail of Dauphin County for a period not
exceeding 30 days. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved 7-11-1988]
A. The Middletown Borough Council shall be the sole retail electric
regulatory authority for the municipality and all its retail electric
consumers.
B. The Middletown Borough Council determines it to be desirable that the
aggregation of power needs and demand response on behalf of its retail
customers, to be bid directly into the organized electric and ancillary
services markets administered by the regional transmission
organization that includes the municipality (or any successor
independent system operator or regional transmission organization), be
performed by the municipality or its authorized designee.
§ 138-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-1
1:146
C. Middletown Borough Council or its authorized designee is the sole
entity permitted to aggregate retail customers' power needs and
demand response and bid demand response on behalf of retail
customers of the municipality directly into any federally approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
organized electric markets.
D. Retail customers of Middletown's electric system desiring to bid their
demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric
markets may do so only by participating in the program established by
the Middletown Borough Council or its authorized designee.
E. Middletown Borough Council or its authorized designee is the sole
entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers
of the municipality directly into any Commission-approved independent
system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized
markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental
reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and
frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in
the Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional
transmission organization's tariff).
F. Retail customers of Middletown's electric system desiring to bid their
demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets
for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves,
reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency
response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the
Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional
transmission organization's tariff) may do so only by participating in the
program established by the Middletown Borough Council or its
authorized designee.
G. The Borough Manager, as general manager of the electricity system, is
authorized to propose any regulations necessary to implement this
section, which shall be adopted by Council.
H. The requirements for connections to the supply lines of the Borough are
established in the Borough of Middletown Electric Service and Meter
Installation Requirements, latest edition, as amended. The customer
shall conform to the requirements established therein.
I. Electrical service shall be required in all inhabited properties. Failure
to obtain or maintain electrical service in a property or apartment unit
while it is inhabited shall deem the property or apartment unit unfit for
human habitation and shall further render the structure or apartment
unit as dangerous and unsafe. As to apartment units, only the unit
without electric service shall be deemed unfit for human habitation. The
remaining units in the apartment structure that have electric service
shall not be affected. In such instances, in addition to other remedies
§ 144-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-1
1:147
§ 144-2. Financial responsibility for electrical installations.
[Amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 292, approved 2-9-1953;
11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979; 5-3-1993 by Ord.
No. 1040, approved 5-3-1993]
§ 144-3. Nonliability of Borough. [Amended 11-19-1979 by Ord. No.
762, approved 11-19-1979]
contained in this Chapter 144, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
comply with the provisions of Chapter 127.
J. A customer or developer that seeks to interconnect a generating system
to the Borough's electric system is required to complete an
Interconnection Application for Customer Generation on a form
provided by the Borough, as may be amended from time to time.
Customer-owned generation shall be subject to the requirements of the
Borough and comply with all applicable land use, zoning, planning,
electric tariff rules and regulations, applicable electric classification
and rates, insurance requirements set forth by Borough resolution, and
Borough Code rules and regulations. Customer-owned generation shall
be subject to the Borough of Middletown's Technical Requirements for
Customer-Owned Generation, as may be amended from time to time by
the Borough. [Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 1355, approved
11-7-2018]
A. The consumer, customer, owner or subscriber (and in any event not the
Borough) shall provide, own and maintain the service extensions, as
applicable, and all subsequent service equipment from the Borough's
service termination point with the exception of the meter and metering
transformers.
B. The consumer, customer, owner or subscriber (and in any event not the
Borough) shall pay for all inside work, including wiring, cutouts,
fixtures, sockets, lamps and any other devices which the consumer,
customer, owner or subscriber may choose to install.
C. If the Borough decides for whatever reason to modify or in any way to
alter the method of providing electrical service to an existing customer,
the customer shall bear all costs for the work required beyond the
service termination point unless the modification will solely benefit the
Borough or a third party.63
A. The Borough will use reasonable diligence in furnishing continuous
electric service, but the Borough shall not be liable for any loss, damage
or expense sustained by the customer caused by interruption,
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning payment for service conductors extending
beyond the one-hundred-foot maximum allowed by the Borough, and former Subsection E,
added 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1057, approved 10-3-1994, concerning reimbursement for
transformers larger than 50 kilovolt-amperes, were repealed 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1106,
approved 6-1-1998. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former
Subsection D as Subsection C.
§ 144-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-3
1:148
§ 144-4. Right of Borough to terminate supply. [Amended
11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979]
deficiency, variation or other failure of electric services caused by any
acts of God, public enemies, accidents, labor disputes, riots, wars,
orders or acts of civil or military authority, breakdowns of or damage
to equipment or facilities of the Borough or any cause other than gross
negligence or willful neglect on the part of the Borough.
B. The Borough may, without liability therefor, interrupt or suspend
service to any or all of its customers whenever, in its sole judgment,
such action is required to limit or prevent any actual or threatened
disturbance or instability on the system of the Borough or on any
interconnected system.
A. The Borough reserves the right to shut off the supply of electric service
for any of the following reasons:
(1) Repair, alteration or extension of the Borough's facilities.
(2) Unavoidable shortages or interruptions in the Borough's source of
supply.
(3) Fraudulent act or representation by the customer in the
procurement or use of electric service.
(4) Any disapproval by the Borough of the customer's equipment or
installation by virtue of its being or becoming defective or
otherwise unsafe or causing disturbances on other customer's
equipment.
(5) The customer's premises have been abandoned or are in such
condition as to create a hazard to service facilities or to persons on
or about such premises.
(6) Placement or maintenance by the customer of any building or
structure which, in the opinion of the Borough, constitutes a hazard
to service facilities or to persons on or about the premises.
(7) The customer's premises become flooded or are threatened with
flooding.
(8) Failure by the customer to maintain effective ground connection in
compliance with requirements of the code or the Borough Code
applicable at such time. [Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194,
approved 7-11-2005]
(9) Nonpayment of any bill, as herein provided.
(10) Violation or noncompliance by the customer with any rule or
regulation herein set forth.
§ 144-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-4
1:149
§ 144-5. Restrictions on Borough employees. [Amended 2-9-1953 by
Ord. No. 297, approved 2-9-1953]
Inspectors, agents and other Borough employees are hereby expressly
prohibited from demanding or accepting any compensation from consumers
or others for services rendered in connection with the electric system,
it being the intent of this section that all such employees shall be
compensated for such services solely by the salaries and/or wages paid
therefor by the Borough.
§ 144-6. Nontransferability of contracts; application for service.
[Amended 11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979;
9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 1270, approved 9-14-2010]
Contracts are not transferable. A nonrefundable connection fee of $75
shall be charged for all applications for service and connections except as
specified otherwise in §§ 144-4, 144-27 and 144-29 of this chapter.
§ 144-7. Failure to comply with regulations. [Amended 11-19-1979
by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979]
Any failure on the part of the subscriber to comply with this chapter of the
Code of the Borough of Middletown, including any amendments thereto at
any time made, shall annul the contract, and the Borough of Middletown
may thereupon, without further notice, terminate service and remove its
property from the premises.
§ 144-8. Due date for bills other than service bills. [Amended
11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979]
Removal bills, special bills or bills rendered on vacation of premises or to
persons discontinuing service must be paid on presentation.
(11) Whenever such action is necessary to protect the Borough from
fraud, abuse, liability or suit.
(12) Upon cancellation of contract.
B. When the service has been discontinued for any of said reasons other
than those in Subsection A(1) and (2), a charge of $40 for making the
disconnection and reconnection, payable before reconnection, will be
made. If the service has been discontinued for the reason specified in
Subsection A(9), the customer must pay all past due charges, plus
reconnection charges in accordance with § 144-27 of this chapter, prior
to reconnection of service. Prior to discontinuance of service, the
Borough will take such steps as may be reasonable to notify the
customer thereof. [Amended 6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1106, approved
6-1-1998]
§ 144-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-9
1:150
§ 144-9. Ownership of meters. [Added 7-11-1932]
Every electric meter heretofore installed or hereafter installed by the
Borough of Middletown on private property shall, at all times, remain the
absolute property of said Borough of Middletown, and said Borough shall
not lose title thereto by attaching the same to the real estate.
§ 144-10. Right of entry to remove meters. [Added 7-11-1932]
The Borough of Middletown shall, at all times, have the right of ingress,
egress and regress to and from the point on private real estate where such
meter may be located and shall further have the right to remove such meter
or meters at any time the proper Borough authorities may decide to remove
such meter or meters.
§ 144-11. Interference with equipment prohibited. [Added
4-8-1940]
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to willfully and intentionally interfere with or molest in
any way the wires or equipment of the Borough of Middletown over which
said Borough furnishes or intends to furnish electric current to any of its
consumers or to the streetlights operated by it.
§ 144-12. Interference with Borough employees prohibited. [Added
4-8-1940; amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 308, approved 2-9-1953;
11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979]
From and after the passage of this chapter, any employee of the Borough of
Middletown, duly employed for such purpose, shall have the right to enter
upon or into any property located in the Borough of Middletown, either
commercial or residential, for the purpose of reading the Borough's electric
meter or to inspect or remove the same or to inspect the wiring in such
property or any of the Borough's equipment at any and all reasonable times.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or persons to interfere
in any way with any employee of the Borough while in the performance of
his duties as such employee.
§ 144-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-8-1940; amended
11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979; 4-6-1987 by Ord.
No. 943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
Any person who shall violate any of the rules and regulations or provisions
of this chapter of the Code of the Borough of Middletown, including the
provisions of § 144-12 above, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor greater than $1,000, plus court costs
or costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 144-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-14
1:151
§ 144-14. Inspection of wiring prior to service. [Added 6-13-1949;
amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
property owner or tenant to have electric current turned on or used in any
new building or any remodeled building in the Borough of Middletown used
for residential or business purposes unless and until all the electric wiring
in such new or remodeled building shall first have been inspected and
approved, in writing, by a certified electrical inspection agency and proof
of such inspection and approval shall have been exhibited to the authorized
representative of the Borough.
§ 144-15. Certificate of approval required. [Added 7-13-1949;
amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
The authorized representative of the Borough and his workmen and
employees shall not at any time hereafter cut into any new or remodeled
building or buildings in the Borough of Middletown for the purpose of
furnishing electric current to such building or buildings until a proper
certificate of approval of the wiring in such new or remodeled building
or buildings issued by a certified electrical inspection agency shall first
have been exhibited to the authorized representative of the Borough. All
temporary services must be properly grounded before service installation
shall be made to any building.
§ 144-16. Insulation requirements. [Added 1-19-1981 by Ord. No.
786, approved 1-19-1981; amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194, approved
7-11-2005]
New residential buildings and commercial buildings, and additions thereto
and hereafter, that utilize electric space heating shall conform to the code
adopted in § 114-1 herein and shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 144-17. Standards for electrical wiring. [Added 6-13-1949]
The fire insurance standards for electric wiring approved by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are hereby adopted as the requirements of
the Borough of Middletown as to safety.
§ 144-18. Unlawful to bypass meter. [Added 6-13-1949; amended
11-19-1979 by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979]
A. Any person installing an electric connection or contrivance in his or her
property or properties used by such person or who knowingly uses such
electric connection or contrivance for the purpose of procuring electric
current without registering the same on the meter shall be liable to a
penalty as hereinafter provided.
§ 144-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-18
1:152
§ 144-19. Deposits for electric service. [Added 7-11-1932; last
amended 12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 1201, approved 12-5-2005]
B. For the purpose of determining whether any person is receiving electric
current from the Borough of Middletown which does not pass through
an electric meter, the authorized representative of the Borough shall
have and is hereby given authority to enter into and upon any property
or properties of the Borough of Middletown, and any property owner or
tenant who refuses to permit the authorized representative of the
Borough to enter into and upon any premises in the Borough of
Middletown for said purpose shall be subject to the penalty provided in
§ 144-13 of this chapter. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987]
A. Electric service customers shall be required to make a security deposit
with the Borough in order to obtain electric service as outlined in this
§ 144-19 under conditions outlined herein. This deposit is designed to
guarantee against a default in payment by an electric customer. A
security deposit, if required, shall not be considered as being made in
lieu of a regular required payment.
B. The following residential customers are required to make a security
deposit with the Borough:
(1) New residential customers;
(2) Previous residential customers who have not had an electric
service account with the Borough for 30 days or more;
(3) Existing residential customers who have bad pay history with the
Borough. For purposes of this § 144-19, "bad pay history" is defined
as any one of the following:
(a) A residential customer who has had a delinquent electric
account balance in excess of $50 for more than 90 days over
the course of the account history;
(b) A residential customer who has presented the Borough with at
least two checks, electronic fund transfers, or other methods of
payment which were not honored by the customer's bank or
financial institution; or
(c) A residential customer who has had his or her service
terminated for nonpayment.
C. All commercial customers shall be required to place a security deposit
with the Borough.
D. All security deposits shall be held separate from other funds of the
Borough, and shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per annum.
E. Security deposits may be returned to a residential customer:
§ 144-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-19
1:153
(1) After 12 months, provided that the customer does not have a bad
pay history or has made no delinquent payments or insufficient
funds payments during the previous 12 months; or
(2) Following assignment of the account to a successor and payment of
the final electric bill. In the event that the final electric bill is not
paid in full, the security deposit shall be retained and applied to the
unpaid balance. Any portion of the security deposit remaining after
application against amounts owed shall be returned.
F. Any customer whose service is terminated and, as a result, is required
to make a security deposit, shall be required to do so prior to the
reactivation of the terminated electric service. Failure, or inability, to
make the required security deposit shall, in all cases, prohibit Borough
staff from reestablishing electric service.
G. Security deposits for commercial customers shall only be returned
following the assignment of the account to a successor and settlement
of the final bill.
H. Returned deposits shall be paid only to the customer of record or his or
her heirs, executors or administrators.
I. The Borough reserves the right, but shall not be required, to apply said
deposit, in whole or in part, to payment of all current or other service
charges, or any other fees, taxes, penalties, or charges, due to the
Borough, by the service customer.
J. The following security deposits shall be provided by residential and
commercial customers: [Amended 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 1270,
approved 9-14-2010]
(1) Residential security deposits shall be determined and based upon
the customer's FICO (Fair Isaac Corporation) credit reporting
score, and a deposit is made in accordance with the following table:
FICO Credit Score Deposit Required
Less than or equal to 525 $200
526 to 600 inclusive $150
601 to 675 inclusive $100
Equal to or greater than 676 $50
(2) Commercial security deposits shall be calculated at the rate of $1
per ampere of service (i.e., 400 ampere service equals $400
deposit).
K. The Borough reserves the right to allow security deposits to be made in
the form of cash, credit card drafts, or electronic fund transfers.
§ 144-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-20
1:154
§ 144-20. Authority to establish rate schedule. [Added 11-13-1941;
amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987; 3-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 1320, approved 3-1-2016]
The Borough Council shall be and is hereby authorized to establish a
schedule of rates for electric current hereafter furnished by the Borough
to its citizens and consumers and to alter and amend the same, from time
to time, in whole or in part. The schedule or schedules shall be established
by resolution of the Borough Council, and shall provide for all classes of
consumers. Until the new schedule of rates is adopted by resolution, the
present rates shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 144-21. Furnishing of current without consent prohibited. [Added
5-10-1926]
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter furnish any electric current
to any person, firm or corporation within the limits of the Borough of
Middletown without first securing the consent of the proper authorities of
the Borough of Middletown so to do; the foregoing provision, however, shall
not affect any corporation now supplying electricity to manufacturing plants
within the Borough of Middletown under permission heretofore granted by
the Borough.
§ 144-22. Rate schedule. [Added 5-10-1926; last amended 3-1-2016
by Ord. No. 1320, approved 3-1-2016]
A. Residential Service – R Rate.
(1) Application of schedule.
(a) This rate schedule is available to:
[1] Customers located on the Borough's distribution line who
desire service for household and other related uses in a
single, private dwelling or an individual dwelling unit in a
multiple-dwelling structure.
[2] Customers located in a single, private dwelling in which
not more than 25% of the square footage of that dwelling
is used exclusively in connection with the conduct of a
business (commercial or noncommercial) or profession by
a person residing therein.
(b) This rate is not available to:
[1] Customers located in a single, private dwelling in which
more than 25% of the square footage of that dwelling is
used exclusively in connection with the conduct of a
business (commercial or noncommercial) or profession by
a person residing therein. Such customers shall have
available to them the rates for Commercial Service, unless
such customer can establish that his or her electrical
§ 144-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-22
1:155
consumption relating to the business (commercial or
noncommercial) or profession is less than 50% of the total
electric usage.
[2] Any customer for the usage of electricity for a business
(commercial or noncommercial) or a profession located in
a building which is detached from the dwelling used by the
customer as a residence. Such customers shall have
available to them for usage of electricity in such detached
buildings the rates for Commercial Service.
(2) The character of service shall be continuous, alternating current,
60 hertz, single-phase, 120/240 volts.
(3) Net monthly rate. The customer's monthly bill shall be the sum of
the customer charge and energy charges.
(a) Customer charge: $10.91 per electric meter.
(b) Energy charge. Shall be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, and shall be the sum total of the following charges:
[1] The wholesale purchase price, transmission costs, and
ancillary charges; and
[2] An energy distribution charge.
(4) Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be
the customer charge of $10.91.
B. Commercial-General Service, two kilowatt minimum small power and
light rate – C rate.
(1) Application of schedule. This rate schedule is for small general
services, including churches, schools and other municipal
buildings, and excluding volunteer fire services as provided in
Subsection B(7), at nominal secondary voltage. It is available to
customers located on the Borough's distribution line desiring
electric service for general lighting and/or power service and
whose minimum billing demand is not less than two kilowatts
available to all customers located on the Borough's distribution line
which do not fall within the Residential Service rate schedule.
(2) The character of service shall be continuous, alternating current,
60 hertz, single- or three-phase secondary at approximately 120/
208 volts, 120/240 volts and 277/480 volts, where available.
(3) Net monthly rate. The customer's monthly bill shall be the sum of
the customer charge, demand charge and energy charges.
(a) Customer charge: $10.91 per electric meter.
(b) Demand charge. The demand charge shall be as follows:
§ 144-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-22
1:156
[1] The first two kilowatts of the billing kilowatt: $1.33 per
kilowatt.
[2] Over two kilowatts of the billing kilowatt: $5.46 per
kilowatt.
(c) Energy charge. Shall be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, and shall be the sum total of the following charges:
[1] The wholesale purchase price, transmission costs, and
ancillary charges; and
[2] An energy distribution charge.
(4) Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be
an amount equal to the demand charge plus the customer charge of
$10.91, and in no circumstances less than $10.91.
(5) The determination of billing demand shall be the maximum fifteenminute
demand, or as determined by periodic tests. Demand may
be determined by estimate, in which case it will be taken as the
connected lighting load, plus 60% of the connected heating load,
plus the following percentage of connected motor load:
Size of Installation
(horsepower)
Percentage of Connect Motor
Load
Under 5 72%
5 to 10 60%
10 to 20 56%
All over 20 52%
(6) Power factor. When the power factor is above or below 85%,
multiply the demand by 85% and divide by the actual percent
power factor to determine billing demand. For such adjustment, the
measured power factor will be taken as not over 90% nor below
50%.
(7) Volunteer fire services. The Middletown Volunteer Fire Department
shall not be subject to demand charges and demand meters shall
not be required for all Middletown Volunteer Fire Department
buildings for determination of billing demand charges and billing
purposes pursuant to this Subsection B.
C. Commercial-Industrial Service, twenty-kilowatt minimum large power
and light rate – CI rate.
(1) Application of schedule. This rate schedule is for large general
service. It is available to customers located on the Borough's
distribution line desiring electric service for general lighting and/or
power service and whose minimum billing demand is not less than
20 kilowatts.
§ 144-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-22
1:157
§ 144-23. Alternative billing for church, meeting house or place of
worship. [Added 8-5-1985 by Ord. No. 896, approved 8-5-1985]
(2) The character of service shall be continuous, alternating current,
60 hertz, single- or three-phase secondary, at approximately 120/
208 volts, 120/240 volts and 277/480 volts, where available.
(3) Net monthly rate. The customer's monthly bill shall be the sum of
the customer charge, demand charges and energy charges.
(a) Customer charge: $6.95 per electric meter.
(b) The demand charge shall be as follows:
[1] First 20 kilowatts of the billing kilowatt: $5.46 per
kilowatt.
[2] All additional kilowatts of the billing kilowatt: $4.671 per
kilowatt.
(c) Energy charge. Shall be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, and shall be the sum total of the following charges:
[1] The wholesale purchase price, transmission costs, and
ancillary charges; and
[2] An energy distribution charge.
(4) Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be
an amount equal to the customer charge plus demand charge, but
not less than $50.
(5) Determination of demand. The demand in kilowatts (billing
kilowatt) is the average kilowatts supplied during the fifteenminute
period of maximum use during the current billing period, as
determined by a demand meter.
A. Where a demand meter measuring demand at any time, whether onpeak
or off-peak, has been installed at a church, meeting house or other
regular place of stated worship, the church, meeting house or other
regular place of stated worship is hereby authorized to elect to be
billed, and upon so electing shall be billed, at 25% of the measured
demand shown by such meter. The minimum monthly charge shall be an
amount equal to the customer charge for a church, meeting house or
other regular place of stated worship electing this option in lieu of
installing time-of-day meters otherwise required to implement for
churches, meeting houses or other regular places of stated worship, as
typical off-peak users, the "off-peak, no charge" provisions (§ 144-22E
above64) relating to demand charges.
64.Editor's Note: Such section reference became invalid when § 144-22 was amended by Ord.
No. 1320, adopted 3-1-2016.
§ 144-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-23
1:158
§ 144-24. Tampering with meters; violations and penalties. [Added
7-1-1985 by Ord. No. 895, approved 7-1-1985]
§ 144-25. Budget billing for all residential total electric customers.
[Added 6-14-1971 by Ord. No. 586, approved 6-14-1971]
B. Any church, meeting house or other regular place of stated worship
which begins operation after the effective date of this chapter shall
have the same election that is afforded under Subsection A of this
section.
A. No person shall tamper with any meter used by the Borough of
Middletown to measure electric rates pursuant to § 144-22. For the
purposes of this section, "tampering" shall include but not be limited to
unauthorized meter removal or load shifting from what would be
commercial or industrial use under this chapter to a less expensive use.
[Amended 9-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1090, approved 9-3-1996]
B. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to make restitution and to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
nor less than $50 and, upon refusal to pay such fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. For the purposes of
this section, "restitution" shall be the payment to the Borough of the
difference between what would have been charged based on historical
usage, absent the tampering, and what was actually charged.
[Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved 7-11-1988]
A. Total budget billing will be applicable to residential customers using
electric service, in conjunction with other residential uses, as the sole
primary method of space heating, water heating, cooking and lighting.
B. At the option of the customer, the Borough will make an estimate of the
total annual charges under this schedule. A budget bill for
approximately 1/12 of such estimate will be rendered monthly. Any
adjustment upward or downward will be made on the final bill for the
twelve-month period. Payment terms shall apply to budget bills under
this schedule.
C. The yearly budget period under this method is from July through June.
D. Accounts will be reviewed at the end of six months, and necessary
adjustment will be made at that time. The final adjustment will be made
on the June billing.
E. When the initial budget period is less than 12 months, the total charges
for that period shall be estimated and divided by the number of full
months in that period adjusted to the nearest dollar; this figure shall be
the monthly budget payment for the interim period. Upon institution of
a mutually agreeable budget program, the failure of the customer to
pay any one budget payment shall be cause for termination of the
budget account.
§ 144-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-26
1:159
§ 144-26. Flat rates or special rates prohibited. [Added 5-10-1926]
There shall be no flat rates and no special rates granted by the Borough of
Middletown to any consumer. All consumers of electric current furnished by
the Borough of Middletown shall fall within the provisions of this chapter
and shall be charged the rates fixed by this chapter.
§ 144-27. Delinquent bills. [Added 11-14-1962 by Ord. No. 436,
approved 11-15-1962; last amended 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 1208,
approved 6-5-2006]
The purpose of this chapter is to recover delinquent charges from
customers. Unpaid electric bills unfairly force increases in rates to good
customers. Customers are required to pay for all electric current registered
by their electric meters, without exception.
A. Electric bills will be due and payable within 15 days of the date billed, in
accordance with Article I of Chapter 108, Bills for Borough Services. A
late payment penalty of 10% of the amount unpaid will be added to all
bills which remain unpaid after the due date.
B. At any time after the 27th day following the issuance of the bill, should
the account remain delinquent in an amount greater than $50, notice of
such delinquency and termination of service will be mailed to the
customer at the billing address. [Amended 11-15-2011 by Ord. No.
1279, approved 11-15-201165]
C. Throughout all seasons, the same disconnection policy shall apply,
except that the Electric Department shall affix a notice of service
termination to the service location at least 48 hours prior to service
disconnection during the months of October through March.
D. At any time after the 38th day following the issuance of the bill, should
the account continue to remain delinquent in an amount greater than
$50, it shall be the duty of the Electric Department, as herein
authorized by the Borough Council, to terminate electric service and to
inform the Borough Code Enforcement Office so that a notice of
uninhabitable residence can be affixed to service location and all
residents referred to sources of alternate habitation.
E. Failure of the U.S. Postal Service to deliver any or all of the abovereferenced
notices, or failure to show proof that the Electric
Department affixed a termination notice at the service location, does
not constitute grounds for continuation of service for a delinquent
account.
F. Medical extension:
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B, regarding notice of
delinquent accounts after the 15th day following the issuance of a bill, and provided for
the renumbering of former Subsections C through H as Subsections B through G,
respectively.
§ 144-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-27
1:160
§ 144-28. Yard lighting. [Added 9-13-1965 by Ord. No. 491,
approved 9-13-1965]
(1) Each service customer may request a one-time thirty-day extension
of termination of electric service at the service location. This
request must be submitted as follows:
(a) Application for extension shall be submitted on a form
provided by the Finance Director;
(b) Application for extension shall be submitted within 15 days of
issuance of the bill for which an extension is requested, prior to
the account becoming delinquent; and
(c) Documentation shall be provided to show that a permanent
Borough resident at the service location, as identified on the
Borough tax rolls, uses life support equipment which requires
electric current. This documentation shall be provided by a
medical physician, licensed by, the commonwealth, who shall
sign and attest to such on said application.
(2) The Borough Manager may grant a one-time-per-customer
additional 30 days from the issuance of the Final Termination of
Service notice.
G. In the event that the electric service is discontinued for nonpayment,
the same will be reconnected upon payment of all amounts due, plus
late penalty, along with a reconnection charge of $60. In addition, a
security deposit shall be required. Payment shall be made to the
Borough no later than 3:00 p.m. on a regular Borough working day. No
service disconnected for delinquency will be reconnected after 3:00
p.m. on regular Borough working days, or on Saturdays, Sundays or
Borough holidays.
A. The Borough of Middletown will install yard lighting for property
owners only upon the conditions that the owner shall request the same
in writing to the Borough of Middletown and shall sign an initial
contract agreeing to the services for a period of three years from the
date of the execution of the agreement.
B. The Borough of Middletown will furnish the yard lighting hereinbefore
referred to in Subsection A for a monthly charge or fee of $8.61 in
addition to all other charges made by the Borough for electrical
services to the property owner's residence. [Amended 11-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1982; 12-14-1982 by Ord. No. 808,
approved 12-14-1982; 1-3-2000 by Ord. No. 1126, approved
1-3-2000; 12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1142, approved 12-3-2001]
C. For the yard lighting, the Borough of Middletown will furnish to the
property owner the complete fixture for said service, and the fixture
shall be and remain the property of the Borough of Middletown and may
be removed at any time by the Borough, either on termination of the
§ 144-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-28
1:161
§ 144-29. Fee for connection after working hours. [Added
12-11-1967 by Ord. No. 525, approved 12-11-1967; amended
9-10-1973 by Ord. No. 632, approved 9-10-1973; 11-19-1979 by Ord.
No. 762, approved 11-19-1979; 8-4-1986 by Ord. No. 919, approved
8-4-1986]
§ 144-30. Failure of meter to register correctly. [Added 11-19-1979
by Ord. No. 762, approved 11-19-1979]
service or at the request of the property owner or for nonpayment of the
service. The Borough of Middletown will furnish all labor and material
to install the fixture at no charge or cost to the property owner. The
Borough further agrees to furnish all labor, bulbs and other material
to keep the fixture in an operating condition and will make changes
or provide such services as may be necessary, upon notice from the
property owner. The fixture to be installed under the yard lighting
agreement shall be at least a one-hundred-seventy-five-watt mercury
lamp with automatic electric eye to ensure its operability during the
hours of darkness.
D. The fixture hereinbefore referred to in Subsection C shall be installed
on a light pole of the Borough of Middletown or on a Bell Telephone
pole, or the property owner may furnish a wooden pole which meets
Borough specifications, and will be placed at the location to be
determined by the Borough of Middletown. The costs of the pole and
the wiring on private property shall be paid by the property owner and
shall be to such specifications as the Borough may direct. The cost of
installing the fixture on the pole shall be paid for by the Borough. No
fixture of any kind or nature shall be installed on any buildings of the
property owner, but shall only be installed on such poles as shall be
either presently installed or installed by the property owner or by the
Borough.
A. Whenever a new applicant or present customer, excluding those
customers who are delinquent, makes application for electric service in
the Borough of Middletown and requests that said service be connected
at any time other than at regularly scheduled working hours of the
Electric Department of the Borough of Middletown, a connection fee
equal to the actual costs incurred by the Borough to connect such
service, plus an administrative overhead, must be paid by said customer
or applicant, prior to turning on of said electric service.
B. "Actual costs" under this subsection shall be defined as compensation
paid to the highest ranking employee of the Municipal Electric Division.
A. In the event that the Borough's meter or metering equipment fails to
properly register the electricity supplied during any month or other
period of time, the Borough will estimate the number of kilowatt-hours
or the kilowatt-hours and the demand of the electricity supplied during
such period, having due regard for the use to which the customer put
§ 144-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 144-30
1:162
§ 144-31. (Reserved)66
Chapter 148
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance Department — See Ch. 21.
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 195.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
the electricity supplied to him during such period and any other
information and data permitting a reasonable conclusion as to the
kilowatt-hours and demand of electricity supplied but not measured
or inaccurately measured. The customer may present any information
or data within his knowledge on the subject. If the Borough has
undercharged the customer as the result of a meter or metering
inaccuracy or other continuing problem under its control, the Borough
will only bill the customer for the amount of unmetered electricity
rendered in the 365 days immediately prior to the date the Borough
remedies the meter inaccuracy. The customer shall be given at least 12
months to pay the undercharged amount if he so desires, in monthly
payments equal to 1/12 of the undercharge. The Borough shall continue
to furnish service to the customer and the customer shall continue
to pay the amounts billed pending the determination of a proper and
reasonable adjustment.
B. The Borough will test the accuracy of its meter serving the premises of
any user who shall request such test and make a deposit of $40. Such
deposit shall stand as security in the event that the costs of such tests
shall be borne by the customer as herein provided, and appropriate
refund may be made accordingly at the completion of such tests if or to
the extent that the costs are not imposed upon the customer. Meters or
metering equipment shall be considered accurate if they register within
3% fast or 3% slow. Whenever a meter or metering equipment is found
to be inaccurate, it or they shall be restored to accuracy or shall be
replaced by the Borough with an accurate meter or metering
equipment without expense to the customer. If a customer notified the
Borough that his meter or metering equipment is inaccurate and
subsequent tests show the meter or metering equipment to be within
the 3% fast or slow tolerance, the costs of such tests shall be borne by
the customer. [Amended 7-1-1996 by Ord. No. 1087, approved
7-1-1996]
66.Editor's Note: Former § 144-31, Purchase power cost adjustment, as amended, was
repealed 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1320, approved 3-1-2016.
§ 144-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-31
1:163
§ 148-1. Copies. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1178, approved
5-3-2004]
Whenever a copy is made for an individual where said copy is made for the
personal use of said individual, a fee shall be charged for each copy. Said
fee shall be set forth in a fee schedule approved by resolution of Borough
Council and shall be collected by the Borough Manager or designee and
forwarded to the Finance Director.
§ 148-2. (Reserved)67
§ 148-3. Fire Marshal reports. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No.
1178, approved 5-3-2004]
Any person, firm or corporation requesting a copy of a Fire Marshal report
shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee schedule adopted by resolution
of Borough Council.
§ 148-4. Fee for use of pavilions at Hoffer Park; exemptions.
[Amended 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1064, approved 11-7-1994;
5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1178, approved 5-3-2004]
§ 148-5. Maps. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1178, approved
5-3-2004]
The fees charged for copies of Borough Maps shall be set forth in a fee
schedule setting fees and charges as approved by resolution of Borough
Council.
A. A nonrefundable fee shall be charged to any person, firm, corporation
or organization reserving a pavilion at Hoffer Park. The fee charged for
use of same shall be set forth in a fee schedule approved by resolution
of the Borough Council.
B. The following organizations and individuals shall be exempt from the
payment of the fees outlined herein and set forth on the Borough fee
schedule: Middletown Senior Citizen Center, Middletown Chapter of
the American Red Cross, Middletown Fire Companies, Middletown
service clubs, Middletown Area Historical Society, Middletown
churches, Middletown schools, Middletown Boys Club, Middletown
Amateur Baseball Association, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Middletown
Borough employees and the Hoffer Family.
67.Editor's Note: Former § 148-2, Use of Borough dumpster, was repealed 5-3-2004 by Ord.
No. 1178, approved 5-3-2004.
§ 144-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 148-6
1:164
§ 148-6. Zoning Ordinance. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1178,
approved 5-3-2004]
Any person, firm, corporation or organization requesting a copy of the
Borough Zoning Ordinance shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee
schedule established by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 148-7. Real estate tax certification fee. [Added 8-4-2003 by Ord.
No. 1160, approved 8-4-2003]
Any person or entity requesting certification of real estate taxes paid shall
be charged a fee of $5 for each copy of said certification, payable to the Tax
Collector of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 148-8. Collection of attorney fees. [Added 7-8-2008 by Ord. No.
1237, approved 7-8-2008]
A. Legislative intent. By Act 1 of 1996, the General Assembly amended the
Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, as
amended and supplemented, 53 P.S. §§ 7101 through 7505, to
specifically authorize inclusion of attorney fees incurred in the
collection of delinquent accounts as part of a municipal lien. Act 1
requires that municipalities by ordinance adopt a schedule of attorney
fees. Act 1 further requires that, prior to imposing attorney fees, the
municipality must notify, by certified mail, the owner of the property
with the delinquent account of the municipality's intent to recover these
fees and the manner by which assessment of the fees may be avoided by
payment of the delinquent account. It is the intention of the Borough
Council in enacting this section to comply with the requirements of Act
1 of 1996.
B. Definitions. Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this section, have the meanings herein indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH SOLICITOR — The persons or law firm appointed by the
Borough Council to serve as legal counsel to the Borough.
DELINQUENT ACCOUNT — Any sums due and owing to the Borough
which have not been paid within the time required by the Borough's
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations or policies, including, but not
limited to, charges for trash collection, sewer service, water service,
electric service, removal or abatement of nuisances, taxes, municipal
improvements, or any other charge which may lawfully be imposed by
the Borough and for which a municipal claim may be filed.
HOURLY RATE — The hourly fee charged, by the Borough Solicitor to
the Borough consistent with the ordinary and customary charges by the
Borough Solicitor for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the hourly rate exceed the rate charged by the Borough Solicitor
§ 148-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-8
1:165
to the Borough when fees are not reimbursed by or otherwise imposed
upon delinquent customers of the Borough.
C. Imposition of attorney fees for collection of delinquent accounts. The
Borough Council specifically authorizes the recovery of attorney fees
incurred by the Borough in the collection of delinquent accounts from
the person or persons who are responsible for the payment of such
delinquent accounts. The Borough Council authorizes the Borough
Manager, the Finance Director, or the Assistant Borough Manager to
take all actions required by applicable law to enable the Borough to
recover attorney fees incurred from the persons responsible for this
cost and to include such attorney fees in municipal claims. This
authorization includes, but is not limited to, sending notification to such
persons of the intention of the Borough to impose attorney fees
incurred in collection efforts upon such persons.
D. Schedule of attorney fees for services related to collection of delinquent
accounts. The Borough shall impose attorney fees upon persons who
have delinquent accounts in accordance with the following schedule:
Service
Minimum Time
(hours)
Obtain and review tax account information for
property
0.4
Obtain and review deed for property 0.2
Prepare municipal lien 0.5
Prepare civil action cover sheet 0.1
File municipal lien 0.4
Forward copy of municipal lien to Borough 0.2
Prepare civil action complaint before Magisterial
District Judge for collection of account
0.7
Prepare for and attend hearing before
Magisterial District Judge concerning civil action
to collect delinquent account
2.5
Prepare and file satisfaction of municipal lien 0.2
E. Recovery of additional attorney fees in specific circumstances. The
services and minimum times expended by the Borough Solicitor for the
services set forth in § 148-8D of this chapter are based upon the
experiences of the Borough Solicitor and upon standard collection
practices. Should the person or persons responsible for payment of a
delinquent account take action or should other circumstances occur
which will require the Borough Solicitor to perform additional or more
time-consuming services than contemplated by § 148-8D, it is the
intention of the Borough to recover all of its attorney fees so incurred.
Such actions include, but are not limited to, filing of counterclaims,
§ 148-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 148-8
1:166
Chapter 151
FIREARMS
§ 151-1. Discharge restricted.
No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property, fire
or discharge any gun or other firearm, including BB guns and pellet guns,
within the Borough of Middletown.
§ 151-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 153
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 155.
Other parking restrictions — See Ch. 252.
§ 153-1. Statement of findings.
In Middletown there are fire lanes, with a minimum width of 11 feet,
duly marked with red lines and posted with no-parking signs, at such
representative places as the Church of God, Essex House, Genesis Court,
Hemlock Hall, Holly Hall, Interfaith Apartments, Midtown Plaza, the Moose
Building and Frey Village Center.
challenging the legal power of the Borough to impose and collect the
fee, rate, charge or other cost, or similar actions.
A. For years, authorization therefor appeared in the duly adopted Fire
Prevention Code recommended by the American Insurance Association,
successor to the National Board of Fire Underwriters, most recently in
the edition of 1970 at page 209 in Section 28.16, headed "Fire Lanes on
Private Property, Devoted to Public Use" and providing as follows:
"a. The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use,
shall be approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and the
Chief of Police."
§ 148-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:167
§ 153-2. Designation of fire lanes.
The Chief Fire Marshal shall have the power to designate fire lanes
anywhere within the Borough of Middletown, on public or private property,
where he deems that parking congestion may create a hazard by impeding
the free movement of firefighting equipment. In formulating such
designations, he shall consult with the Chief of Police and may consult with
but shall report in writing to the appropriate committee of the Borough
Council. Such fire lanes, length determined by the Fire Marshal's office,
shall be marked with red lines in such a fashion as to indicate their location
and posted with no-parking signs. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise
obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. Existing fire lanes and
no-parking signs are hereby confirmed, validated and approved.
§ 153-3. Enforcement.
The Chief Fire Marshal shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for
the administration of this chapter and may adopt and enforce regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration thereof, including
but not limited to the imposition and collection of fines for violations. The
Chief Fire Marshal may designate his office and assistants, the Borough
police, the private property owner's security force, the fire police and other
persons to enforce all provisions concerning fire lanes, either singly or
conjunction with some or all others named or alluded to.
§ 153-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-3-2004 by Ord. No.
1178, approved 5-3-2004]
Any person who parks or permits to be parked a motor vehicle within a
fire lane or otherwise obstructs a fire lane violates these provisions for fire
lanes and shall be subject to penalties as herein described. A fine in an
"b. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall
be prohibited at all times."
B. Such fire lanes were applicable (see page 247) "where the parking of
motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress and
egress of Fire Department vehicles for the protection of persons and
property, such as at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters,
hospitals, churches and similar locations."
C. While it has recently been discovered that such authorization
inadvertently lapsed with the adoption of the BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code by the former Middletown Code of Ordinances,
Chapter VIII, Section 18, enforcement has continued, and continuing
compliance has confirmed the teachings or experience evidenced also
by Fire Lane Ordinance No. 1975-9 in adjoining Lower Swatara
Township, that the designation of fire lanes is necessary in the public
interest whenever it appears that parking congestion may create a
hazard by impeding the free movement of firefighting equipment on
public or private property.
§ 153-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 153-4
1:168
amount set forth in a fee schedule setting fees and charges as approved by
resolution of Borough Council shall be imposed for each violation and shall
be collected by the Chief Fire Marshal or by a ticketing procedure whereby
the fine may be paid at the Middletown Emergency Operations Center or
other designated place of payment. If payment is not made within 48 hours,
the fine shall be increased to an amount set forth in said fee schedule. If the
fine is not paid within 10 days, the Chief Fire Marshal, or a Borough police
officer authorized by the Chief Fire Marshal, shall prosecute the violator
before a District Justice. If such prosecution is necessary, the violator shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine set forth in said fee schedule, plus costs. In
default of payment of such fine and costs, the violator may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the Dauphin County Jail or other appropriate prison for not
more than 30 days.
Chapter 155
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 23.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 127.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 153.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-4
1:169

ARTICLE I
Standards
[Adopted 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1045,68 approved 9-7-1993]
§ 155-1. Relationship to state law.69
In all matters that are regulated by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations,
as the case may be, shall control where the requirements thereof are the
same as or more limiting than the provisions of this article. The Code shall
control in all cases where the state requirements are not as strict as those
contained in this article.
§ 155-2. Continuing provisions.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
§ 155-3. through § 155-8. (Reserved)
68.Editor's Note: this ordinance supersedes former Art. I, Standards, adopted 6-4-1990 by
Ord. No. 1002, approved 6-4-1990.
69.Editor's Note: Former §§ 155-1, Adoption of standards, and 155-2, Modifications to
standards, were repealed, and former §§ 155-3 and 155-4 were renumbered as §§ 155-1
and 155-2, 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194, approved 7-11-2005.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-3
1:171

ARTICLE II
Reporting of Fires70
[Adopted 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 609, approved 11-13-1972]
§ 155-9. Notice to Fire Department required.
Whenever a fire occurs in or about any building of any kind (except a private
dwelling), including a building in course of construction, or a structure or
lumberyard or place of outdoor storage, it shall be the duty of the owner,
manager, person in control or an occupant thereof, upon discovery of such
fire or of evidence of there having been a fire even though apparently
extinguished, immediately to cause notice of the existence of such fire,
circumstances of the same and the location thereof to be given to the local
Fire Department. A "private dwelling," within the meaning of the exception,
shall be narrowly construed and shall mean a dwelling unit consisting of
one or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having a
kitchen with fixed cooking facilities, arranged for occupancy by one family.
The requirements imposed by this section shall not be construed to forbid
the use of all diligence necessary to extinguish such fire prior to the arrival
of the Fire Department.
§ 155-10. Right of entry.
The Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshal or the Chief of Police or
the authorized representatives of any of them, upon exhibiting the proper
credentials or proof of identity upon request, shall have the right to enter
any premises or building (except a private dwelling, as aforesaid) without
consent of the occupant or of anyone during business or operating hours
and also at any time in any emergency that immediately endangers life,
property or public safety for the purpose of performing their duties,
including law enforcement. Such right to enter without consent, as applied
to multiple dwellings, shall relate to those spaces to which the public or
any one of the several occupants is ordinarily admitted, such as hallways,
basements and similar spaces. Any private dwelling as aforesaid may be
entered by such authorities during or immediately following an emergency,
such as a fire, explosion or the like, or upon first obtaining a search warrant
or with the consent of any occupant of such private dwelling.
§ 155-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987]
Any person violating § 155-9 or interfering with or obstructing any entry
for which § 155-10 provides may, upon conviction thereof before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300 and, in default of
payment thereof, to undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30
days.
70.Editor's Note: The provisions of this article were continued in effect by Section 4.3 of Ord.
No. 697.
§ 155-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-12
1:173
§ 155-12. Interpretation of provisions. [Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 1194, approved 7-11-2005]
The provisions in §§ 155-9, 155-10 and 155-11 are intended to be cumulative
and shall not affect the continuing validity and applicability of other
provisions, particularly the provisions of the code adopted in § 114-1 herein.
§ 155-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 155-12
1:174
ARTICLE III
Fire Marshal
[Adopted 10-15-1979 by Ord. No. 758, approved 10-15-1979;
amended in its entirety 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 1221, approved
4-2-2007]
§ 155-13. Appointment, powers and duties. [Amended 4-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 1348, approved 4-3-2018]
A. The Borough shall maintain the position of Fire Marshal, who shall
report to the Borough Manager of the Borough of Middletown; and two
subordinate positions, one of which shall be entitled "Deputy Fire
Marshal" and shall be second in command in the absence of the Fire
Marshal; and the other shall be entitled "Assistant Fire Marshal" and
shall be third in command in the absence of the Fire Marshal and
Deputy Fire Marshal. The Deputy Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire
Marshal shall report to the Fire Marshal. The officers serve at the
discretion of the Borough Manager and will likewise take the oath
before the Mayor as detailed in § 23-6.
B. To be eligible to hold the office of Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal, or
Assistant Fire Marshal of the Borough, an individual must:
(1) Have attained the age of 26 years;
(2) Be an active, experienced firefighter, in good standing with MVFD
for a period of at least five years;
(3) The Fire Marshal need not be a resident of the Borough, but the
Fire Marshal must reside within a twenty-five-mile radius of the
Middletown Borough Hall building; and
(4) Have completed such training classes as to qualify him or her as a
Fire Marshal.
C. The Fire Marshal, in conjunction with the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, may be responsible for the enforcement of the Borough Uniform
Construction Code, pursuant to Chapter 114 of the Borough of
Middletown Code of Ordinances, and any and all applicable National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Uniform Fire Codes, and/or all
NFPA Fire Codes, as such may exist or be created; herein adopted as
the Fire Code of the Borough of Middletown.
D. The Fire Marshal, in conjunction with the Dauphin County or State Fire
Marshal, shall be responsible for assisting with the investigation of the
cause of any fire, as requested or required.
E. The Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshal
shall be volunteer firefighters serving Middletown and they shall
continue to enjoy all the benefits, insurance protection and other
emoluments of a volunteer firefighter. It is intended that these benefits
§ 155-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-13
1:175
§ 155-14. Inspection of buildings.
The Chief Fire Marshal or an Assistant Fire Marshal is hereby authorized to
inspect all apartments, hotels, rooming houses, business places and public
buildings at least once every six months and to make a report thereof to the
owner and to the Office of Code Enforcement of any hazards found thereon
and to give notice thereof to the owner and, if the same be leased, to the
lessee thereof (Frey Estate tenants of long-term leaseholds shall be treated
as owners for this provision), with instructions to abate said hazard within
10 days from the date of said notice.
shall apply to their performance of the duties as Fire Marshal and to
the risks attendant thereupon.
F. Full police powers, including power to take into custody or arrest or to
remove an individual(s) from a fire or explosion site, is hereby
conferred upon the Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal, and Assistant
Fire Marshal. Such powers may be exercised upon view and without
warrant in order to implement the authority and responsibility vested in
such office.
G. A penalty in furtherance of this chapter is hereby imposed for
obstructing investigations by the Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal, or
Assistant Fire Marshal as follows:
(1) If the investigation of fires or explosions, under any law of the
commonwealth, is impeded or obstructed, or if there is attempted
or actual access by any person or persons to such buildings,
structures or premises until evidence has been properly processed,
or disturbance, removal or suppression of any physical evidence
relating to the cause or origin of such fire or explosion, knowingly
or with reason to know, or in violation of orders in the Fire Marshal,
or Deputy Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshal, then, in
accordance with § 127-14 of Chapter 127, Code Enforcement, any
person, upon conviction in proceedings before a District Justice,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; each occurrence
to be considered a separate violation.
§ 155-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 155-14
1:176
Chapter 157
FIREWORKS
§ 157-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
APA 87-1 — The American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1:
Standard for Construction and Approval for Transportation of Fireworks,
Novelties, and Theatrical Pyrotechnics, 2001 edition, or any subsequent
edition.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects
by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes, but is not
limited to:
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — A structure, vehicle or place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons or for conducting business, whether
or not a person is actually present.
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public, complies
with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation and complies with the provisions for consumer
fireworks as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale,
possession and use of which shall be permitted throughout the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A.
The term does not include devices such as ground and handheld
sparkling devices, novelties or toy caps as defined in APA 87-1 or any
successor standard, the sale, possession and use of which shall be
permitted at all times within the Borough, unless otherwise provided in
the Middletown Borough Code.
B.
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
A.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
B.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
C.
§ 155-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-2
1:177
§ 157-2. Permits.
§ 157-3. Request for extension of permit.
A. Permissible purposes. Display fireworks may be possessed and used by
a person holding a permit issued by the Borough of Middletown at the
display covered by the permit or when used as authorized by a permit
for any of the following:
(1) For agricultural purposes in connection with the raising of crops
and the protection of crops from bird and animal damage.
(2) By railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or
illumination.
(3) In quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use.
(4) In the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater.
(5) For signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports.
(6) By military organizations or organizations composed of veterans of
the armed forces of the United States.
B. Application. A permit may only be issued following the submission of
written application to the Borough not less than 30 days before the date
of the display fireworks. The Borough may adopt by resolution an
official permit application and fee, which may be amended from time to
time as may be determined by Borough Council.
C. Age limitation. A display fireworks permit may not be issued to a person
under 21 years of age.
D. Bond. The Borough shall require a bond deemed adequate by the
Middletown Borough Council from the permittee in a sum not less than
$50,000 conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be
caused to a person or property by reason of the display and arising from
an act of the permittee or an agent, an employee or a subcontractor of
the permittee.
A. Authorization. If, because of unfavorable weather, the display for which
a permit has been granted does not occur at the time authorized by the
permit, the person to whom the permit was issued may, within 24 hours,
apply for a request for extension to the Borough.
B. Contents of request. The request for extension shall state, under oath,
that the display was not made, provide the reason that the display was
not made and request a continuance of the permit for a date designated
within the request, which shall be not later than one week after the date
originally designated in the permit.
C. Determination. Upon receiving the request for extension, the Borough,
if it believes that the facts stated within the request are true, shall
§ 157-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 157-3
1:178
§ 157-4. Use of consumer fireworks.
§ 157-5. Use of display fireworks.
extend the provisions of the permit to the date designated within the
request, which shall be not later than one week after the date originally
designated in the permit.
D. Conditions. The extension of time shall be granted without the payment
of an additional fee and without requiring a bond other than the bond
given for the original permit, the provisions of which shall extend to and
cover all damages which may be caused by reason of the display
occurring at the extended date and in the same manner and to the same
extent as if the display had occurred at the date originally designated in
the permit.
A. Conditions. A person who is at least 18 years of age and meets the
requirements of this section may purchase, possess and use consumer
fireworks.
B. Prohibitions. A person may not intentionally ignite or discharge:
(1) Consumer fireworks on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner.
(2) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw
consumer fireworks or sparkling devices from, a motor vehicle or
building.
(3) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle
or building, or at another person.
(4) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under
the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or another drug.
(5) Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure.
(6) Consumer fireworks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., except that on New Year's Day, they shall be permitted be
permitted between 12:00 midnight until 12:30 a.m.
A. Display fireworks shall be subject to following conditions:
(1) Each display shall be handled by a competent operator; and
(2) Each display shall be of a character and so located, discharged or
fired as, in the opinion of the Chief of the Middletown Borough
Volunteer Fire Department or other appropriate officer as may be
designated by the Middletown Borough Council, after proper
inspection, to not be hazardous to property or endanger any
person.
§ 157-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-5
1:179
§ 157-6. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Chapter 158
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 58.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 236.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
B. After permission is granted under this chapter, possession and use of
display fireworks for display shall be lawful for that purpose only.
C. A permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable upon approval
of the Borough.
A. A person using consumer fireworks or display fireworks in violation of
the provisions of this chapter commits a summary offense and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.
B. Middletown Borough Police or other authorized law enforcement
officials shall take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the
owner all stocks of consumer fireworks or display fireworks stored or
held in violation of this chapter. The owner shall also be responsible for
the storage and, if deemed necessary, the destruction of these
fireworks.
§ 157-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 157-6
1:180
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 158-1. Statutory authorization.
The legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,71 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of the Borough of Middletown
does hereby order as follows.
§ 158-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 158-3. Applicability.
§ 158-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Middletown unless a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
71.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:181
§ 158-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 158-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Middletown or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 158-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-6
1:182
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 158-7. Designation of Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer within the Department of Building & Zoning is hereby
appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein
as the Floodplain Ordinance Administrator.
§ 158-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 158-9. Duties and responsibilities of Zoning Officer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);72 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Zoning Officer shall have the
authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development in
the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials,
at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
72.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 158-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-9
1:183
§ 158-10. Application procedures and requirements.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of Title
34 of the Pennsylvania Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC,73 or
latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Middletown. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related costs and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
73.Editor's Note: "IBC" and "IRC" refer to the International Building Code and the
International Residential Code, respectively.
§ 158-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-10
1:184
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under Title 34
of the Pennsylvania Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
§ 158-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-10
1:185
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood;
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations;
(c) Documentation certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 158-19B),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point;
(d) A document certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development;
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 158-25F, Storage, and § 158-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 158-25F and 158-26, which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 158-26
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development"; and
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(5) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator and
the Borough's fee schedule.
§ 158-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-11
1:186
§ 158-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the Dauphin County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 158-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 158-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 158-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 158-15. Start of construction.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The "actual start of construction" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
§ 158-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-15
1:187
§ 158-16. Enforcement.
§ 158-17. Appeals.
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the Borough of Middletown of not less than $25 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other
actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 158-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-17
1:188
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time
and place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.74
74.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 158-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-17
1:189

ARTICLE III
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 158-18. Identification.
§ 158-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area is an overlay zoning district and shall be
any areas of the Borough of Middletown classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated August 2,
2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Borough of Middletown and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
C. Supplemental floodplain areas are areas not identified in the FIS but
where Borough of Middletown has determined the area to merit
additional regulation under this chapter. These areas are identified on
the Borough of Middletown supplemental floodplain identification map.
A. Floodway area.
(1) Description.
(a) The area identified as floodway in the FIS, which represents
the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point.
(b) This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. Special floodplain area.
§ 158-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-19
1:191
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS,
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of
any watercourse.
(b) In special floodplain areas without a designated floodway, no
new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the BFE by more than
one foot.
C. Approximate floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS, which are
subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of
any watercourse.
(b) When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE,
as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using
a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which
is nearest the construction site in question.
(3) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Borough of
Middletown.
D. Supplemental floodplain area (SA).
(1) Description. Areas not identified in the FIS but where Borough of
Middletown has determined the area to merit additional regulation
under this chapter.
§ 158-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-19
1:192
§ 158-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council, with recommendations by the Planning Commission and Borough
Engineer, where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 158-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
(2) Special requirements. No new construction or development shall
be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top
of bank of any watercourse.
§ 158-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-21
1:193

ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 158-22. General.
§ 158-23. Special requirements in identified floodplain areas.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the Borough of
Middletown to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) as soon as
practicable but within six months of any new construction,
development, or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The
situations when a LOMR or a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
(CLOMR) are required are:
(1) Any development occurring in Zone A which will cause a rise of
more than one foot in the base flood elevation [as determined using
methodology in § 158-19C(2)(b)]; or
(2) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, new construction or development
is prohibited with the following exceptions, provided the use does not
require structures other than as indicated or fill other than as indicated:
(1) Accessory uses, such as sheds or pavilions. Such uses are limited to
600 square feet of floor area. The total amount of floor area per lot
for accessory uses is limited to 600 square feet regardless of the
number of such accessory structures.
§ 158-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-23
1:195
§ 158-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(2) Plowing, seeding, harvesting, pasture, plant nurseries,
horticulture, forestry, aquaculture and other normal farming
operations.
(3) Vehicle access uses, including driveways, roads, streets, bridges
and culverts. Impacts to the floodplain are limited to the least
amount needed to construct the use and provide safety and
structural integrity.
(4) Public and private recreational uses, such as parks, camps, picnic
areas, swimming areas, boat launches, wildlife areas and
preserves, hunting and fishing, game farms, trails for hiking, horse
riding, athletic fields and other recreational activities.
(5) Accessory residential uses, such as yards, gardens and play areas.
(6) Projects conducted with the objective of improvement,
stabilization, restoration, or enhancement of the stream bank,
stream channel, floodplain or aquatic habitat. Such projects must
receive appropriate permits and approvals from DEP prior to
starting the project.
(7) Utility lines and pipes.
(8) Similar uses determined to be acceptable by the governing body of
the Borough of Middletown, provided the use does not require
structures other than as indicated above or fill other than the
minimal amount needed for the use.
B. Preexisting lots or parcels. Where a lot or parcel that has been legally
created and recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter is
located entirely or partially within any identified floodplain area, the
following conditions apply:
(1) If the lot or parcel is located entirely within any identified
floodplain area, development may be allowed by variance. Such
development shall be in full compliance with all other requirements
of this chapter.
(2) If the lot or parcel is located partially within any identified
floodplain area, development shall be confined to the area outside
of the floodplain area to the maximum extent practical. If the area
outside of the floodplain area is insufficient for the proposed use,
development within the floodplain may be allowed by variance.
Such development shall be in full compliance with all other
requirements of this chapter.
A. Residential structures.
§ 158-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-24
1:196
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 158-19C(2)(b) of
this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and Chapters 401-405 of Title 34 of
the Pennsylvania Code, as amended, shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and;
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation in
accordance with § 158-19C(2)(b) of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
§ 158-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-24
1:197
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and Chapters 401-405 of Title 34 of
the Pennsylvania Code, as amended, shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
§ 158-24 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-24
1:198
§ 158-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only – sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Zoning Officer;
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties; and
(6) Be limited to only the amount needed for the intended use.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
§ 158-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-25
1:199
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area, except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC75 and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damage, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 158-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
75.Editor's Note: See Part XIV, Uniform Construction Code, of Title 34 of the Pennsylvania
Code.
§ 158-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-25
1:200
§ 158-26. Development which may endanger human life.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are "water-resistant"
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other "water-resistant"
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other
finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall be located at or above the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in Chapters 401-405 of Title 34 of the
Pennsylvania Code, as amended, and not limited to the following
provisions, shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections
of this chapter to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or
supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition thereof:
Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix
E and Appendix J.
§ 158-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-26
1:201
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act76 and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be
subject to the provisions of this section in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
76.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 158-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-26
1:202
§ 158-27. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least five
lots or at least two acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 158-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall
be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood Proofing Regulations" (United
States. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
D. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of any
watercourse.
A. Within any FW (floodway area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within approximate floodplain or special floodplain areas,
manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50
feet landward from the top of bank of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
§ 158-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-28
1:203
§ 158-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply, and
Chapters 401-405 of Title 34 of the Pennsylvania Code.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and
Title 34 of the Pennsylvania Code, as amended, where appropriate and/
or applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for
anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the units(s)
proposed for installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 158-28.
§ 158-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-29
1:204
ARTICLE V
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 158-30. Generally.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,77 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the Zoning Hearing Board:
§ 158-31. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
77.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 158-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-31
1:205
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water, including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 158-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-31
1:206
§ 158-32. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Middletown, the following procedures shall apply, in addition to those of
Article II:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;78 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Middletown
Planning Commission and Borough of Middletown Engineer for review
and comment.
78.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 158-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-32
1:207
§ 158-33. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of
Middletown shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect
the application is deficient.
C. If the Borough of Middletown decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Middletown approves an application, it shall file
written notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information, with the Department of Community and Economic
Development, by registered or certified mail, within five calendar days
after the date of approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Middletown shall
allow the Department of Community and Economic Development 30
days after receipt of the notification by the Department to review the
application and decision made by the Borough of Middletown.
F. If the Borough of Middletown does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Middletown and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Borough of Middletown shall not issue the special
permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article IV of this chapter, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between
any of the following requirements and those in Article IV of this chapter
or in any other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 158-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-33
1:208
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Middletown and the Department of
Community and Economic Development.
§ 158-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-33
1:209

ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 158-34. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 158-35 shall apply.
§ 158-35. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the base flood elevation.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of Title 34 of the
Pennsylvania Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 158-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-35
1:211

ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 158-36. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Middletown may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 158-37. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the procedures contained in § 158-17 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any special floodplain area that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (Article V) or to development which
may endanger human life (§ 158-26).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 158-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-37
1:213
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Zoning Officer. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-hundred-year flood.
§ 158-37 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-37
1:214
ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
§ 158-38. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 158-39. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
§ 158-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-39
1:215
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed area
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 158-39 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-39
1:216
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after August 2, 2012, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after December
28, 1976, and before August 2, 2012, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
§ 158-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-39
1:217
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development. Provided,
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 158-39 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-39
1:218
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage
or repetitive loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
A.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement, as defined in this chapter, must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
B.
§ 158-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-39
1:219
Chapter 164
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210. Littering — See Ch. 235, Art. III.
§ 158-39 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 158-39
1:220
ARTICLE I
Storage and Collection
[Adopted 4-7-1986 as Ord. No. 911, approved 4-7-1986]
§ 164-1. Definitions.
The following shall be defined as follows, in this article and any other
ordinance of the Borough previously enacted or to be enacted, except where
the context indicates otherwise:
GARBAGE — Any animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of foods.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, except body waste, and shall include garbage,
ashes and rubbish.
RUBBISH — Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood or
nonputrescible solid wastes.
§ 164-2. Storage containers. [Amended 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1172,
approved 3-1-2004]
§ 164-3. Manner of disposal of certain liquid waste.
Liquid wastes which are not disposable through the sewers shall be
removed in closed vessels and shall not be kept upon any premises until
they become foul.
§ 164-4. Vehicles for transporting garbage; licenses for collectors.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
All persons engaged in collecting or removing garbage from premises
within the Borough shall collect, transport or convey all such garbage in
A. Refuse shall be stored in containers which shall be made of durable,
watertight, rust-resistant material having a tight-fitting lid which must
be kept on the container when in use; provided, however, that refuse
may be stored in sealed plastic or similar bags or containers on the day
that regularly scheduled collection of such refuse is made.
B. No storage containers or sealed plastic or similar bags or containers
shall be set in or before the front of any residence, business or other
structure within the Borough, or otherwise set out for refuse collection,
earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding a scheduled collection of
refuse.
C. No storage container or scaled plastic or similar bags or containers
shall remain in front of any residence, business or other structure
within the Borough later than 5:00 p.m. on the day following a
scheduled collection of refuse.
D. Storage containers shall be stored only in the side yard or rear yard of
any property within the Borough.
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-4
1:221
closed, leakproof vehicles. This equipment may be inspected by the Code
Enforcement Officer, and, upon approval, a license shall be issued, without
cost, and shall remain in force for a period of one year from the date of
issuance, unless revoked.
§ 164-5. Manner of storage and disposal of garbage.
All garbage and kitchen offal shall be kept separate and distinct from ashes,
and garbage collectors are required to remove the same in vehicles so
constructed as to comply with the preceding section. Such materials shall
be deposited only at an approved refuse disposal site.
§ 164-6. Hauling of offal and similar refuse.
Any person hauling offal and other refuse from any butcher shop or
slaughterhouse in the Borough shall use an enclosed, leakproof vehicle
while doing so.
§ 164-7. Ashes.
§ 164-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No.
972, approved 7-11-1988]
A. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee, tenant or
householder or any person to deposit, throw, spread, place or cause to
be deposited, thrown, spread or placed any ashes on any vacant lot
within the Borough limits. The word "ashes" in this article shall mean
ashes from coal, pulverized coal and wood and other organic
substances such as may be used for filling purposes without becoming
offensive.
B. Before any person may deposit, throw, place or cause to be deposited,
thrown, spread or placed any ashes on any vacant lot within the
Borough limits, it shall be necessary for him to secure from the Borough
Manager a permit to use said ashes as herein defined for filling
purposes. Said permit shall not be issued by the Borough Manager
unless the parties securing or seeking the same shall agree to, within
five days after the ashes have been deposited on said vacant lot, cover
or cause the same to be covered with six inches of topsoil for every two
feet of ash or ashes which are used for filling purposes.
A. Any person, firm or corporation guilty of violating § 164-2 or 164-3 of
this article or who shall neglect or refuse to comply with any of those
sections shall, upon conviction thereof, for each violation, be liable to a
fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment thereof, may be sentenced to not more than 30 days'
imprisonment, provided that any fine or penalty imposed after
conviction for violation of any of these provisions shall be in addition to
any charge imposed for abatement of any nuisance created or
maintained by such violation.
§ 164-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-8
1:222
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating §§ 164-4 through 164-7 shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be liable to a fine of
not more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution, or, in default of the
payment of said fine and costs of prosecution, to imprisonment for not
more than 30 days in the county jail, provided that where any specific
violation of any of the provisions of this article shall result in the
creation or maintenance of a condition defined in this article or finding
by the Board of Health as a nuisance, prosecution under this section
and payment of a penalty or imprisonment thereunder shall not
preclude the abatement of such nuisance upon notice from the Board of
Health and the payment of the costs of such abatement as provided in
this article.
§ 164-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-8
1:223

ARTICLE II
Garbage and Refuse Service Charge
[Adopted 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 332, approved 3-9-1954]
§ 164-9. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the
purpose of this article, the meanings indicated in this section:
OCCUPIER OF REAL ESTATE — Any person who owns, leases or has control
of or occupies real estate in the Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, firm, association, copartnership
or corporation.[Amended 3-13-1967 by Ord. No. 510, approved
3-13-1967]
RESIDENCE — Any private dwelling, store, apartment, theater,
manufacturing plant, garage and any other building not herein specifically
mentioned to which the Borough of Middletown supplies electric current
and in or on which an electric meter for the measuring of the electric
current consumed therein is located.
§ 164-10. Service charge levied. [Amended 12-3-1990 by Ord. No.
1011, approved 12-3-1990; 2-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1054, approved
2-7-1994; 12-14-2010 by Ord. No. 1275, approved 12-14-2010;
12-17-2013 by Ord. No. 1301, approved 12-17-2013]
§ 164-11. Basis for determining applicability of charge. [Added
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 806, approved 12-14-1981]
For administrative convenience, each dwelling unit may normally be
identified in terms of and correlated with the Borough records relating to
the electric meter applicable thereto. A "dwelling unit" for this purpose
(as under § 260-12 of Chapter 260, Zoning) may be defined as one or
more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having usually a
kitchen with fixed cooking facilities, arranged for occupancy by one family.
A. There is hereby levied, assessed and imposed a service charge for
Borough purposes on occupiers of real estate in the Borough of
Middletown for the collection and removal of garbage, ashes, refuse,
paper and other debris from premises situated in the Borough of
Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, with the rate as follows:
(1) Beginning January 1, 2011: $25.65 per month, or any part thereof.
B. All persons, except commercial users of electric current where no
garbage is collected, who are residents within the Borough of
Middletown shall be liable for said service charge. Occupiers of real
estate living in apartments shall severally be liable for said service
charge, each apartment being considered one unit of real estate, but no
one occupier of real estate shall pay more than one service charge.
§ 164-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-11
1:225
As applied over the years, therefore, one such service charge is levied
against, inter alia, each dwelling unit. In the few instances where billing in
terms of electric meters does not truly reflect and implement the purpose
of said garbage and refuse service charges, the Borough Manager is hereby
authorized to issue interpretive determinations. Any determination is to be
noted in writing and made a permanent part of the specific account.
§ 164-12. Charge added to electric bill. [Amended 3-13-1967 by
Ord. No. 510, approved 3-13-1967]
From and after April 1, 1954, the Borough Secretary of the Borough of
Middletown is directed to add, as a part of the regular monthly bill for the
consumption of electricity, the service charge herein levied to said bill to be
collected and to make return of said service charge to the Treasurer of the
Borough of Middletown not later than the first day of the month following
the month in which said service charge is levied.
§ 164-13. Penalty for nonpayment. [Amended 3-13-1967 by Ord. No.
510, approved 3-13-1967]
If any service charge levied and assessed pursuant to this article shall not
be paid when due, a penalty of 10% of the amount of the service charge due
and unpaid shall be added thereto and collected.
A. Illustrative cases where such charges should not be billed to an electric
meter, hereby legally recognized because the meter is not, in fact,
related to the generation or collection of garbage or refuse normally
incident to a dwelling unit in the residential context usually associated
with these borderline cases, include the following:
(1) A separate meter for a dusk-to-dawn light.
(2) A separate meter applicable to the basement or furnace or hallway
of a residential property whose constituent dwelling units are each
appropriately metered.
(3) A separate meter applicable only to a garage which is
noncommercial and of a type usually constructed as a building
accessory to a residence where the garage (often on a rental basis)
is used solely for vehicle parking.
B. As further guidance for the issuance of interpretative determinations,
the principle is hereby enunciated that no single dwelling unit shall be
subject to more than the intended one such service charge usually
involved with the one meter typically associated with and applicable to
such dwelling unit.
§ 164-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-14
1:226
§ 164-14. Disclosure of information. [Amended 3-13-1967 by Ord.
No. 510, approved 3-13-1967; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987]
Any information obtained by the Secretary of the Borough or any official
or agent of the Borough of Middletown as a result of any returns,
investigations or verifications required or authorized by this article is
deemed confidential and shall not be required to be disclosed except for
official purposes or proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
It shall further be the duty of any of the above officials to report the names
and addresses of any occupiers of real estate whose names are not on the
official records of the Borough of Middletown for the purpose of maintaining
a full and complete list of all persons liable for said service charge.
§ 164-15. Authority to collect. [Amended 3-13-1967 by Ord. No. 510,
approved 3-13-1967]
For the purpose of enforcing the payment of the service charge levied
or penalty imposed in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
Secretary of the Borough of Middletown shall have all of the authority and
power of a duly elected and qualified Tax Collector and shall have a right to
proceed to collect the service charge and penalty by distraint or by action
at law as other debts of like amount are collected. All suits shall be brought
in the name of the Borough of Middletown. The Secretary of the Borough of
Middletown may, with the approval, by resolution, of the Borough Council
of the Borough of Middletown, appoint a deputy or assistant or as many
deputies and assistants as may be deemed necessary, who shall have all of
the authority given by the provisions of this section to the Secretary of the
Borough of Middletown.
§ 164-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-13-1967 by Ord. No.
510, approved 3-13-1967; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved 7-11-1988]
Any person convicted before the District Justice of failing to pay the service
charge imposed by this article or of interfering with the duly authorized
representatives or agents of the Borough of Middletown when performing
the duties imposed upon said representatives or agents by this article shall
be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $1,000 for each offense, together
with the costs of prosecution thereof, and, in default thereof, to undergo
imprisonment in the county prison of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania for a
period not exceeding 30 days. The fine or penalty hereby imposed shall be
in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article
and shall be paid to the Secretary of the Borough of Middletown for the use
of said Borough.
§ 164-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-16
1:227

ARTICLE III
Open Burning
[Adopted 10-5-1987 by Ord. No. 950, approved 10-5-1987]
§ 164-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN BURNING — Any fire where the products of combustion are emitted
into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney
connected to a structure as defined by the Middletown Zoning Ordinance.79
PLANT LIFE — Vegetation, including but not limited to trees, tree branches,
leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.
REFUSE — All putrescible and imputrescible wastes, except body waste,
and including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trimmings, leaves,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles and solid market
and individual waste.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Any business, trade or industry engaged in
whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material,
including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or
drums.
§ 164-18. Open burning prohibited.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning.
§ 164-19. Exceptions. [Amended 10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 1365,
approved 10-1-2019]
A. This article shall not apply to the following activities which do not
require a permit from the Fire Marshal or the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection:
(1) Open barbeque pits or devices of similar construction, whether
they are of a permanent or temporary nature, when such pits or
devices are used for the purpose of preparing food for human
consumption; or
(2) Fire pits, fire bowls, chimineas or similar portable devices, but only
when the following requirements and conditions are met:
(a) Any person operating a fire pit, fire bowl, chiminea or similar
portable device must have permission from the landowner.
(b) There must be one person at least 18 years of age present to
assume responsibility for the use of these devices.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 164-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-19
1:229
(c) Appliances must be used in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions and guidelines. User instructions
and guidelines shall be kept nearby for quick reference.
(d) Use of fire pits, fire bowls, chimineas and similar portable
devices must be a minimum of 15 feet away from any building
or structure in all directions. All flammable material(s), e.g.,
mulch, fabrics, firewood, etc., must be kept a minimum of three
feet in diameter around the appliance.
(e) The use of fire pits, fire bowls, chimineas or similar portable
devices on a balcony or deck is prohibited.
(f) Use of only aged, dried wood is allowed. The burning of any
type of construction material or trash is prohibited.
(g) The use of any type of flammable or combustible liquid at any
time is prohibited.
(h) A garden hose connected to a constant water source or
extinguishing device must be stored close by, available and
operational in the event of an emergency.
(i) Smoke is not allowed to cross property lines. Users must be
mindful of the wind speed prior to starting this type of fire.
(j) Fire pits, fire bowls, chimineas and similar portable devices
shall not be used on "Code Orange" or "Code Red" air quality
days.
(k) Users must dispose of all ashes in a safe manner. After 24
hours has passed, all leftover hot ashes must be thoroughly
dampened, cooled and stored in a metal can that is used solely
for ash storage. The metal can should be a minimum of five feet
from any structure. Ashes that are two or three days old may
appear to be safe, but can still retain enough heat to cause an
unwanted fire. Do not discard hot ashes in a compost pile,
paper bag, cardboard box, or anything that is combustible.
(l) Care and necessary precautions should be taken in handling
partially burned wood. The wood may still be smoldering and
could cause a serious burn.
B. The use of fire pits, fire bowls, chimineas or similar portable devices
without taking the proper precautions, including but not limited to the
requirements and conditions described above, is strictly prohibited. If
said use is determined by the Middletown Volunteer Fire Department to
be hazardous, it may result in the fire being extinguished by the Fire
Department.
§ 164-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-20
1:230
§ 164-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating § 164-18 shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice, be liable to a fine of not more than $300, plus costs of
prosecution, or, in default of the payment of said fine and costs of
prosecution, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days in the county jail.
§ 164-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-20
1:231

ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 985, approved 4-3-1989; amended in
its entirety 11-18-2008 by Ord. No. 1243, approved 11-18-2008]
§ 164-21. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Middletown Borough Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 164-22. Definitions.
Any capitalized term, if not defined in this article, shall have the meaning
as from time to time set forth in the Borough of Middletown Rules and
Regulations Related to Waste Collection and Recycling ("Rules and
Regulations") which are incorporated into this article by reference. In
addition, as used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.S. 380,
No. 97, as now or hereafter amended.80
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.81
ALUMINUM — All food and beverage cans made of the light-in-weight,
ductile and malleable metallic substance or element commonly known as
"aluminum." This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates, and
miscellaneous aluminum products.
BOROUGH — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the Borough
of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
CLEAR GLASS — Clear glass consists only of clear food and beverage
containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity, and comprised
of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance
produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime
and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the manufacture
of glass.
COLORED GLASS — Colored glass consists only of green or brown food
and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity,
and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent
substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda
and lime and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the
manufacture of glass.
COMMENCEMENT DATE — The date upon which the current and
subsequent municipal contract collection services begin.
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 164-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-22
1:233
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, and
theaters.
COMMERCIAL MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal solid waste, as herein
defined, that is generated at a commercial establishment.
COMMINGLED — Designated recyclable materials:
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals, including, but not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials,
picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
COMPOSTING — The process by which solid organic waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled aerobic or anaerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION DEBRIS — A portion of municipal waste
resulting from the construction or demolition of buildings and other
structures, including bricks, cement, bituminous material, steel, aluminum,
siding, shingles, timber, paneling, beams, trim, molding, shelves, doors,
windows, frames, jams, railing, risers, boards or lumber.
CONTRACTOR — The person providing municipal contract waste and
designated recyclable materials collection services under the municipal
contract.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Unbleached, unwaxed kraft paper that is
formed into layers with a fluted medium and manufactured into shipping
boxes and related products.
CURBSIDE — The correct location for the placement of refuse containers
and recycling containers for the purpose of collection by the contractor,
which shall be adjacent to the residential unit, and no more than five feet
from the public street used by collection vehicles.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those source separated
recyclable materials designated in § 164-27 of this article.
DWELLING UNIT or RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any building or portion thereof
designated or used as living quarters for one or more families, and mobile
homes, travel trailers or modular homes as defined in the Zoning Code of
the Borough of Middletown.82
Which have been segregated from regulated municipal waste, but
which have not been separated into different types of recyclable
materials; and
A.
Which have been placed in a recycling container for the purpose of
collection.
B.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 164-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-22
1:234
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any municipal contract for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials generated or located within the
municipality which was legally entered into prior to the effective date of this
article; and, when entered into, was legally enforceable.
EXTRA BAG TAG — A label which must be affixed to any bag in excess
of the permitted number of bags per week per household, tires, white
goods, oversized refuse items and yard waste in order for such items to be
collected by the contractor. The permitted number of bags per week per
household shall be established by contract between the municipality and the
contractor.
EXTRA REFUSE CONTAINERS — Refuse containers which are in excess of
the number of refuse containers per collection site limit in the municipal
contract.
FACILITY — Any specific site designated by Dauphin County (or approved
by Dauphin County) as the specific place or site to which source separated
recyclable materials must or may be delivered; or in the absence of a
specific site being designated by Dauphin County, any approved site for the
delivery of any category of source separated recyclable materials.
GENERATOR — A person who produces or creates any solid waste.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Desktop-generated paper limited to white
ledger, copy paper, and computer printout (CPO).
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaging in
manufacturing or processing, including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, and refineries.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in the
service to persons, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools, and universities.
INSTITUTIONAL MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal solid waste, as herein
defined, that is generated at an institutional establishment.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar materials, but not including grass clippings.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — Rental housing apartment buildings or apartment
complexes which have three or more dwelling units, and condominium
associations and homeowners' associations of three or more dwelling units
which are established and organized in such a manner that the association
provides common services for the residents of the housing development.
This definition shall also include apartment buildings and apartment
complexes owned and operated by institutional establishments if the
institutional establishment charges a rental fee for the dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT — The agreement between the municipality and a
permitted collector under which collection services are to be provided to
residential units for designated recyclable materials.
§ 164-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-22
1:235
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — The rules and
regulations adopted and revised from time to time by the municipality which
govern and pertain to the municipality's recycling program.
NEWSPRINT — Paper which has been used for the production of daily,
weekend and special edition publications commonly known as
"newspapers."
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — All commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and all community activities, excluding residential units and
multifamily units.
OPEN BURNING — A fire, the air contaminants from which are emitted
directly into the outdoor atmosphere and not directed thereto through a
flue.
PERMITTED COLLECTOR — A person who is in possession of all pertinent
permits and licenses which may be required by the municipality and
Dauphin County for the collection, storage or disposal of solid waste or
recyclable materials.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS — Recyclable plastics are identified on the bottom of the
container and consist of two types of containers, namely: #1 PETE (such
as soda bottles) and #2 HDPE (such as milk, spring water, and detergent
bottles).
QUARTERLY REPORT — A form supplied by the Borough to be completed
and signed by the contractor which specifies, inter alia, the source, type,
quantity and delivery point for the solid waste or source separated
recyclable materials and other pertinent information as requested.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Any material which would be regulated
municipal waste but for source separation and which will be processed into
raw materials or products which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, yard waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as solid waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of
reusable materials.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — For residential units, the term "recycling
container" shall refer to the container supplied by the municipality. For
multifamily units and nonresidential units, the term "recycling container"
shall refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass
and has handles of adequate strength for lifting.
§ 164-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-22
1:236
REFUSE CONTAINER — A receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal,
or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting and having
a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by
vectors; or a polyethylene bag which is specifically designed for storage
and collection, is protected against animal damage and overloading so as
to prevent littering or attraction of insects or rodents, and has a holding
strength capable of withstanding normal stresses until it is collected. With
respect to residential units, the weight of a refuse container and its contents
shall not exceed 30 pounds nor shall its capacity exceed 32 gallons.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any solid waste generated or collected
within the municipality which is garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities, and any sludge meeting the definition of "residual waste" or
"hazardous waste" from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include designated recyclable materials or
unacceptable waste.
RESIDENT(S) — Any person(s) owning and/or occupying a dwelling unit in
the Borough of Middletown.
RESIDENTIAL MUNICIPAL WASTE — The municipal solid waste, as defined
herein, generated at a dwelling unit, as also herein defined.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — See "dwelling unit."
SCAVENGING — The removal of designated recyclable materials in
violation of § 164-31 of this article.
SINGLE STREAM — A system where recyclable materials; commonly fibers
and glass, metal and plastic containers, are collected and processed
together.
SOURCE SEPARATE or SOURCE SEPARATION — The process of
separating, or the separation of, designated recyclable materials from other
solid waste at the location where generated for the purpose of recycling.
STEEL CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage containers commonly
known as "tin cans."
TIRE — Any pneumatic rubber automobile, truck, or farm implement tire.
WOODY WASTE — Leaves, twigs, branches, brush, bushes, shrubbery,
undergrowth, vines, kindling, driftwood, wood chips or any organic material
other than grass clippings. Processed wood products, including
construction debris, are not included.
§ 164-23. Mandatory recycling.
All persons within the municipality shall source separate designated
recyclable materials generated by such person or generated within a
§ 164-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-23
1:237
residential unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit occupied by such
person.
§ 164-24. On-site collection and disposal.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit, multifamily unit or
nonresidential unit within the municipality shall ensure that designated
recyclable material generated at such residential unit, multifamily unit
or nonresidential unit are collected and disposed of in accordance with
this article, the municipality's policies and procedures, and DCMWM Plan
requirements.
§ 164-25. Residential units.
Collection services for designated recyclable materials shall be provided to
residential units by the contractor. Each person who owns or occupies a
residential unit shall prepare designated recyclable materials for collection
in accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures.
§ 164-26. Multifamily units and nonresidential units.
§ 164-27. Designated recyclable materials.
A. Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit or multifamily
unit shall provide proper collection and disposal of designated
recyclable materials by utilizing a permitted collector to collect and
deliver such materials to a facility. With respect to designated
recyclable materials, a person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit
or nonresidential unit may request municipality approval to receive the
services under the municipal contract.
B. Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit or nonresidential
unit approved to receive services under the municipal contract shall
comply with the municipality's policies and procedures established for
residential units and notwithstanding the provisions of § 164-27B and C
of this article, shall source separate the recyclable materials designated
in § 164-27A.
C. Each person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that
does not receive services under the municipal contract shall:
(1) Provide recycling containers at easily accessible locations for
source separation of designated recyclable materials;
(2) Provide written instructions to all persons occupying each
multifamily unit and nonresidential unit to ensure that all
designated recyclable materials are source separated; and
(3) Provide collection and delivery of source separated designated
recyclable materials at a frequency of not less than once per
month.
§ 164-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-27
1:238
§ 164-28. Approved haulers.
A. Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall source
separate the following recyclable materials:
(1) Clear glass;
(2) Colored glass;
(3) Aluminum;
(4) Steel cans;
(5) Plastic; and
(6) Newsprint.
B. Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit shall source
separate the following recyclable materials:
(1) Clear glass;
(2) Colored glass;
(3) Aluminum;
(4) Steel cans;
(5) Plastic; and
(6) Newsprint.
C. Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit shall source
separate the following recyclable materials:
(1) Clear glass;
(2) Colored glass;
(3) Aluminum;
(4) Steel cans;
(5) Plastic;
(6) Newsprint;
(7) High-grade office paper; and
(8) Corrugated cardboard.
D. Woody waste is a designated recyclable material and shall be disposed
of in accordance with rules and regulations for the disposal of woody
waste as established by the municipality. Woody waste may not be
mixed with other types of commercial municipal waste or other
designated recyclable materials.
§ 164-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-28
1:239
§ 164-29. Illegal dumping and open burning.
§ 164-30. (Reserved)
A. With respect to designated recyclable materials, no person other than
the contractor shall collect, transport, store, process or dispose of such
designated recyclable materials. Each permitted collector that collects
or transports designated recyclable materials generated in any
residential unit, nonresidential unit or multifamily unit shall complete
quarterly reports reporting the amount of designated recyclable
material collected in the municipality.
B. No person who generates, owns or possesses designated recyclable
materials shall, by contract for collection services or otherwise cause,
permit or assist in the collection, storage, processing or disposal of
such designated recyclable materials by any person other than:
(1) The contractor with respect to designated recyclable materials
generated at residential units; and
(2) A permitted collector with respect to designated recyclable
materials generated at multifamily units or nonresidential units.
C. No permitted collector who collects or disposes of designated
recyclable materials by municipal contract for such services or
otherwise shall cause, permit or assist in the storage, collection,
processing or disposal of designated recyclable materials in a manner
which treats such materials as regulated municipal waste, or which is
otherwise inconsistent with source separation or recycling. Any
delivery of designated recyclable materials to a Dauphin Countyapproved
facility in accordance with the DCMWM Plan shall be deemed
to satisfy the requirements of this Subsection C.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A and B above, any
person who occupies a residential unit may deliver to a facility the
designated recyclable materials which were generated at such person's
residence.
E. All designated recyclable materials generated or collected in the
municipality shall be delivered directly to a facility in accordance with
the requirements of the DCMWM Plan and without any intervening
transfer, unloading, processing, sorting, salvaging, scavenging, or
reuse of any portion of any load of such designated recyclable materials
from the time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the facility.
A. No person shall store, process or dispose of any designated recyclable
materials except at a facility.
B. No person shall process or dispose of any designated recyclable
materials through open burning.
§ 164-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-31
1:240
§ 164-31. Scavenging.
From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable
materials, all such designated recyclable materials shall be the property of
the generator or the permitted collector who has contracted to provide onsite
collection, as provided in the municipal contract. It shall be a violation
of this article for any person, other than such permitted collector, to collect
or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such designated
recyclable materials.
§ 164-32. Existing contracts.
§ 164-33. Authorization of municipality.
The municipality shall have the power to issue the municipality's policies
and procedures governing all matters set forth in this article and any
other related matters. The municipality's policies and procedures shall
be effective when issued in writing and signed by the manager of the
municipality. The municipality shall have the power to establish record and
reporting requirements, and standards and procedures for the issuance,
administration and revocation of licenses, as deemed necessary, including,
without limitation, application procedures, fees, standards and conditions
for licenses; the fixing of a monetary bond, with or without surety, to secure
the compliance by any permitted collector with any such requirements,
standards or procedures; and any other matters deemed necessary or
convenient by the municipality. In the event of suspension or revocation
of any license which is issued by the municipality or Dauphin County, the
person whose collection permit is suspended or revoked shall refund to
each customer any prepaid fees.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair the obligations of
any existing contract.
B. No renewal or modification of any existing contract, and no new
contract for the storage, on-site collection, processing or disposal of
designated recyclable materials, shall be entered into after the effective
date of this article unless such renewal or modification or new contract
shall conform to the requirements of this article and the municipality's
policies and procedures.
C. No contract which is entered into, renewed, extended, modified or
assigned after the effective date of this section shall provide for on-site
collection services to be performed after the commencement date for
designated recyclable materials generated at residential units. This
provision shall not apply to the contract between the municipality and
the contractor. With respect to any contract which violates this
Subsection C, such contract shall be deemed void and the hauler that is
a party to such contract shall reimburse to the applicable residential
units any funds which have been paid for such on-site collection
services, and shall not collect or attempt to collect any funds for such
on-site collection services.
§ 164-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-34
1:241
§ 164-34. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or cause or permit or assist
in the violation of, any provision of this article or any provision of the
municipality's policies and procedures. All unlawful conduct shall also
constitute a public nuisance.
§ 164-35. Violations and penalties.
Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates
this article or any regulations thereof shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $25 upon a first conviction, not to exceed $50 upon a second
conviction and not to exceed $100 upon a third or subsequent conviction.
The above fines shall not be applicable to a conviction for § 164-31 hereof
or for the unlawful taking of containers designated for recycling usage or
taking the contents of the same, which latter actions shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed $300 per property. No enforcement of this article shall
be made until three months from the effective date of this article.
§ 164-36. Persons liable.
For purposes of the obligations established by this article or the
municipality's policies and procedures, and for purposes of any fine, penalty,
imprisonment or other sanction, the terms "person," "residential unit,"
"multifamily unit," and "nonresidential unit" shall:
§ 164-37. Injunctive relief.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality
may institute proceedings to restrain any violation of, or to require
compliance with, this article and/or the municipality's policies and
procedures.
§ 164-38. Concurrent remedies.
The penalties and remedies set forth in this article are in addition to, not
in lieu of, any fines, penalties or remedies provided in the municipality's
policies and procedures. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not
prevent the municipality from exercising any other remedy provided under
A. Include officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity
having officers and directors; and
B. Refer to and impose joint and several liability upon both:
(1) The persons residing in or occupying any such residential,
multifamily or nonresidential units; and
(2) The owner, landlord, condominium owners' association and/or
agent of an owner, landlord or condominium owners' association of
such premises.
§ 164-34 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 164-38
1:242
this article or the municipality's policies and procedures, or available at law
or equity.
§ 164-39. Prior ordinances.
Article IV, former §§ 164-21 through 164-32, are repealed in their entirety.
Any other ordinances which pertain to designated recyclable materials are
hereby repealed to the extent of any inconsistency with this article.
§ 164-40. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the municipality that this article would have been enacted if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had
not been included herein.
§ 164-41. When effective.
This article shall take effect and be in force immediately upon its enactment
by the Council of the Borough of Middletown as provided by law.
§ 164-42. Intermunicipal agreement. [Added 1-6-2009 by Ord. No.
1250, approved 1-6-2009]
A. The Borough of Middletown hereby authorizes the execution of the
"Intermunicipal Agreement Regarding Use of Woody Waste Facility
between the Borough, the Township of Lower Swatara and the
Boroughs of Highspire and Royalton" in such form as presented to
Council and as attached hereto.
B. The agreement shall become effective upon its authorization by each of
the participating municipalities by passage of an ordinance.
§ 164-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-42
1:243
Chapter 168
HOMESTEAD LOAN PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Rental property — See Ch. 219.
Taxation — See Ch. 243.
§ 168-1. Legislative intent.
A program of the Borough of Middletown has been created known as
the "Homestead Loan Program." The purpose of the program is the
improvement of housing stock in Middletown; to promote an increased
vitality of neighborhoods; and to provide decent, safe, sanitary, single-family
housing that is in conformance with the Code of Ordinances of the Borough
of Middletown and the Borough's Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended
from time to time.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABSENTEE LANDLORD — A person who holds the legal or equitable title
to any parcel of real estate located in the Borough of Middletown or who
holds the equitable or legal title to any improvements on real estate or
any building located in the Borough of Middletown but does not maintain
primary residence at that real estate.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH SECRETARY — That employee of the Borough appointed to the
position of Secretary pursuant to the Borough Code.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
CONVERSION — The creation of a single-family dwelling in a property that
was previously a multifamily dwelling.
FINANCE DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the Borough of
Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
LOAN — The lending of funds in exchange for a mortgage agreement and
promissory note.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling having more than one household
or more than one independent outside access to separate living areas not
otherwise easily accessible, or more than one party wall in common with
adjoining dwellings.
§ 164-42 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 168-2
1:244
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling having only one household from
ground to roof, independent outside access, one side yard and not more
than one party wall in common with an adjoining dwelling.
TENANT — A person who has the use, either by himself or with others, of a
dwelling unit owned by a person other than himself.
§ 168-3. Source of funds.
The funding for the Homestead Loan Program is derived from residential,
rehabilitation loan repayments for loans previously granted through
federally funded projects. All monies accrued through loan repayments and/
or interest earnings shall be set aside in a special account, referred to
as the Homestead Program Account for the specific purpose of supporting
community redevelopment through the Homestead Loan Program in
accordance with the policies herein. The Finance Director shall be the
custodian of these funds.
§ 168-4. Executive Committee.
Authority to approve loans shall be vested in the Homestead Loan Program
Executive Committee. Said Committee will consist of one member of
Council who will serve as the Chairperson and four members of the general
public, each of whom shall serve a four-year term. Those members having
been appointed pursuant to Resolution Number 240 of 1993, the
predecessor to this chapter, shall continue in said capacity for the balance
of their terms.
§ 168-5. Home improvement loans.
A. It shall be the goal of this type of loan to provide low-and moderateincome
property owners with low-interest-rate loans so that singlefamily
dwellings in the Borough may be brought into compliance with
building, electric, sewer, or other codes as defined by the Middletown
Code of Ordinances.
B. All loans shall be to low-and moderate-income persons (as determined
by the Section 8 income guidelines of the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development for the Harrisburg-Lebanon-Carlisle
Pennsylvania MSA; or any successor housing program as administered
by the Dauphin County Housing Authority).
C. Loans to absentee landlords shall be governed by the requirement that
all tenants within the structure for which the loan is being applied must
fall within the low-and moderate-income limits; and tenants must
continue to maintain income eligibility for the balance of the loan term.
D. Loans shall be in accordance with the following guidelines:
§ 168-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-5
1:245
§ 168-6. Multifamily building conversion loans.
Loan
Applicant
Maximum
Loan
Annual
Interest Rate Maximum Term
Low income $10,000 1% per annum 15 years
Moderate
income
$10,000 2% per annum 10 years
Absentee
landlord
$10,000 6% per annum 5 years
E. Loans shall be awarded according to the following priorities:
Priority Loan Category
1 Low-moderate income/code violation correction
2 Low-moderate income/housing renovation
F. Loans shall be secured by a construction covenant agreement,
promissory note and open-ended mortgage. The costs of preparing
these documents shall be paid by the Borough. The Borrower shall be
responsible for the costs of recording the construction covenant
agreement and mortgage, which cost shall be added to the amount of
the loan. The construction covenant agreement shall place a restrictive
covenant on the property prohibiting the property from being used as
anything other than a single-family dwelling.
G. All payments to contractors will be made directly by the Borough on
behalf of the loan recipients as submitted to the Borough Secretary.
H. The Borough Secretary shall promulgate policies for the validation of
the applicant's credit worthiness and the appropriate cost of proposed
code or home improvements. The Borough Secretary is authorized to
request information necessary for the Executive Committee to make a
reasonable determination whether the loan should be approved.
I. The Executive Committee may reasonably deny any request where
incomplete information has been supplied, or where, in its opinion, the
total income of the single-family residential household exceeds income
eligibility, or where the proposed code or home improvements do not
meet with the goals of this chapter.
J. Loans shall not be made for construction activities that will convert a
single-family dwelling into a multifamily dwelling.
A. Said loans shall be known as "conversion loans." It shall be the goal of
these loans to provide all property owners with an incentive to convert
multifamily buildings into single-family dwellings.
B. The resulting single-family dwelling may be owner-occupied or a rental
unit but the proposed conversion project must result in a clear singlefamily
use, in the sole opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 168-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 168-6
1:246
§ 168-7. Subordination.
In those cases where it is necessary for the property owner to obtain
other financing sources, with permission of the Executive Committee, the
Borough Secretary may enter into a subordination agreement whereby a
junior or inferior lien position is taken with respect to the loan mortgage.
However, all costs associated with this agreement or filing shall be the
burden of the party requesting the Borough subordinate its position.
§ 168-8. Delinquent loans.
A loan shall be considered delinquent where no payment has been received
for 30 calendar days. Upon said delinquency, a written notice of delinquency
shall be issued to the borrower. Whenever a loan becomes delinquent for a
period greater than 60 days, the Borough Secretary shall issue a certified
letter, return receipt requested, notifying the borrower of said delinquency.
A late charge of 1% per annum may be charged to the loan for delinquent
C. Loans can only be issued to property owners and all property owners
must consent to the borrowing.
D. Loans shall be in accordance with the following guidelines:
Loan
Applicant Maximum Loan
Annual Interest
Rate
Maximum
Term
Property
owner
$10,000 2% per annum 10 years
E. Loans shall be secured by a construction covenant agreement,
promissory note and open-ended mortgage. The costs of preparing
these documents shall be paid by the Borough. The Borrower shall be
responsible for the costs of recording the construction covenant
agreement and mortgage, which cost shall be added to the amount of
the loan. The construction covenant agreement shall place a restrictive
covenant on the property prohibiting the property from being used as
anything other than a single-family dwelling.
F. All payments to contractors will be made directly by the Borough on
behalf of the loan recipients as submitted to the Borough Secretary.
G. The Code Enforcement Officer shall promulgate policies for the
validation of the applicant's conversion plan. The application shall
describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional
information and shall be accompanied by such drawings of the
proposed work as may be required by the Code Enforcement Officer for
an intelligent understanding of the work proposed. All permits must be
issued prior to payment of funds.
H. The Executive Committee may reasonably deny any request where
incomplete information has been supplied, or where, in its opinion, the
proposed conversion does not meet with the goals of this chapter.
§ 168-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-8
1:247
payments for mortgages issued on or after the effective date of this chapter.
Delinquent loans will be collected upon the sale or transfer of the real
estate.
§ 168-9. Records.
The Borough Secretary shall maintain all the records associated with this
chapter.
Chapter 179
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open containers of alcoholic beverages — See
Ch. 98, Art. II.
Curfew — See Ch. 132.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 179-1. Loitering or prowling prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or
in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that
warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.
A. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight
upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any
object.
B. As a procedural condition to conviction, if practicable and unless flight
by the actor or other circumstance makes it impracticable, a police
officer shall, prior to any arrest under this section, afford the actor an
opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by
requesting said actor to identify himself or herself and explain his or
her presence and conduct. Also, no person shall be convicted of an
offense under this section if it appears at the hearing that the
explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police
officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
C. Types of loitering. No person shall loiter in a public place in such
manner as to: [Added 11-6-1990 by Ord. No. 991]
(1) Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
(2) Create or cause to be created any annoyance to any person or
persons.
(3) Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
§ 168-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 179-1
1:248
§ 179-1.1. Definitions. [Added 11-6-1990 by Ord. No. 991]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LOITERING — Remaining idle essentially in one location; lingering or
spending time idly; loafing or walking about aimlessly in one vicinity or
neighborhood; or "hanging around" for no legitimate purpose other than to
linger in the area.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including any
public street or public sidewalk or the front of and the area immediately
adjacent to any school, parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern or other place
of business.
§ 179-2. Lingering in or about specific facilities. [Amended
8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 862, approved 8-8-1983]
Under circumstances falling short of rendering such person an implied
invitee or licensee, it shall be unlawful for any person to linger in or about
and for a purpose unconnected with lawful activity related to facilities of
a restricted public nature to which the public or a substantial group has
access, including a store, shopping center, school, railroad stop or station,
the post office, the Borough's municipal or community building or any
place of public worship or any parking area serving any such facility or
any residential, municipal or commercial parking area to which the public
or a substantial group has access. Such specific places shall be deemed
to include, to the fullest extent permitted as reasonable under all the
circumstances, any point within 100 feet of such place or facility for the
effective dispelling of alarm for safety of persons or property, prevention of
disruption of activities in which such facilities specialize and minimizing of
trespassing or trespassing ab initio.
§ 179-3. Group loitering. [Amended 8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 862,
approved 8-8-1983]
On any public street or parking area of any type adjacent thereto open as
a parking area or street to the use of the public, irrespective of whether
such public use is a matter of right, and including streets as well as parking
lots open to public use as a privilege by permission of the owner, including
sidewalks thereof (and walls, steps or points immediately adjacent thereto
so as to minimize evasion), it shall be unlawful for three or more persons as
a group or as interacting individuals or groups to linger for more than 10
minutes under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons
or property in the vicinity.
(4) Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place, as defined in § 179-1.1 of this chapter. This shall include the
making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or
insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the
person to whom, or in whose hearing, they are made.
§ 179-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-3
1:249
§ 179-4. Requests by police officers to leave. [Amended 11-6-1990
by Ord. No. 991]
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 179-1C of this chapter,
any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who
is observed by a police officer standing around in violation of this chapter
for a period of 10 minutes or more shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.
§ 179-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-6-1990 by Ord. No.
991]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and/or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 179-6. Construction and interpretation.
A. A police officer, acting reasonably and objectively, may warn such
persons to disperse.
B. If reasonably necessary to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted, a police officer may clear the area of such persons, causing
those who refuse or fail to leave to be taken to the police station. At the
police station, the Sergeant on duty shall ascertain relevant facts,
under constitutional safeguards, and assume centralized responsibility
for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement. Such
persons may thereupon be permitted to return or be escorted to their
respective homes if such action is consonant with dispelled alarm for
the safety of persons or property in the area affected. Said Sergeant
shall promptly, within 24 hours, file a written report with the Chief.
C. As a last resort for effective crowd control, after consultation with the
Mayor, proceedings may be instituted before the District Justice under
this section.
A. Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions, parts,
phrases and terms of §§ 179-1, 179-2 and 179-3 and the application
thereof; if any of such are held invalid, this shall have no effect in any
other respect, and the invalidity of any minimum number shall have no
effect on the applicability of the minimum number constitutionally
permissible or any higher number.
B. A constitutional construction is likewise intended in every respect, and,
from excess of caution, exercise of First Amendment rights is hereby
specifically excepted from the provisions of § 179-1, 179-2 or 179-3.
C. To be as fair and specific as possible, the Mayor is authorized to give
advisory opinions, in writing or immediately reduced to writing, which
shall be binding and shall be adhered to by the police, until an
§ 179-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 179-6
1:250
§ 179-7. Continuing evaluation.
Aided by normal monthly distribution to each Councilman of all reports to
the Chief of Police and of all advisory opinions of the Mayor hereinbefore
provided for, the Borough Council and its appropriate committee shall
oversee and review the continuing effectiveness, in meeting impelling
needs, of this chapter.
Chapter 182
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 182, Mechanical Standards, adopted 9-7-1993 by Ord.
No. 1046, was repealed 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194, approved
7-11-2005. See now Ch. 114, Construction Code, Uniform.]
Chapter 185
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 101.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 252.
appropriate amendment, if any, has been duly considered and enacted
by the Borough Council, interpreting terms, phrases, parts or any
provisions or the application thereof with respect to conduct and
circumstances definitely described, preferably, where practicable, in
response to signed letters addressed to the Mayor at the Middletown
Community Building, 60 West Emaus Street, Middletown, Pennsylvania
17057.
§ 179-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-7
1:251

ARTICLE I
Noise Disturbances
[Adopted 9-12-1977 by Ord. No. 713, approved 9-12-1977]
§ 185-1. Certain activities prohibited; violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988
by Ord. No. 972, approved 7-11-1988]
A fine not to exceed $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, upon refusal
to pay such fine and costs, imprisonment in the Dauphin County Jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days shall be the sentence, upon conviction
thereof, for any person who shall, in violation of this article, unreasonably
make, continue or continue or cause to be made or continued any noise
disturbance hereby prohibited, annoying or disturbing a reasonable person
of normal sensitivities.
A. Hereby prohibited is operating, playing or permitting the operation or
playing of any radio, television set, phonograph or similar device which
produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to create
a noise disturbance (any sound which annoys or disturbs a reasonable
person of normal sensitivities) across a real property boundary. A real
property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by
one person from that owned by another person, but not including
intrabuilding real property divisions.
B. Also prohibited is owning, possessing or harboring any dog or animal
which howls, barks, meows or makes other sounds frequently or for
continuous duration which create a noise disturbance. To the end that
no person in Middletown shall be deprived of or suffer unreasonable
interference with peace, quiet, rest or sleep, this prohibition shall apply
broadly, as in the July 1977 City of Harrisburg Ordinance No. 15, to any
owner, any person having a right of property in such animal, any person
who keeps or harbors such animal or has it in such person's care or any
person who permits such animal to remain on or about any premises
occupied by such person. Any person who violates this Subsection B
shall be given notice thereof, either in writing or orally, by the Borough
police. Any person who violates this Subsection B after receiving one
warning shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced as hereinbefore
provided in the first sentence of § 185-1. [Added 9-12-1977 by Ord.
No. 716, approved 9-12-1977]
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:253

ARTICLE II
Vehicle Noise
[Adopted 9-12-1977 by Ord. No. 714, approved 9-12-1977]
§ 185-2. Vehicle operation restrictions. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord.
No. 943, approved 4-6-1987; 12-7-1992 by Ord. No. 1035, approved
12-7-1992]
§ 185-3. Interpretation of provisions.
All provisions and terms and any application thereof are severable. No
application of this section to ambulance, fire or police vehicles, however, is
intended.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on any public
street or private property in the Borough of Middletown in such a
manner as to make any unnecessary sound which annoys, disturbs or
perturbs reasonable persons with normal sensitivities or reasonably
may be perceived to injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of any person, whether by racing the motor, spinning
the wheels or other means lacking redeeming social utility.
B. Such operation includes operation of any part of a vehicle, such as its
motor, irrespective of the extent, if any, to which the entire vehicle is in
motion. It may be standing or parked.
C. A fine not to exceed $1,000 plus costs of prosecution, and, upon refusal
to pay fine and costs, imprisonment in the Dauphin County Jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days shall be the sentence, upon conviction
thereof, for any person who shall be in violation of this article.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-3
1:255

ARTICLE III
Construction Noise
[Adopted 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 1180, approved 7-12-2004]
§ 185-4. Prohibited during certain hours and at certain levels.
§ 185-5. Exceptions.
A. The following acts and the causing thereof are in violation of this
article:
(1) The operation or permitting operation of any tools or equipment
used in the erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration
or repair of any building in any residential district or section and
the excavation of streets or highways in any residential district or
section:
(a) Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the following
day on Monday through Saturday and before 10:00 a.m. and
after 6:00 p.m. on Sunday during the period that Eastern
standard time is in effect. When Eastern daylight time is in
effect, the prohibited hours shall be between 8:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. on the following day on Monday through Saturday
and before 10:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. on Sunday.
(b) At any time other than the times set forth in Subsection A(1)(a)
herein, such that the sound level at or across a real property
line (boundary) exceeds 85 dB(A) for a period of one hour or
longer.
B. The following terms are defined for purposes of this subsection:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level, in decibels,
as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The
level so read is designated "dB(A)."
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit for measuring the sound pressure level, equal
to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure
of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
A. In cases of urgent necessity, where public health and safety will not be
impaired and upon evaluation of the loss or inconvenience to any party
in interest, the Borough Manager may grant exceptions to the
provisions of § 185-4. Such exceptions may be granted by permit issued
by the Borough Manager upon written application and shall be valid for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. This article shall not apply to or be enforced against the following:
(1) Any vehicle or personnel of the Borough while engaged upon
necessary public business.
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:257
§ 185-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs, by
imprisonment for a term of not more than 30 days. Each instance during
which any person violates any provision of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
(2) Personnel or organizations while engaged in excavations or repairs
of bridges, streets, highways or utilities by or on behalf of the
Borough when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impossible to perform such work during permitted hours.
(3) Any vehicle or personnel of the Borough or any public or private
utility company while engaged upon necessary repairs or
reconnections of such utilities during outages or other emergencies
or when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to
perform such work during permitted hours.
(4) Emergency work. Any work performed for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage
threatened or caused by an emergency.
§ 185-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 185-6
1:258
Chapter 188
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 188, Nuisances, adopted 5-13-1935, as amended, was
repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1332. See now Ch. 210, Property
Maintenance.]
Chapter 190
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 190, Numbering of Buildings, adopted 7-8-1907, as
amended, was repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1332. See now Ch.
210, Property Maintenance.]
Chapter 195
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open containers of alcoholic beverages — See
Ch. 98, Art. II.
Curfew — See Ch. 132.
Loitering — See Ch. 179.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
Public places — See Ch. 212.
Littering — See Ch. 235, Art. III.
§ 195-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this chapter to ensure the preservation
of public parklands, recreation facilities and conservation areas within the
Borough of Middletown for the perpetual enjoyment of the residents of
the Borough, to regulate activities within these areas consistent with the
enjoyment of unspoiled natural settings and park facilities and to prevent
any nuisances to the residents of the Borough in the use of such public
parklands, recreation facilities and conservation areas or in the enjoyment
of private property adjacent to them.
§ 195-2. Preservation of property, natural resources and wildlife.
No person, except those authorized by the Borough and conducting
Borough business, shall, in recreation, park or conservation areas:
A. Injure, deface, disturb, befoul or in any manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any part of any recreation, park or conservancy site owned
by the Borough, nor any building, sign structure, equipment, utility or
other property found within.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-2
1:259
§ 195-3. Operating policy. [Amended 8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 861,
approved 8-8-1983; 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1344, approved
10-3-2017]
B. Remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing
thing or any rock or other mineral.
C. Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner deliberately disturb or cause to
be disturbed any wild bird or animal within the recreation, park or
conservancy sites owned by the Borough, except as permitted in
§ 195-4B.
D. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake or other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result
in the pollution of said waters; nor to dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage,
refuse or trash anywhere within the park or conservancy sites owned by
the Borough; but rather to make use of proper receptacles where these
are provided, and where receptacles are not so provided, all such
materials shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. Hours of operation.
(1) Recreation, park and conservation areas shall generally be open
daily to the public between dawn and dusk, with certain limited
exceptions.
(a) This shall not preclude free access to and egress from the
Swatara Creek at the Pennsylvania Fish Commission boat
launching ramp near the end of South Union Street in
connection with night fishing.
(b) Use of any lighted recreational areas, including the basketball
courts, tennis courts, and sand volleyball court at Hoffer Park
and the baseball field at Oak Hill Park, may continue past
regular operating hours for as long as the lights are lit.
Arrangements for use of the lights must be made in advance by
special permit from the office of the Borough Manager.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than Borough
personnel conducting Borough business therein, to occupy or be
present in said park during any hours in which the park is not open
to the public, except by special permit from the office of the
Borough Manager.
(3) Any section or part of the recreation, park or conservation areas
may be declared closed to the public at any time and for any
interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
During such periods of time, it shall be unlawful to enter upon or to
§ 195-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 195-3
1:260
occupy such areas or portions thereof contrary to posted
regulations.
B. Group activity. Whenever any Middletown group, association or
organization desires to use recreation or park facilities for a particular
purpose, a representative of said group, association or organization
shall first obtain a special permit for such use in specially designated
areas from the office of the Borough Manager.
(1) The Borough Manager may delegate his responsibilities under this
section to another appropriate Borough employee or the
Recreation Director of the Olmsted Regional Recreation Board (or
any successor organization).
(2) The Borough Council may adopt a building or park or conservation
area utilization form to be used by the Borough Manager or
designee.
C. The Borough Manager or designee shall grant the permit if it appears
that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the
general use of the park by members of the public, if the intended use is
consistent with the purposes of the building, park or conservation area
and implicit in their character, and if the group, association or
organization meets all other conditions contained in the application.
(1) In the event that application is made by a group, association or
organization for a use that is not consistent with the intended
purposes of the park, such as theatrical or entertainment
performances, then the Borough Manager or designee shall seek
the approval of Borough Council for such special permit.
(2) In the case of any special permit or request for use, the Borough
may require an indemnity bond or other security to protect the
Borough from any liability of any kind or character and to protect
Borough property from damage.
D. Use of facilities. Facilities and areas in Borough recreation, park or
conservancy sites shall be used only for the purposes designated or
implicit in their character. Special activities, including but not limited to
flying model airplanes, tournaments, and the operation of motor
scooters, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and similar
vehicles, shall be permitted only at locations or trails specifically
designated for such use and at times established. No golf shall be
played on any Borough property, in any Borough parkland or
conservation area, irrespective of the type of balls used.
E. Motor vehicles. Licensed motor vehicles shall be permitted only on
designated roadways. The speed limit for such vehicles on such
roadways shall be 10 miles per hour. Motor scooters, motorcycles,
minibikes, go-carts and snowmobiles shall not be permitted on
roadways designated for licensed vehicular traffic unless licensed for
travel on the public roads of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All
§ 195-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-3
1:261
§ 195-4. Prohibited activities.
vehicles shall be parked in areas or places so provided and designated.
Parking in places contrary to posted regulations and times is
prohibited, and such vehicles may be removed by the Borough at the
owner's expense. All vehicles must exit the park area at the regular
closing time or within 15 minutes after the lights have been turned
off if the driver is attending an event at Hoffer or Oak Hill Parks as
set forth in Subsection A(1)(b), whichever is later. It shall be unlawful
to clean, wash, repair or do any work whatsoever on private vehicles
within recreation, park and conservation areas, except for emergency
repairs.
F. Fees. The Borough Manager or designee shall have the authority to
issue a fee schedule for special permits and/or requests for use, set the
amount of deposits and prescribe conditions under which deposits are
collected or forfeited. Such revenue shall be used for recreation, park
and conservation purposes within the general fund.
A. Fires and fireworks. Fires may not be built or allowed anywhere in
recreation, park or conservation areas except in stoves, fireplaces or
designated areas provided for that purpose. Permits must be secured
for any fireworks at any time and for fires to be maintained after closing
time.
B. Animals. It shall be unlawful for owners of animals to permit the same
within recreation, park or conservation areas. Permits may be obtained
for the training and/or exhibition of animals in designated areas. It shall
be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any recreation, park or
conservation area.
C. Gambling. Gambling is prohibited in recreation, park or conservation
lands.
D. Merchandising, advertising and signs. Municipal recreation facilities
are public areas where the benefit of use includes the right to enjoy the
environment without the intrusion of commercial enterprise. Therefore,
to preserve and protect the aesthetics of recreation spaces, the
Borough Council herein prohibits most types of commercial enterprise,
solicitation, fund-raising activity, and advertisement. The only exception
to such prohibition is a narrow exception, which would allow certain
recreation facilities owned by the Borough of Middletown to recover
part of the maintenance expense of operating such facilities through
the assignment of the opportunity to seek sponsorships. [Amended
4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1038, approved 4-5-1993; 5-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 1222, approved 5-7-2007]
(1) In recreation, park or conservation areas, no person shall:
(a) Offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place any
stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of
§ 195-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 195-4
1:262
any such article or thing, except for special community events,
such as the Colonial Arts and Crafts Festival, Civil War
Reenactment Festival, or like events, as designated under the
authority of the Middletown Borough Council and adopted by
resolution. The Main Pavilion in Hoffer Park may not be used
for commercial activities otherwise.
(b) Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to
any article or service for sale or hire.
(c) Post, paste, fasten, paint, write, draw, carve, tack or affix any
placard, bill, notice, sign, advertisement or any inscription
whatever upon any structure, tree, stone, fence, thing or
enclosure within any recreation, park or conservation area or
on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to any
recreation, park or conservation area, including but not limited
to all parks and fields, the Middletown Centre Square, and
Middletown's James and Edith Booser Reservoir, except that
the Borough Highway/Property Department may have
informational signs placed within such areas.
(2) Sponsorship. The Borough Council herein authorizes a local
nonprofit recreation agency to underwrite the cost of maintenance
of two specific facilities located in the Borough, through the sale of
sponsorship opportunities to support an event, activity, person, or
organization financially or through the provision of products or
services. The two specific facilities and the requirements are:
(a) Oak Hills ball field. The Middletown Amateur Baseball
Association (MABA), or its successor, may, for the purpose of
underwriting the cost of its community operation, affix
temporary canvas or plywood sponsorship signs upon the chain
link outfield fence and across the chain link backstop. The
sponsorship signs may state the names, logos, and contact
information of those persons, entities, corporations or firms
which have provided financial support for MABA. These
temporary postings must be removed at the end of each youth
baseball season and must be in a style and aesthetic that does
not interfere with the enjoyment of the baseball facility. The
Middletown Borough Council herein authorizes the MABA to
use its reasonable judgment in soliciting commercial support.
The MABA must transmit to the Borough Manager, by
correspondence prior to the opening day of each baseball
season, the name of each entity that will appear upon the
temporary signage.
(b) Community swimming pool. The Olmsted Regional Recreation
Board (Rec. Board), or its successor, may, for the purpose of
underwriting the cost of its community operation, affix
temporary canvas or plywood sponsorship signs upon the chain
link eastern fence only. The sponsorship signs may state the
§ 195-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-4
1:263
§ 195-5. Enforcement authority.
The Borough Manager or other agents designated by the Borough Council,
including the Recreation Director, shall administer the provisions of this
chapter, including the establishment and collection of fees, the preparation
of application forms, the issuance and revocation of permits, the
promulgation of rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this
chapter and all other decisions relative thereto. When acts or conduct of
individuals or groups is determined to be in violation of this chapter or
names, logos, and contact information of those persons,
entities, corporations or firms which have provided financial
support for the public pool or the Rec. Board. These temporary
postings must be removed at the end of each pool season and
must be in a style and aesthetic that does not interfere with
the enjoyment of the pool facility. The Middletown Borough
Council herein authorizes the Rec. Board to use its reasonable
judgment in soliciting commercial support. The Rec. Board
must transmit to the Borough Manager, by correspondence
prior to the opening of the pool each season, the name of each
entity that will appear upon the temporary signage.
(3) The Borough Manager, or his designee, is herein authorized to
remove any sponsorship sign not identified by the MABA or the
Rec. Board as a sponsor or any sign that is in violation with the
requirements established herein.
E. Aircraft. It shall be unlawful to land a private or commercial airplane or
helicopter on recreation, park or conservation lands.
F. Personal conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person in any recreation,
park or conservation area to:
(1) Disturb the peace or use profane or obscene language.
(2) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(3) Commit any assault or battery or engage in fighting.
(4) Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage, including beer.
(5) Violate any rule for the use of the park made or approved by the
Borough.
(6) Prevent the use by any person or interfere with the use by any
person of any park, recreation or conservation lands, building or
facilities so long as such use is in compliance with this chapter and
the rules applicable to such use.
(7) Act in an unlawful, disorderly or disruptive manner or against the
best interests of the areas or other people.
(8) Ride a bicycle on the infield of a ball diamond.
§ 195-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 195-5
1:264
rules and regulations promulgated by the authority of this chapter or not
to be in the best interest of the recreation, park and conservancy area or
when such acts or conduct endangers other people or private or public
property or when such acts are deemed to be disruptive to the surrounding
neighborhood, the Borough police, the Recreation Director or their agents
assigned to such areas or programs shall have the authority to cause such
acts to be terminated or to expel the perpetrators of such acts from the
area or to call the Borough police to arrest and detain such individual or
individuals or to file a complaint for the violation of this chapter with a
District Justice.
§ 195-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No.
972, approved 7-11-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
not to exceed $1,000 and not less than $25, plus costs, and, upon refusal
to pay the same, to be imprisoned in the Dauphin County Jail for a period
not to exceed three days. For each succeeding offense, the minimum fine
shall be increased an additional $25, making such minimum fine $50 for
the second offense, $75 for the third offense and so on, but in no event to
exceed $1,000, the statutory maximum. Where such violator has removed,
destroyed, damaged, defaced or befouled the recreation, park or
conservation area or the contents thereof, the cost of maintenance, repair
or replacement shall be charged to such person or group in addition to any
fines levied. Further use of recreation and park facilities may be denied to
violators of this chapter in addition to the imposition of fines and/or costs.
Chapter 198
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult bookstores — See Ch. 93.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 98.
Curfew — See Ch. 132.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 138.
Firearms — See Ch. 151.
Loitering — See Ch. 179.
Noise — See Ch. 185.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 195.
§ 198-1. Damaging or defacing Borough property prohibited.
[Amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 307, approved 2-9-1953; 5-12-1975
by Ord. No. 666, approved 5-12-1975; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943]
A. No person shall hereafter willfully damage or deface Borough property
of any kind whatever. Any person who shall deface or damage any
Borough property whatsoever shall, in addition to any penalty imposed
for the crime or offense involved in such violation, be liable to
§ 195-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-1
1:265
§ 198-2. Disorderly conduct prohibited. [Added 11-10-1975 by Ord.
No. 672, approved 11-10-1975; amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943]
reimburse the Borough for the damage done or for removal of the
defacement done, as the case may be.
B. Any police officer of the Borough of Middletown shall be and is hereby
authorized to arrest, on view and without warrant, any person violating
Subsection A above.
A. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause
public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or recklessly creating a risk
thereof, such person:
(1) Engages in fighting or threatening or in violent or tumultuous
behavior.
(2) Makes unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture
or display or addresses abusive language to any person present.
(3) Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
(4) Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of
alcohol, narcotics or other drugs not therapeutically administered
to the degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or
property or annoy persons in his or her vicinity.
(5) Having no legal privilege to do so, intentionally or recklessly
obstructs any highway or other public passage, whether alone or
with others. No person shall be guilty of violating this Subsection
A(5) solely because of a gathering of persons to hear him speak or
otherwise communicate or solely because of being a member of
such gathering.
(6) Refuses to obey a reasonable official request or order to move:
(a) To prevent obstruction of a public passage; or
(b) To maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in
dangerous proximity to a fire or other hazard.
(7) Refuses or knowingly fails to obey an order to disperse where three
or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly conduct
likely to cause substantial harm or serious public inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm and a policeman or other public servant
engaged in executing or enforcing the law orders the participants
and others in the immediate vicinity to disperse.
B. In relation to disorderly conduct, the word "public" means affecting or
likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or a substantial
group has access. Among the places included are streets, transport
facilities, schools, apartment houses, places of business or amusement,
§ 198-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-2
1:266
§ 198-3. Tampering with or injuring street lamps prohibited. [Added
4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
No person or persons shall injure or tamper in any way with any of the
street lamps in any manner or form whatsoever.
§ 198-4. Jumping onto or off moving trains. [Added 4-6-1987 by
Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
No person shall jump or climb onto or off any moving railroad train or car
within the limits of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 198-5. Ball playing or throwing missiles.
§ 198-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987; amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 200
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 185. Littering — See Ch. 235, Art. III.
shopping centers and plazas, the Village of Pineford, any neighborhood
or any premises open to a substantial group or the public.
C. Any person violating any provision of this section may be arrested, on
view and without a warrant, by any police officer of the Borough.
A. The playing of ball and the wanton throwing of missiles of any kind,
including but not limited to balls, snowballs, stones and bricks, upon or
onto any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Borough is hereby
prohibited. [Added 2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 313, approved 2-9-1953;
amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
B. This prohibition shall apply to any parking areas or landscaped areas
maintained by the Borough, including, for example, the Fish
Commission site, the Park and Ride Lot and the Elm Court landscaped
area. Where parks are involved, said prohibition against ball playing
shall be subordinated to park rules promulgated by or pursuant to
Chapter 195, Parks and Recreation Areas, or the equivalent thereof,
when, where and to the extent that ball playing is thereby permitted.
[Added 5-9-1983 by Ord. No. 850, approved 5-9-1983]
§ 198-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-6
1:267
§ 200-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to regulate the distribution of certain materials,
peddling, soliciting and related activities within the Borough of Middletown.
The registration of persons engaged in the above-mentioned activities is
required so that the identity of persons going door to door or distributing
materials within the Borough may be established, so that general
regulations may be more effectively enforced for the protection and
maintenance of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Borough and to prevent dishonest business practices and dishonest
solicitations of funds in the Borough.
§ 200-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who distributes or causes to be distributed on
any street or public place within the Borough any handbill, advertisement,
circular, card, pamphlet or printed material of any kind other than a
regularly delivered newspaper, magazine or periodical.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares, food, meat, fish, ice cream, fruit,
vegetables, magazines, periodicals, printed materials, farm products,
services and orders or contracts for services, home improvements or
alterations and anything that may be sold or distributed by peddlers,
solicitors or distributors, as defined herein.
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the Borough or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street
traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
carrying or transporting merchandise for the purpose of selling and
delivering the merchandise to customers. The word "peddler" shall also
include the words "hawker," "huckster" and "transient merchant."
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether a resident of the Borough or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street
traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of merchandise or
services of any kind for future performance or delivery, whether or not he
is collecting advance payments on such sales or orders, or who engages in
such activities from a stationary location on any street or in any other public
place. The word "solicitor" shall also include the word "canvasser" or any
person who goes from door to door as described above for the purpose of
soliciting contributions and/or who collects funds from a stationary location
on any street or other public place.
§ 198-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 200-3
1:268
§ 200-3. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, distributor or transient
merchant to sell, offer for sale or distribute merchandise, printed material
or services within the Borough without first filing an application for
registration and obtaining a registration certificate from the Chief of Police
of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 200-4. Registration certificate.
Upon obtaining a registration certificate as hereinafter provided, a peddler,
solicitor, distributor or transient merchant may conduct his activities within
the Borough only as long as he adheres to the regulations set forth herein
and carries his registration certificate upon his person at all times during
the conduct of his activities. The registration certificate shall identify the
person and the type of activity for which he has registered and shall be
shown to any police officer or citizen upon request. All certificates shall
expire on the date shown thereon, but in no case shall any certificate be
issued for a period of time of more than one month.
§ 200-5. Application procedure.
A. Every applicant for a certificate under this chapter shall file with the
Chief of Police of the Borough a sworn written application on a form to
be furnished by the Borough, which shall give or be accompanied by the
following information or documents:
(1) The name and description of the applicant.
(2) The permanent home address and full local address of the
applicant.
(3) A brief statement of the nature of the activity and a description of
the merchandise or service to be sold or performed.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the certificate is desired.
(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle, the
operator's license number, the vehicle registration number and the
vehicle license number.
(7) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
B. In the case of solicitation of contributions, one person shall make
application for the organization, at least 30 days prior to the proposed
date the solicitations will begin, which application shall give or be
accompanied by the following:
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:269
§ 200-6. Fees.
The fees to be paid in conjunction with the issuance of a nontransferable
registration certificate pursuant to this chapter, payable to the Borough of
Middletown at the time the application is made, shall be $20 per day or
$100 per year. Such fee is imposed for the purpose of defraying the costs of
administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 200-7. Issuance of certificate.
(1) The name and local address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the organization represented and the
names and addresses of the organization's legal officers and
managers.
(3) The purpose of soliciting.
(4) The name and address of the person or persons who will be in
direct charge of conducting the solicitation.
(5) A list of names and addresses of all sponsors, promoters and
solicitors connected with the solicitation.
(6) An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation.
(7) The dates when the solicitation is to be made, giving the
commencement and termination dates.
(8) A statement as to whether or not any commission, fee, wage or
other compensation is to be paid in connection with such
solicitation and, if so, details as to the amount to be expended from
the funds collected.
A. Upon receipt of the completed application form and payment of the fee
herein required, a registration certificate shall be issued by the Chief of
Police. The certificate shall give such information as shall be deemed
necessary to adequately identify the registrant and the activity in which
he is involved. The expiration date of the registration certificate shall in
all cases be indicated.
B. In the case of solicitation of contributions, the certificate shall be issued
to the organization, which shall supply each of its agents or solicitors
with credentials, in a form approved by the Chief of Police, giving the
name of the solicitor, the name of the sponsoring organization, the
purpose for which the solicitation is being made, the signature of the
managing officer of the organization, the date during which the
solicitation is authorized to be made and the number of the registration
certificate issued to the organization by the Borough.
C. Except as provided in Subsection B above, where an organization has
several agents peddling, soliciting or distributing merchandise or
printed material, each agent shall be registered separately. Upon
§ 200-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 200-7
1:270
§ 200-8. Restrictions.
No person shall:
expiration of a certificate, a new certificate may be issued upon
compliance with all the provisions of this chapter.
D. Any certificate issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Chief of Police upon proof being furnished to him that the
application for the certificate contained false information or that the
applicant was convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude after the
issuance of such certificate or that the applicant was convicted of
disorderly conduct under any law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any ordinance of the Borough of Middletown. [Added
5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1016, approved 5-6-1991]
A. Peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise except during daylight hours
only, but, in any event, not later then 8:00 p.m. during summer months.
B. Attempt to peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise or printed material
without first having identified himself as a peddler, solicitor or
distributor registered with the Borough and having displayed his
certificate or credentials.
C. Have exclusive right to any location in the public streets or operate in
any congested area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public.
D. Enter or attempt to enter the residence of any person in the Borough
without an express invitation from the occupant of such residence.
E. Conduct himself in such a manner as to become objectionable to or
annoy an occupant of any residence.
F. Shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound-making or
amplifying device upon any of the streets, parks or public places of the
Borough or upon private premises, where sound of sufficient volume is
emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard
upon the streets, avenues, parks or other public places of the Borough
or upon private premises, for the purpose of attracting attention to any
merchandise or services.
G. Distribute obscene merchandise or printed material or that which
advocates unlawful conduct.
H. Litter the streets, public places or properties within the Borough with
any merchandise or printed material.
I. Violate any motor vehicle law of the Borough or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 200-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-9
1:271
§ 200-9. Exemptions.
The following persons or organizations are exempt from the payment of fees
upon compliance with all other provisions of this chapter and submission of
applicable identification and documents to support the claim of exemption:
§ 200-10. Interpretation.
This chapter shall not be applied so as to occasion any undue burden upon
interstate commerce with respect to any business or activity referred to
herein. It is the intent of the Council that this chapter be interpreted so as
to achieve the primary purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare
of the inhabitants of the Borough and not to unduly regulate or control the
proper conduct of any business or commercial property.
§ 200-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No.
972, approved 7-11-1988]
Any person who shall be convicted of violating or failing to comply with
the provisions of this chapter before any District Justice shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000, together with costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, the violator shall be subject
to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
A. Any charitable or religious society that shall conduct solicitations or
sales of personal property when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to
the payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or religious
object for which the society exists.
B. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or
other articles or things, in the regular course of business, to the
premises of the persons who had previously ordered the same or were
entitled to receive the same by reason of a prior agreement.
C. Any school, political or civic organization, benevolent society, service
club or organization, not for profit, whose principal office is located in
the Borough.
D. Any person honorably discharged from the military services of the
United States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity with
60 P.S. § 61.83
E. Any person selling fruits and farm products grown by himself, with or
without the help of others, or any person delivering bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
F. Persons conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law or a sale
required by statute or by order of any court.
83.Editor's Note: Said section was repealed by 11-24-1992 by P.L. 717, No. 108.
§ 200-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 200-11
1:272
continuation of a violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
Chapter 203
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 203, Plumbing, adopted 9-7-1993 by Ord. No. 1047, was
repealed 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194, approved 7-11-2005. See now
Ch. 114, Construction Code, Uniform.]
Chapter 206
POLES AND WIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235. Vehicles and traffic— See Ch. 252.
§ 200-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-11
1:273

ARTICLE I
Signs on Poles
[Adopted 11-10-1969 by Ord. No. 554, approved 11-10-1969]
§ 206-1. Attachment of signs to utility poles restricted. [Amended
2-9-1970 by Ord. No. 564, approved 2-9-1970]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, erect or
in any other manner attach any form of sign on any utility pole situated or
located in the Borough of Middletown, except as follows:
§ 206-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article or
aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of any provision of this article
shall be fined by the District Justice in a sum not more than $100, plus costs
of prosecution, or, in default of payment of said fine or cost, shall undergo
imprisonment for a period not in excess of 10 days.
A. Emergency signs for snow removal, leaf collection and traffic control
shall be permitted as authorized by the Mayor and the Borough
Manager.
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-2
1:275
Chapter 210
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 210-1. Adoption of standards.
§ 210-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of
Code Enforcement of the Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, including Appendix A, Boarding Standards,
be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, for regulating
and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the
Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of Middletown are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 210-3 of this chapter.
B. As new editions of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015
edition, are published by the International Code Council, the same shall
become effective in the Borough of Middletown 30 days after the
Borough of Middletown duly advertises the enactment and publication
of the same in a newspaper of general circulation.
A. Wherever the term "chief appointing authority" or "appointing
authority" is used in the International Property Maintenance Code, it
shall mean the Borough Council of the Borough of Middletown.
B. Wherever the term "date of adoption of this code" is used in the
International Property Maintenance Code, it shall mean the date of
enactment of this chapter.
§ 206-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-2
1:276
§ 210-3. Additions, insertions and changes to the International
Property Maintenance Code.
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby revised as follows:
C. Wherever the term "legal representative" or "legal counsel" is used in
the International Property Maintenance Code, it shall mean the
Solicitor of the Borough of Middletown.
D. Wherever the term "municipality," "name of jurisdiction" or "this
jurisdiction" is used in the International Property Maintenance Code, it
shall mean the Borough of Middletown (the "Borough").
E. Wherever the term "department of property maintenance inspection,"
"department of property maintenance," or "the department" is used in
the International Property Maintenance Code, it shall mean the Office
of Code Enforcement.
A. Chapter 1 (Scope and Application).
(1) Section 101.1 (Title) is hereby amended to read as follows:
These regulations shall be known as the "Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of Middletown," hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
(2) Section 102.10 (Other laws) is hereby amended to read as follows:
102.10.1 The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify
any provisions of local, state or federal law.
102.10.2 Where this code conflicts with other regulations or
chapters of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Middletown,
the more restrictive regulation or chapter shall govern. Violations
of other regulations or chapters shall be considered violations
of this code, and at the option of the Borough, the enforcement
provisions of this code (including penalties and fines) may be
applied in lieu of enforcement provisions, if any, provided for in
such other regulation or chapter. Notwithstanding the above, this
code shall not control if this code is identified by name and its
application is expressly restricted by such other regulation or
chapter by provisions referenced in such other regulation or
chapter or by provision of this code.
(3) Section 103.5 (Fees) is hereby amended to read as follows:
The fees for activities and services performed by the department
in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as
indicated in a fee schedule adopted by the resolution of the
Borough Council establishing such fees, which may be amended
from time to time.
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:277
(4) Section 106.3 (Prosecution of violation) is hereby amended to read
as follows:
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order
served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of
a summary offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with,
the Borough shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure
in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having
jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate.
(5) Section 106.4 (Violation penalties) is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this code, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Magistrate
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, plus costs and reasonable attorney's fees, for each separate
offense and, in default of the payment of such fine, costs and fees,
may be sentenced to imprisonment for 90 days, or to the extent
allowed by law for the punishment of summary offenses. Each day
that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this
chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
(6) Section 111.1 (Application for appeal) shall be amended to read as
follows:
Any person affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the
Board of Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is
filed within 20 days after the day of decision, notice or order was
served. The appeal shall be upon such form as the Borough Council
shall prescribe, shall be filed in duplicate and shall be filed with the
code official. The parties to the appeal shall be the person filing the
appeal, the owner and the Office of Code Enforcement.
(7) Section 111.2 (Membership of the Board) shall be amended to read
as follows:
The Board of Appeals shall consist of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Middletown. The Board of Appeals may engage the
services of such professionals and disciplines as it shall deem
necessary.
§ 210-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-3
1:278
(8) Sections 111.2.1 (Alternate members), 111.2.2. (Chairman),
111.2.3. (Disqualification of member), 111.2.4. (Secretary) and
111.2.5. (Compensation of members) shall be deleted in their
entirety.
(9) Section 111.3 (Notice of hearing) shall be amended to read as
follows:
The Board shall meet upon notice from the Borough Manager or
Borough Secretary, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at a
regularly scheduled Borough Council meeting within 30 days of the
filing of an appeal.
(10) Section 111.4 (Open hearing) shall be amended to read as follows:
Hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The
appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any
person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity
to be heard. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the Board of
Appeals then in office.
(11) Section 111.4.1 (Procedure) shall be amended to read as follows:
Section 111.4.1 (Evidence). The Board of Appeals shall not be
bound by technical rules of evidence, and all relevant evidence
of reasonable probative value may be permitted. Reasonable
examination and cross-examination shall be permitted.
(12) Section 111.6 (Board decision) shall be amended to read as follows:
The Board of Appeals shall modify or reverse the decision of the
code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total
number of Board members in attendance at the meeting where
action is taken on the decision, but within 30 days after the
conclusion of the hearing. Failure to render a decision within 30
days after the conclusion of the hearing shall not be deemed
approval in favor of appellant.
(13) Section 111.6.1 (Records and copies) shall be amended to read as
follows:
The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be recorded. Every
decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings and the
reason for the decision. Every decision shall be filed in the Office
of Code Enforcement and shall be open to public inspection. A
certified copy of the decision shall be served upon all parties or
their counsel personally or by mail not later than 10 days following
the decision.
(14) Section 111.7 (Court review) shall be amended to read as follows:
Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall
have the right to apply to the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:279
County, Pennsylvania, to correct errors of law made by the Board
of Appeals in its decision. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days
after the date of written notice of the decision of the Board of
Appeals is mailed to the appellant.
(15) Section 112.4. (Failure to comply) shall be amended to read as
follows:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
for the penalties prescribed in Section 106.4 of this code.
B. Chapter 2 (Definitions).
(1) Section 202 (General Definitions) shall be amended as follows:
(a) The term and definition of "inoperable vehicle" shall be
amended to read as follows:
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — A vehicle that cannot be operated
upon the public streets for any reason, including, but not
limited to, being unlicensed, unregistered, uninsured,
abandoned, or incapable of being moved under its own power,
but which does not qualify as a nuisance vehicle.
(b) The following terms and definitions shall be added in
alphabetical order to read as follows:
NUISANCE VEHICLE — A vehicle exhibiting any of the
following nonexhaustive dangerous or hazardous physical
characteristics, regardless of whether it is also an inoperable
vehicle, because they create, or could create, a threat to public
safety or the welfare of citizens:
Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp
edges.
[1]
One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit
vermin harborage.
[2]
Missing doors, windows, hoods, or other body parts which
could permit vermin harborage.
[3]
Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting
from rust.
[4]
Damaged wheels or missing tires resulting in unsafe
suspension of the vehicle.
[5]
Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit
vermin harborage.
[6]
[7] Broken headlamps or taillamps with sharp edges.
§ 210-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-3
1:280
VEHICLE — An assembly of parts, designed to have a wheel or
wheels, or revolving track or tracks, which would enable the
assembly to be more readily moved over the land or surfaces,
used or intended for use (whether as a primary use or ancillary
use) in transporting persons, other living things, materials of
any kind, or other assemblies.
Disassembled chassis parts from a vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
[8]
[9] Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
Vehicle frames suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
[10]
Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause
fire or explosion.
[11]
[12]Exposed battery containing acid.
[13] Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunks.
Open or damaged floorboards, including trunk and fire
wall.
[14]
Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of a
vehicle.
[15]
[16]Broken grill with protruding edges.
Loose or damaged metal trim and clips, broken
communications equipment and antenna.
[17]
[18]A vehicle suspended on unstable supports.
Such other characteristics or defects which could threaten
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough.
[19]
C. Chapter 3 (General Requirements).
(1) Section 302.1 (Sanitation) shall be amended to read as follows:
Exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean,
safe and sanitary condition. Conditions which present a hazard or
nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the general public
shall not be permitted on any property or premises. The occupant
shall keep that part of the exterior property that such occupant
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Section 302.4 (Weeds) shall be amended to read as follows:
Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches on land located
200 feet or less from any building or structure available for use
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:281
for human occupancy. Noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds"
shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other
than trees or shrubs.
The following are exceptions:
1. Cultivated crops, flowers and gardens; and
2. Undeveloped lots of record greater than one acre in size,
provided that a twenty-foot-wide buffer area be provided
adjacent to all abutting developed properties and public streets
and sidewalks in which no weeds or plant growth in excess of
eight inches shall be permitted.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property
to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation,
they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section
106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon
failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized
employee of the Borough or contractor hired by the Borough shall
be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and
destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal
shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, weeds located in the street to the
curb shall be maintained and destroyed by the Borough.
(3) Section 302.5 (Rodent harborage) shall be amended to read as
follows:
Section 302.5 (Rodent harborage and mosquito breeding habitat)
Structures and exterior property shall be maintained free from
rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they
shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will
not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and
prevent infestation.
Premises and exterior property shall be maintained to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant or flowing water in which mosquitoes
breed or are likely to breed. Where mosquitoes are found, the
water shall be promptly treated or maintained by approved
processes that will not be injurious to human health so as to
effectually prevent such breeding. After pest elimination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate the mosquito breeding
habitat.
(4) Section 302.8 (Motor vehicles) shall be amended to read as follows:
Section 302.8 (Nuisance and inoperable vehicles)
Except as provided for in other regulations, no nuisance vehicle
shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and not more than
§ 210-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-3
1:282
one inoperable vehicle parked, kept or stored on any premises.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed
and approved for such purposes.
(5) Section 302.10 shall be added to read as follows:
Section 302.10 (Unenclosed storage of firewood)
Unenclosed storage of firewood shall be located in the rear or side
yards. Stockpiles shall not exceed the height of six feet or be stored
in an unstable condition that would create a hazard.
(6) Section 304.3 (Premises identification) shall be amended to read as
follows:
Buildings shall have approved address numbers mounted in a
secure fashion to be plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with
their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or
alphabet letters. Address numbers shall be not less than four
inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch (12.7 mm). Address numbers shall be a minimum of 30 inches
above ground level and so placed that trees, shrubs and other
obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers from the
street or road fronting the property.
If the address numbers cannot be affixed to the front of the building
as required above due to obstructions, the address numbers shall
be permitted to be secured to a post, rod or other type of fixture of
substantial nature or a mailbox at or near the street or road, so as
to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the
property.
(7) Section 304.14 (Insect screens).
During the period from April 1 through October 31, every door,
window and other outside opening required for ventilation
purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch
(16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
(8) Section 305.3 (Interior surfaces) shall be amended to read as
follows:
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:283
§ 210-4. Neighborhood blight reclamation and revitalization.
Interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be
maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling,
chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or
covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other
defective surface conditions shall be corrected. Mold shall be
promptly removed.
D. Chapter 6 (Mechanical and Electrical Requirements).
(1) Section 602.3 (Heat supply) shall be amended to read as follows:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or
lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat during the period from October 1 through May 31 to
maintain a minimum temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the
minimum room temperature shall not be required, provided
that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity.
The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing
Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°
F. (1° C.), a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be
maintained.
(2) Section 602.4 (Occupiable work spaces) shall be amended to read
as follows:
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during
the period from October 1 through May 31 to maintain a minimum
temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) during the period the spaces are
occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
(3) Section 606 (Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters) shall be
deleted in its entirety.
§ 210-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-4
1:284
A. This § 210-4 of the Code of the Borough of Middletown intends to codify
for the use of the Borough the Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and
Revitalization Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq. (the "Act"), and any
amendments thereto. Amendments to the Act shall become effective in
the Borough of Middletown 30 days after the Borough of Middletown
duly advertises the enactment and publication of the same in a
newspaper of general circulation.
B. The Council adopts the findings of the General Assembly and declares
as follows:
(1) There are deteriorated properties located in the Borough of
Middletown as a result of neglect by their owners in violation of
applicable state law and the Borough Code.
(2) These deteriorated properties create public nuisances which have
an impact on crime and the quality of life of Borough residents and
require significant expenditures of public funds in order to abate
and correct the nuisances.
(3) In order to address these situations, it is appropriate to deny
certain Borough permits and approvals in order:
(a) To prohibit property owners from further extending their
financial commitments so as to render themselves unable to
abate or correct the Code violations or tax delinquencies.
(b) To reduce the likelihood that the Borough will have to address
the owners' neglect and resulting deteriorated properties.
(c) To sanction the owners for not adhering to their legal
obligations to the Commonwealth and the Borough, as well as
to tenants, adjoining property owners and neighborhoods.
C. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section
shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
AGENT — Any director, officer, servant, employee or other person
authorized to act on behalf of a corporation or association, and in the
case of an unincorporated association, a member of such association.
BOROUGH PERMITS — Privileges relating to real property granted by
the Borough, including, but not limited to, building permits, exceptions
to the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Middletown, the Middletown
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (the "Zoning
Ordinance") and occupancy permits. The term includes approvals
pursuant to land use ordinances other than decisions on the substantive
validity of the Zoning Ordinance or map or the acceptance of a curative
amendment.84
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:285
BUILDING — A residential, commercial or industrial building or
structure and the land appurtenant to it.
CORPORATION — The term does not include a municipal authority.
COURT — The Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County.
MORTGAGE LENDER — A business association defined as a banking
institution or mortgage lender under 7 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 61 (relating to
mortgage loan industry licensing and consumer protection) that is in
possession of or holds title to real property pursuant to, in enforcement
of, or to protect rights arising under a mortgage, mortgage note, deed
of trust or other transaction that created a security interest in the real
property.
OWNER — A holder of the title to residential, commercial or industrial
real estate, other than a mortgage lender, who possesses and controls
the real estate. The term includes, but is not limited to, heirs, assigns,
beneficiaries and lessees, provided this ownership is a matter of public
record.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Property which, because of its physical
condition or use, is regarded as a public nuisance at common law
or has been declared by the appropriate official a public nuisance in
accordance with the Borough Code.
SERIOUS VIOLATION — A violation of a State law or a Borough Code
that poses an imminent threat to the health and safety of a dwelling
occupant, occupants in surrounding structures or a passersby.
STATE LAW — A statute of the commonwealth or a regulation of an
agency charged with the administration and enforcement of
commonwealth law.
SUBSTANTIAL STEP — An affirmative action, as determined by the
relevant Borough official or officer of the court, on the part of a
property owner or managing agent to remedy a serious violation of a
state law or the Borough Code, including, but not limited to, physical
improvements or repairs to the property, which affirmative action is
subject to appeal in accordance with applicable law.
TAX DELINQUENT PROPERTY — Tax delinquent real property as
defined under:
The act of July 7, 1947 (P.L. 1368, No. 542), known as the "Real
Estate Tax Sale Law";85 or
(1)
The act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153), referred to as the
"Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law."86
(2)
D. Actions.
85.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.101 et seq.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 210-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-4
1:286
(1) In addition to any other remedy available at law or in equity, the
Borough may institute the following actions against the owner of
any real property that is in serious violation of the Borough Code or
for failure to correct a condition which causes the property to be
regarded as a public nuisance:
(a) An in personam action may be initiated for a continuing
violation for which the owner takes no substantial step to
correct within six months following receipt of an order to
correct the violation unless the order is subject to a pending
appeal before the Board of Appeals or court.
(b) Notwithstanding any law limiting the form of action for the
recovery of penalties by the Borough for the violation of the
Borough Code, the Borough may recover, in a single action
under this section, an amount equal to any penalties imposed
against the owner and any costs of remediation lawfully
incurred by or on behalf of the Borough to remedy any Borough
Code violation.
(2) A proceeding in equity.
E. Asset attachment.
(1) General rule. A lien may be placed against the assets of an owner of
real property that is in serious violation of the Borough Code or is
regarded as a public nuisance after a judgment, decree or order is
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction against the owner of
the property for an adjudication under Subsection D (relating to
actions).
(2) Construction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize, in the case of an owner that is a corporation, association
or trust, a lien on the individual assets of the general partner, agent
or trustee, except as otherwise allowed by law, limited partner,
shareholder, member or beneficiary of the association or trust.
F. Duty of out-of-state owners of property in the Borough. A person or
other responsible party who lives or has a principal place of residence
outside the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania who owns or is responsible
for property in the Borough against which Borough Code violations
have been cited and the person is charged under 18 Pa.C.S.A. (relating
to crimes and offenses), and who has been properly notified of the
violations, may be extradited pursuant to § 6113 of the Act, 3 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6113, to the commonwealth to face criminal prosecution to the full
extent allowed and in the manner authorized by 42 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 91
(relating to detainers and extradition).
G. Duty of corporation, association and trust owners. Where, after
reasonable efforts, service of process for a notice or citation for any
Borough Code violation for any real property owned by a corporation,
association or trust cannot be accomplished by handing a copy of the
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:287
notice or citation to an agent, executive officer, partner or trustee of the
corporation, association or trust or to the manager, trustee or clerk in
charge of the property, the delivery of the notice or citation may occur
by registered, certified or United States express mail, accompanied by
a delivery confirmation:
(1) To the registered office of the corporation, association or trust.
(2) Where the corporation, association or trust does not have a
registered office, to the mailing address used for real estate tax
collection purposes if accompanied by the posting of a conspicuous
notice to the property and by handing a copy of the notice or
citation to the person in charge of the property at that time.
(3) In the case of a corporation, notice shall be sent to the registered
office on file with the Department of State.
H. Failure to comply with a Borough Code requirement.
(1) Offense defined. The owner of real property commits the offense of
failure to comply with a Borough Code requirement if all of the
following:
(a) The owner of real property has been convicted of a second or
subsequent serious violation of the same provision of the
Borough Code for the same property.
(b) The violation poses a threat to the public's health, safety or
property and the owner has not taken a substantial step to
correct the violation.
(c) The violation is considered a public nuisance and the owner
has not made a reasonable attempt to correct the violation.
(2) Grading. Failure to comply with a Borough Code requirement shall
constitute a:
(a) Misdemeanor of the second degree if the offense is a second
conviction of a serious violation of the same provision of the
Borough Code relating to the same property.
(b) Misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense is based on three
or more convictions of serious violations of the same provision
of the Borough Code relating to the same property.
(3) Definition. As used in this section, "Borough Code" shall mean
Chapters 114 (Construction Code, Uniform) and 210 (Property
Maintenance) of the Borough Code.
I. Municipal permit denial.
(1) For purposes of this section, "Board" shall mean the Middletown
Borough Council or Middletown Zoning Hearing Board or other
body granted jurisdiction to render decisions in accordance with
§ 210-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-4
1:288
the act of July 31, 1968 (P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the
"Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."87
(2) The Borough or Board under Subsection (c)88 may deny issuing to
an applicant a Borough permit if the applicant owns real property
in the Borough for which there exists on the real property:
(a) A final and unappealable tax, water, sewer or refuse collection
delinquency on account of the actions of the owner; or
(b) A serious violation of state law or the Borough Code and the
owner has taken no substantial steps to correct the violation
within six months following notification of the violation and for
which fines or other penalties or a judgment to abate or correct
were imposed by a magisterial district judge or municipal
court, or a judgment at law in equity was imposed by a court of
common pleas. However, no denial shall be permitted on the
basis of a property for which the judgment, order or decree is
subject to a stay or supersedeas by an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction or automatically allowed by statute or
rule of court until the stay or supersedeas is lifted by the court
or a higher court or the stay or supersedeas expires as
otherwise provided by law. Where a stay or supersedeas is in
effect, the property owner shall so advise the Borough.
(3) The Borough or Board shall not deny a Borough permit to an
applicant if the Borough permit is necessary to correct a violation
of state law or Borough Code.
(4) The Borough permit denial shall not apply to an applicant's
delinquency on taxes, water, sewer or refuse collection charges
that are under appeal or otherwise contested through a court or
administrative process.
(5) In issuing a denial of a permit based on an applicant's delinquency
in real property taxes or municipal charges or for failure to abate a
serious violation of state law or the Borough Code on real property
that the applicant owns in the Borough, the Borough or Board shall
indicate the street address and county in which the property is
located and the court and docket number for each parcel cited as
basis for the denial. The denial shall also state that the applicant
may request a letter of compliance from the Borough in a form
specified by the Borough as provided in this section.
(6) Proof of compliance.
(a) All municipal permits denied in accordance with this
subsection may be withheld until an applicant obtains a letter
from the Borough indicating the following:
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 6131(c).
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:289
[1] The property in questions has no final and unappealable
tax, water, sewer or refuse delinquencies;
[2] The property in question is now in state law and Borough
Code compliance; or
[3] The owner of the property has presented and Borough
staff or the relevant board accepted a plan to begin
remediation of a serious violation of state law or the
Borough Code. Acceptance of the plan may be contingent
on:
[a] Beginning the remediation plan within no fewer than
30 days following acceptance of the plan or sooner if
mutually agreeable to both the property owner and
the Borough.
[b] Completing the remediation plan within no fewer than
90 days following commencement of the plan or
sooner if mutually agreeable to both the property
owner and the Borough.
(b) In the event that the Borough or relevant board fails to issue a
letter indicating tax, water, sewer, refuse, state law or Borough
Code compliance or noncompliance, as the case may be, within
45 days of the request, the property in question shall be
deemed to be in compliance for the purpose of this section. The
appropriate Borough or relevant board shall specify the form in
which the request for a compliance letter shall be made.
(c) Letters required under this section shall be verified by the
appropriate Borough officials before issuing to the applicant a
Borough permit.
[1] Borough permits may be denied in accordance with the
requirements of this section to the extent that approval of
the Borough permit is within the jurisdiction of the Board.
[2] In any proceeding before a board other than the Borough
Council, the Borough may appear to present evidence that
the applicant is subject to a denial by the board in
accordance with this section.
[3] For purposes of this subsection, a Borough permit may
only be denied to an applicant other than an owner if:
[a] The applicant is acting under the direction or with the
permission of an owner; and
[b] The owner owns real property satisfying the
conditions of Subsection I(2) through (5).
§ 210-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-4
1:290
Chapter 212
PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 195.
J. Conflict with other law. In the event of a conflict between the
requirements of this section and state or federal requirements
applicable to demolition, disposition or redevelopment of buildings,
structures or land owned by or held in trust for the Government of the
United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the federal or
state requirements shall prevail.
K. Relief for inherited property. Where property is inherited by will or
intestacy, the devisee or heir shall be given the opportunity to make
payments on reasonable terms to correct Borough Code violations or to
enter into a remediation agreement under § 6131(b)(1)(iii) (relating to
Borough permit denial)89 with the Borough to avoid subjecting the
devisee's or heir's other properties to asset attachment or denial or
permits and approvals on other properties owned by the devisee or heir.
L. (Reserved)
M. (Reserved)
N. Construction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge or
alter the remedies now existing at common law or by statute, but the
provisions of this section are in addition to such remedies.
89.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 6131(b)(1)(iii).
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:291

ARTICLE I
Maximum Occupancy
[Adopted 8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 859, approved 8-8-1983]
§ 212-1. Gym and swimming pool.
The maximum number of occupants of the following Borough properties
shall at no time exceed the capacity respectively indicated for each:
A. Main Street Gymnasium: 750 persons.
B. Municipal Swimming Pool: 510 persons.
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-1
1:293
Chapter 217
REAL ESTATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 138.
§ 212-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 212-1
1:294
ARTICLE I
Use of Real Estate for Illicit Drug Sales
[Adopted 10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 990, approved 10-2-1989]
§ 217-1. Purpose.
The Council finds it to be in the interest of the residents of the Borough of
Middletown and the general public to provide for the regulation of conduct
it deems to be offensive; to prevent vice, disorder and immorality; and to
promote public peace, health and safety; and to this end, the Council enacts
this article.
§ 217-2. Prohibitions.
No person who has legal or equitable ownership of real estate (property)
located in the Borough shall knowingly allow that real estate to be used as
the site for the sale of illicit narcotics or controlled dangerous substances
after having received written notice from the Borough that a present
occupant or tenant of that property has been convicted of selling illicit
narcotics or controlled dangerous substances at that property.
§ 217-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the above section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
§ 217-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-3
1:295
Chapter 219
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
§ 217-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 217-3
1:296
ARTICLE I
Registration and Reporting
[Adopted 10-8-1973 by Ord. No. 635, approved 10-8-1973]
§ 219-1. Purpose.
This article is passed to provide for the uniform and equitable distribution
of the tax levies of the Borough of Middletown upon the inhabitants of the
aforesaid Borough of Middletown.
§ 219-2. Definitions.
§ 219-3. Information to be reported by landlord; time limits.
A. The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS UNIT — A parcel of real estate, with or without
improvements located thereon, utilized by any person or persons for
any commercial motive or purpose.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes, arranged for occupancy by one family or by one person.
LANDLORD — A person who holds the legal or equitable title to any
parcel of real estate located in the Borough of Middletown or who holds
the equitable or legal title to any improvements on real estate or any
building located in the Borough of Middletown.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
TENANT — A person who has the use, either by himself or with others,
of a dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than
himself.
B. In the special case of properties subject to ground rents payable to the
principal and trustees of the Emaus Orphan House, a corporation
organized under special act, relative to the estate of George Frey,
deceased, approved June 20, 1839, the persons holding the long-term
leases (and not said corporation) shall be deemed to be the owners,
subject to the reporting requirements of this article applicable to their
very substantial, historic and unique property interests which this
article, for its practical purposes, equates with ownership.
A. After the date of this article and within 90 days from the passage
hereof, each landlord shall report to the Secretary of the Borough of
Middletown, on a report form to be supplied by the aforesaid Secretary,
the following information:
(1) A list of the dwelling units and business units owned by the
landlord, located within the Borough limits, whether occupied or
not occupied.
§ 219-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-3
1:297
§ 219-4. Report of occupancy changes.
After the date of this article, each and every landlord owning property
within the Borough of Middletown shall report to the Secretary of the
Borough of Middletown, on a form provided by the Secretary of the Borough
of Middletown, any change in the use or occupancy of any dwelling unit
or business unit owned by the aforesaid landlord. Such reported change
shall include the name or names of new tenants of such dwelling unit or
business unit and shall include the date when such change was effected. In
the case of a landlord who is an owner of a hotel, inn or boardinghouse,
such landlord shall not be required to report a person as a tenant until that
person has resided in such landlord's establishment for a period of 30 days.
In the event that a dwelling unit or business unit was used or utilized by a
tenant and then becomes vacant, this change shall also be reported to the
Secretary. All reports required by this section shall be made within 10 days
after a landlord has knowledge of such change in use or occupancy or of
such vacancy.
§ 219-5. Duties of Borough Secretary.
The Secretary of the Borough of Middletown, under the authority of this
article, shall have the following duties:
(2) The address of each dwelling unit and business unit.
(3) A brief description of each dwelling unit and business unit.
(4) The names of the tenant or tenants 18 years of age and older
utilizing the aforementioned dwelling unit or business unit, if any.
(5) Whether or not said dwelling unit or business unit is inhabited or
utilized by tenants.
B. After the date of this article, any person who acquires the legal or
equitable title to any parcel of real estate or to any improvement on real
estate or building located in the Borough of Middletown by agreement
of sale, by deed or by any other means shall, within 30 days thereafter,
report to the Secretary of the aforesaid Borough the information and
data set forth in Subsection A above, and on the forms to be provided by
the Secretary of the Borough of Middletown.
A. To maintain on file in the Borough offices the names of the landlords
owning dwelling units and business units in the aforesaid Borough of
Middletown, said list to include the names of the current tenants of said
dwelling units and business units.
B. To maintain a supply of forms for landlords to use in making reports to
the Secretary of the Borough of Middletown as required by § 219-3 or
219-4 of this article.
§ 219-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 219-5
1:298
§ 219-6. Violations and penalties.
Any landlord who violates any of the provisions of this article or who
furnishes false information to the Borough or who uses a false name or
address in any report required by this article shall, upon conviction thereof
before the District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $50 and not more than $100 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment thereof, to suffer imprisonment in the Dauphin County
Jail for not more than 30 days. Each unreported tenant shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. To notify the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief of the Borough of
Middletown of the address and description of any dwelling unit or
business unit that is vacant, unoccupied and not in use.
D. To report to the proper officer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
of the Borough of Middletown when the number of tenants in any
dwelling unit or business unit exceeds the number of tenants or
inhabitants permitted by any ordinance of the Borough of Middletown
or by any law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 219-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-6
1:299
Chapter 224
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 127. Sewers — See Ch. 226.
§ 219-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 219-6
1:300
ARTICLE I
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 2-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1037, approved 2-1-199390]
§ 224-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
retain sewage, whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is
hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 224-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of the terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Councilmen of the Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 224-3. Control and methods of use.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Borough the control and methods of holding tank use, sewage disposal and
sewage collection and transportation thereof.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Holding Tanks, adopted 2-12-1973
by Ord. No. 618, approved 2-12-1973.
§ 224-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-4
1:301
§ 224-4. Rules and regulations.
§ 224-5. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area serviced by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 224-6. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
§ 224-6.1. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of the improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 224-6.2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 224-6.1 shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $300 and, in default of said fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in excess of 30
days.
A. The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from
time to time to effect the purposes herein.
B. All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Borough and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Authority will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The Authority will complete and retain annual inspection reports for
each permitted tank.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of the Borough, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules and regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an
annual basis.
C. Permit the Authority or its agents to collect, transport and dispose of
the contents therein.
§ 224-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 224-6.3
1:302
§ 224-6.3. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violations
of § 224-6.1 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
municipality or the Authority by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 224-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-6.3
1:303

ARTICLE II
Inspection Fees
[Adopted 3-10-1975 by Ord. No. 660, approved 3-10-1975]
§ 224-7. Establishment of fees authorized.
Whenever an interested party requests an inspection or testing with respect
to sewage facilities, whether a holding tank under Article I of this chapter
or any item the administration of which has been delegated to the Borough
by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended,91 or covered by
regulations of the Department of Environmental Resources, such as
Chapters 71 and 73 of its Regulations for Administration of Sewage
Facilities Program,92 such party shall first pay a fee to the Borough of
Middletown consistent with the cost thereof and the time devoted to such
purpose by the Code Enforcement Officer as Sewage Enforcement Officer,
who conducts such inspections, tests or investigations necessary to
implement said Act and the rules and regulations thereunder. Since such
inspections are very time consuming in a number of such situations, the cost
and time involved in any such instance shall be estimated by the Borough
Manager in terms of the current hourly rate of the Borough's Sewage
Enforcement Officer. As experience reveals certain situations which may
fairly be standardized, the Borough Manager is authorized to develop (and
to report to the Borough Council) and to apply a schedule of such fees. As a
starting point in all cases, the minimum fee shall be $60.
91.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
92.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapters 71 and 73.
§ 224-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-7
1:305
Chapter 226
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bills for Borough services — See Ch. 108.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 224.
Water — See Ch. 256.
§ 224-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 224-7
1:306
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 11-17-195293]
§ 226-1. Sewer system established.
The existing sewers, and those sewers to be erected in the future in the
Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, are hereby included
in and made part of the system of sewers heretofore established by
ordinance of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 226-2. Connection required. [Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No.
1194, approved 7-11-2005]
The system of sewers heretofore established and constructed is now
available to owners of improved property in said Borough, and each and
every owner of such property is hereby required to connect such property
with such system of sewers and to use the same without delay. Each and
every owner of improved property abutting on the existing sewers which is
not already connected to said existing sewers is hereby required to connect
such property with said system of sewers and to use the same. With respect
to sewer connections and the Plumbing Code, the code adopted in § 114-1
herein shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 226-3. Connection permit and fee. [Added 6-8-1959 by Ord. No.
382, approved 6-8-1959; amended 3-11-1965 by Ord. No. 481,
approved 3-11-1965; 1-11-1982 by Ord. No. 810, approved
1-11-1982; 4-1-1991 by Ord. No. 1014, approved 4-1-1991;
12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1145, approved 12-3-2001]
A sewer connection permit shall be required for permission to connect to
the sewer system located within the Borough of Middletown. Said permit
for connection to the sewer system shall be obtained from the office of the
Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 226-4. Properties to be connected as sewers become available.
As, from time to time, sewer service becomes available to additional
properties within the Borough of Middletown by reason of the improvement
of properties adjoining or adjacent to the system of sewers therein where
said system of sewers in the properties adjoining does not meet the
specifications required by the Act of 1937, P.L. 1987, as amended by the
Act of 1945, P.L. 435, known as the "Clean Streams Law of Pennsylvania,"94
or by reason of the construction of extensions to the system of sewers
therein so as to make sewer service available to such additional improved
properties, each and every owner of any such additional improved property
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. XV, Part 1, of the 1953 Code of Ordinances.
94.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 226-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-4
1:307
shall likewise be required to connect such property with such system of
sewers and to use the same without delay.
§ 226-5. Responsibility for connections. [Added 6-9-1958 by Ord.
No. 373, approved 6-9-1958; amended 5-9-1966 by Ord. No. 501,
approved 5-9-1966; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987;
3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved 3-1-2004]
§ 226-5.1. Responsibility for restoration of street, sidewalk and
other public property disturbed. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 1139,
approved 6-4-2001; amended 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved
3-1-2004; 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 1212, approved 8-7-2006]
Sidewalks, curbs, and other public property disturbed between the
structure served by the sewer lateral and the curbline in the course of
installation of a sewer lateral shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to
the Borough at the cost and expense of the property owner whose property
is being connected to the sewer main. The Borough shall bear the expense
of restoring any public property from the curbline to where the sewer
lateral connects to the sewer main.
§ 226-6. Liability for malfunctions. [Added 5-9-1966 by Ord. No.
501, approved 5-9-1966; amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 1139,
approved 6-4-2001; 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 1212, approved 8-7-2006]
A. Where the collection system of sewers abuts on the property of the
applicant, the Borough shall provide a house connection line from the
collection system in the street to the curbline of the property owner at
the expense of the property owner. Connections from the house
connection to the curbline shall be the responsibility of the property
owner. No sewerage connection nor sewerage line shall be run from any
collection system in the street, lanes or highways in the Borough of
Middletown to any abutting property unless and until said owner of the
property abutting on said system of sewers shall first secure a permit
from the Borough of Middletown and pay to the Borough a connection
fee in an amount as set forth in a fee schedule established by a properly
adopted resolution of the Council of the Borough of Middletown.
B. Certain work required for sewer service shall be performed by a private
contractor, at the determination of the Borough, when conditions
require. Such work may include, but is not limited to, sewer service
connections to mains under state-owned highways and roads,
connections at a depth greater than eight feet, connections that require
bypass pumping prior to connection, or any other situation where the
Borough does not have adequate manpower, time or equipment to
accomplish such work.
A. It shall be the duty of the property owner to clean out or, if necessary,
repair and replace sewer laterals that malfunction for any reason
whatsoever. Malfunctions include, but are not limited to, the growth of
§ 226-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-6
1:308
§ 226-7. Collection of costs of repairs or cleanouts. [Added 5-9-1966
by Ord. No. 501, approved 5-9-1966]
If the property owner shall fail to make the repairs, replacements or
cleanout of the lateral or collection sewers after three days' notice by
certified mail to do so, then and in that event the Borough may make
said repairs, replacements or cleanouts, either by its agents, servants or
employees or by contract to the lowest responsible bidder, and may collect
the cost thereof from the abutting property owner by filing a municipal
lien against said abutting property or by assumpsit, or by either or both
remedies at the election of the Borough.
§ 226-8. Inspection of site and work. [Added 6-9-1958 by Ord. No.
373, approved 6-9-1958]
After said connection fee has been paid and the permit issued by the
Borough, no connection shall be made to the system of sewers of the
Borough of Middletown until an inspection has been made of the proposed
connection by the proper Borough employee, nor shall any ditch, trench or
excavation dug for the purpose of making the connection to the system of
sewers of the Borough of Middletown be covered or filled in prior to said
inspection. In the event that said excavation, ditch or trench is filled in
without inspection, the proper officers of the Borough of Middletown may
require the opening of said line before connection to the system of sewers
of the Borough of Middletown is permitted.
trees or roots of trees into the sewer lateral, age or decay of the
sewer lateral, or the settling of the ground around the sewer lateral.
The property owner shall be responsible for any and all cleanout and
maintenance of the sewer lateral from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to where said sewer lateral connects to the sewer main.
In addition, the property owner shall be responsible for the repair or
replacement of sewer laterals from the sewage drainage system of any
structure to the curbline. The Borough shall be responsible for the
repair and replacement of sewer laterals from the curbline to where
said sewer lateral connects with the sewer main.
B. In instances where more than one dwelling unit is serviced by one
sewer connection line which needs to be replaced, the property owners
whose property is serviced by the connection shall replace said
connection line by connecting a separate connection line to each
property. The cost for installing the new connection lines shall be
allocated amongst each property owner in proportion to the length of
the sewer lateral that serves each separate structure.
C. All sewer laterals shall be inspected upon the sale or transfer of any
property within the Borough. It shall be the duty of all parties to the
transfer to insure the proper inspection of the sanitary sewer system.
§ 226-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-9
1:309
§ 226-9. Extensions to system; assessment of costs. [Added
6-9-1958 by Ord. No. 373, approved 6-9-1958]
From and after the passage of this article, capital additions to the system
of sewers of the Borough of Middletown shall only be made under the
authority of this section. Said capital additions will be made by the Borough
at the cost to the abutting property owners by a front-foot assessment
to be established by the Borough Engineer after the capital improvement
has been completed. When the Borough Engineer has certified that the
capital additions have been completed by the filing of said completion
certificate with the Borough Secretary, which certificate shall include all
assessable costs and all assessable front feet, the Borough Council shall
then determine the amount of the assessable front feet which shall be
charged against the abutting property owners, which said sum shall not
exceed the actual costs of erecting or extending the sewer mains, including
engineering and legal fees, if any, and costs of printing and advertising, and
shall equitably assess the costs against each and every property abutting
the line of the improvement, making allowances for corner lots and lots of
irregular shape where the assessment for the full frontage would be unjust.
§ 226-10. Prohibited acts. [Added 6-9-1958 by Ord. No. 373,
approved 6-9-1958; amended 2-12-1962 by Ord. No. 430, approved
2-12-1962; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
Any person making any connection to the system of sewers of the Borough
of Middletown without having first secured a permit and paid the
connection fee or who shall close said excavation, ditch or trench before
inspection of said connection shall be punished as provided in § 226-14 of
this article and the connection heretofore made may be disconnected by the
proper Borough employee without any notification to the offending property
holder.
§ 226-11. Notice to make required connection; work done by
Borough. [Amended 10-11-1982 by Ord. No. 835, approved
10-11-1982]
If, after the expiration of three months from the date of completion of
the construction by the Borough of Middletown of the system of sewers
or any extension thereof or after the expiration of three months from the
date sewer service becomes available to additional improved properties as
provided in § 226-4, any owner of improved property adjacent to the system
of sewers therein shall have failed to connect such property therewith as
required by § 226-2 or 226-4 of this article, the Borough of Middletown
may give such owner 45 days' notice that connection to such system of
sewers is required by this article, either by personal service or by certified
mail sent to the last known address of such owner, and upon failure of
such owner to make the required connection within a further period of 30
days, the Borough of Middletown or its agent or agents may enter upon
the property and construct said connection. In such case, the Borough of
Middletown shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an itemized
§ 226-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-11
1:310
bill of the cost of construction of said connection to the owners of the
property to which connection has been so made, which bill shall be payable
forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal of the owner of such property to pay
said bill, the Borough of Middletown shall file municipal liens or bring an
action of assumpsit for such construction within six months from the date
of completion of construction of such connection, the same to be subject,
in all respects, to the general law providing for the filing and recovery of
municipal liens and assumpsit actions.
§ 226-12. Penalty for failure to connect. [Amended 10-11-1982 by
Ord. No. 835, approved 10-11-1982; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987]
If, after the expiration of three months from the date of completion of the
construction of the system of sewers or extensions thereof in the Borough
of Middletown or after the expiration of three months from the date sewer
service becomes available to additional improved properties as provided in
§ 226-4, any owner of improved property adjacent to the system of sewers
or any extension thereof shall have failed to connect such property thereto
as required by § 226-2 or 226-4 of this article, the Borough of Middletown
may give such owner 60 days' written notice that connection to such system
of sewers or any extension thereof is required under this article, either by
personal service or by certified mail sent to the last known address of such
owner, and, if such owner shall have failed to make the required connection
within a further period of 30 days, such failure shall be and is hereby
declared a violation of this article, and such owner shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in § 226-14 of this article.
§ 226-13. Use of private systems prohibited.
A. At the expiration of three months from the date of the construction of
the system of sewers or any extension thereof in the Borough of
Middletown, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
own, maintain, operate or use within the Borough of Middletown a
privy, cesspool, septic tank or like receptacle for human excrement
upon any property now or hereafter improved adjoining or adjacent to
the system of sewers or any extension thereof or to connect any such
privy, cesspool, septic tank or like receptacle with such system of
sewers or any extension thereof.95
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating Subsection A of this section,
after 60 days' notice to that effect has been given by the Borough of
Middletown by certified mail sent to the last known address or by
personal service, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in § 226-14 of this article. [Amended 10-11-1982 by Ord.
No. 835, approved 10-11-1982; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987]
95.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 224, Sewage Disposal Systems.
§ 226-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-13.1
1:311
§ 226-13.1. Restriction on properties with common sewer line.
[Added 5-2-1988 by Ord. No. 969, approved 5-2-1988; amended
6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 1139, approved 6-4-2001; 8-7-2006 by Ord. No.
1212, approved 8-7-2006]
In instances where more than one dwelling unit is serviced by one sewer
connection line, at no time shall an owner of any one of the dwelling
units be permitted to have the sewer connection line disconnected without
obtaining written permission from the owner(s) of the other dwelling units
serviced by this sewer connection line. This written permission will have to
be submitted to the Borough at the time an application is completed for a
new sewer connection line. Whenever repairs of the common sewer line are
required, the owners of the common sewer line shall replace the common
sewer line pursuant to the provisions of § 226-6B.
§ 226-13.2. Separation of common sewer line. [Added 12-3-2007 by
Ord. No. 1228, approved 12-3-2007]
There shall be one sewer connection per property, parcel, or lot. In
instances where more than one dwelling unit is serviced by one common
sewer connection line, upon the subdivision of said dwelling units, pursuant
to this Code, each dwelling unit shall maintain a separate sewer connection;
installation of which shall be a condition of subdivision and cost of which
shall be borne by the property owners. In those cases where two adjoining
properties share a common sewer connection line, upon substantial repair
or upgrade of the sewer service, lateral, water service, or plumbing in either
property, a separate sewer connection shall be installed, the cost of which
shall be borne by the property owners.
§ 226-14. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972,
approved 7-11-1988]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 226-14.1. Sewer rents and charges. [Added 4-13-1959 by Ord. No.
380, approved 5-11-1959; amended 7-13-1964 by Ord. No. 471,
approved 7-13-1964]
A. Determination of sewer rents.
(1) The sewer rent for collection and treatment of sanitary sewage
discharged into the sewer system by all dwellings and
establishments, with the exception of government-owned facilities
for which a separate contract will be negotiated, will be based upon
the amount of water consumed as determined from meter readings
of the Middletown Water Department and shall be computed
pursuant to Subsection B below.
§ 226-13.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-14.1
1:312
(2) In cases where dwellings and establishments using the sewer
system have sources of water supply other than or in combination
with water supplied by the Middletown Water Department, the
measured flow shall be used as the basis for the computation of the
sewer rent pursuant to Subsection B below.
(3) In case two or more dwellings, flats, apartments, stores or offices
or two or more families in one dwelling unit have the use of the
sewer system through one sewer lateral, each and every dwelling,
flat, apartment, store or office shall be charged the minimum
charge, the same as if each such unit or family has a direct and
separate connection to the sewer system. The charge in excess of
such minimum shall be determined by dividing the total water
consumed, as shown by the meter readings, by the number of units
or families using a single sewer connection and applying the rate
schedules set forth in Subsection B below to the quantity so
determined.
B. Computation and time of payment of sewer rent and penalties. [Last
amended 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 1303, approved 8-18-2014]
(1) The sewer rent imposed under Subsection A above shall be on a
monthly basis for all users. All billings shall be in arrears.
(2) The sewer rentals, rates and charges imposed under Subsection A
above shall be computed as follows:
Sewer Service Rate Schedule
Customer charge: $15 per month, increasing to $16 in 2015 and
$17.20 in 2016
Uniform volumetric charge: $1.515 per 100 gallons per month,
increasing to $1.540 in 2015 and $1.550 in 2016
(3) A penalty of 10% will be charged on all bills for sewerage service,
except bills covering services rendered to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any department or institution thereof or to
municipalities or school districts, if not paid by the due date. In the
case of bills rendered to the commonwealth or any department or
institution thereof or to municipalities or school districts, a period
of 30 days shall be allowed during which the bills are payable
without the penalty of 10%. If the bill is not paid within five days
after the 10% penalty has been invoked hereunder, the Borough,
upon five additional days' notice, in writing, to the consumer, may
shut off the water service until all moneys to the Borough for
sewerage service have been paid. In the interpretation of this rule,
payment by mail will be accepted with a discount or at face,
provided that it bears a postmark date within the period
prescribed.
(4) Users must give the Borough their correct address. Failure to
receive bills will not be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor
§ 226-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-14.1
1:313
permit an extension of the period during which bills are payable
with a discount or at face.
(5) Lower Swatara Township.
(a) The Borough, the Borough Authority, Lower Swatara Township
and the Municipal Authority of Lower Swatara Township have
entered into an agreement with a twenty-five-year term that
requires the Borough and Borough Authority to provide
sanitary sewer service to a portion of Lower Swatara
Township, and further, Lower Swatara Township and the
Municipal Authority of Lower Swatara Township agree to
participate with the Borough and Borough Authority in the cost
of assembly, renovation, maintenance and operation of that
portion of the sanitary sewer collection system that benefits
Lower Swatara as well as a proportionate part of the publicly
owned treatment works.
(b) Pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement between the parties,
a portion of the capacity of the publicly owned treatment works
shall be placed in reserve for use by Lower Swatara Township.
(c) Pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement between the parties,
Lower Swatara Township shall be billed for wastewater
treatment.
(6) Royalton Borough.
(a) The Borough, the Borough Authority, Royalton Borough and
the Royalton Borough Authority have entered into an
agreement that requires the Borough and Borough Authority to
provide sanitary sewer service to Royalton Borough, and
further, Royalton Borough and the Royalton Borough Authority
agree to participate with the Borough and Borough Authority
in the cost of assembly, renovation, maintenance and operation
of that portion of the sanitary sewer collection system that
benefits Royalton as well as a proportionate part of the publicly
owned treatment works.
(b) Pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement between the parties,
a portion of the capacity of the publicly owned treatment works
shall be placed in reserve for use by Royalton Borough.
(c) Pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement between the parties,
Royalton Borough shall be billed for wastewater treatment.
C. Delinquent sewer rents and liens. All sewer rents, together with all
penalties thereon, not paid on or before the end of one year from the
date on which such bill was rendered shall be deemed to be delinquent.
All delinquent sewer rentals and all penalties thereon shall be a lien on
the property served and shall be entered as a lien against such property
in the office of the Prothonotary of Dauphin County and shall be
§ 226-14.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-14.1
1:314
collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
such liens.
D. The Borough's sewer rental charges are based upon metered water
consumption regardless of whether the water is used, wasted, or lost by
leakage or poor plumbing maintenance. In cases where Borough
officials can determine through an investigation that: water which
passed through a water meter was subsequently lost by a leak in the
building plumbing system, that the leak could not have been reasonably
known to the property owner or occupant, no portion of the water lost
by the leak entered into the Borough's sanitary sewer system; and the
applicant for the refund can prove that the leak has been repaired in
accordance with Borough Codes, then the Finance Director is
authorized to issue a credit on the customer account, in an amount
determined as reasonable in the sole judgment of the Finance Director.
The Finance Director is authorized to develop a written policy for the
method of investigation and determination of such leaks, as well as a
form to request credit. The credit shall be determined by the Finance
Director based upon an estimation of historic sewer rental. However, in
all cases, the period of adjustment shall not occur in more than two
billing periods, and adjustments of this type cannot occur for any
customer more than once in any twelve-month period. [Added
6-3-2008 by Ord. No. 1236, approved 6-3-2008]
E. In such cases where the applicant for the refund can provide acceptable
assurances that water which passed through a water meter was used
for a swimming pool or spa, that such water use was in excess of 500
gallons in one billing period, and that no portion of the water used
entered into the Borough's sanitary sewer system, then the Finance
Director is authorized to issue a credit on the customer account in an
amount determined as reasonable in the sole judgment of the Finance
Director. The Finance Director is authorized to develop a written policy
for the method of investigation and determination of such use, as well
as a form to request credit. [Added 6-3-2008 by Ord. No. 1236,
approved 6-3-2008]
§ 226-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-14.1
1:315

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 8-3-1992 by Ord. No. 1032, approved 8-3-199296]
§ 226-15. Purpose and policy; applicability.
A. This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the Borough of Middletown, to effect compliance with applicable state
and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 197797 and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403).
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system
inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost for the
implementation of the Borough's industrial pretreatment program.
C. This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users; authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities; requires user reporting; assumes that existing
customer's capacity will not be preempted; and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
D. This article shall apply to the Borough of Middletown and to persons
outside the Borough who are users of the Authority POTW. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the Borough shall administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this article.
E. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Borough and users
within or without of the Borough, whereby a waste of unusual strength
or character may be accepted by the Borough by special agreements, in
writing, executed prior to such acceptance, containing safeguards,
96.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Sewer Use, adopted 9-11-1989
by Ord. No. 989, approved 9-11-1989.
97.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 226-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-15
1:317
§ 226-16. Definitions and word usage.
limitations and conditions acceptable to the Borough. These special
agreements do not pertain to wastes from significant industrial users
that are bound by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director in an NPDES state with an
approved state pretreatment program, and the Administrator of the
EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state
pretreatment program.
AUTHORITY — The Middletown Borough Authority, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
"authorized representative of an industrial user" may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
A corporate officer or manager, as follows:
A responsible corporate officer of the level of president, vice
president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation in charge
of a principal business function or any other person who
performs similar policy-making or decisionmaking functions
for the corporation; or
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000, if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to
the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
(b)
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if the authorization is made, in writing, by the individual described
in Subsection A(1)(a) above; or the authorization specifies either
an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a
well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company; and the written authorization is
submitted to the Control Authority.
(3)
§ 226-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-16
1:318
laboratory conditions, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration (mg/l).
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standards.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the approval authority, as defined
hereinabove; or the Borough if the Borough has an approved
pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EDU — Equivalent domestic unit with the following wastewater
characteristics:
Characteristic Amount
Flow 250 gpd
Ammonia Nitrogen, as N 25 mg/l
BOD 250 mg/l
Phosphorus, as P 10 mg/l
Total Suspended Solids 250 mg/l
TKN, as N 40 mg/l
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any regulations containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which apply to a specific
category of industrial users.
§ 226-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-16
1:319
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis, with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW, including
holding tank waste discharged into the system.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — A program administered
by a POTW that meets the criteria established in 40 CFR 403.8 and 40
CFR 403.9 and which has been approved by a regional administrator or
state director in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form
of energy rejected or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process or from the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, causes the inhibition or
disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal, which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the Authority's NPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation). The term includes prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with
Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines
or regulations developed pursuant to the Solids Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA), including Title II, more commonly referred to as the "Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)"; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act98 or more stringent state criteria, including those
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Title IV (Subtitle D) of SWDA applicable to the method of disposal or
use employed by the POTW.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act99 and 40 CFR 403.5.
98.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq., 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et
seq., and 33 U.S.C. § 1401 et seq., respectively.
§ 226-16 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-16
1:320
NEW SOURCE —
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company'
association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, any
other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include
the plural where indicated by context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of solution, and indicates
the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a substance.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
is commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act100 which will be
applicable to such source, if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.
(c)
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in modification rather than a "new source" if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation.
(2)
99.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b).
100. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c).
§ 226-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-16
1:321
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature
of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, biological processes
or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works, defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which
is owned, in this instance, by the Authority. This definition includes
any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature. It also includes pipes, sewers and other conveyances only if they
convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this
article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters
to the POTW from persons outside the Borough who are, by contract
or agreement with the Borough or Authority, users of the Authority's
POTW. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section
502(4) of the Act,101 which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges
to and the discharges from such a treatment works.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The wastewater from residential households
and toilet facilities from institutions, commercial and industrial
establishments.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nonresidential user of the
Authority's POTW who:
(1) Is subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
water and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(2)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more
of the average dry weather or organic capacity of the Authority's
POTW treatment plant;
(3)
Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section
307 of the Act102 or Pennsylvania statutes and rules; or
(4)
Is found by the Borough, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources (DER)103 or the United States
(5)
101. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1362(4).
102. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
103. Editor's Note: Now the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
§ 226-16 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-16
1:322
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or waste exceeding a
concentration or flow greater than five times that of the average
twenty-four-hour discharge from the user, which is discharged
continuously for a period longer than 15 minutes.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1987.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Borough of
Middletown who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this article, or his duly authorized representative, deputy or agent.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of
Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act104 or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the Authority's POTW.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulation of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have a significant
impact either singly or in combination with other contributing
significant industrial users on the wastewater treatment system,
the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions
generated by the system.
B. Word usage. The word "shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive.
104. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
§ 226-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-17
1:323
§ 226-17. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
L Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.
U.S.C. United States Code
TSS Total suspended solids
§ 226-18. Prohibited discharges.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW, whether or not the user is
subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user
may not contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with
other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, including
but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup flash point of
less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21. At no time shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or
at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading
over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited
materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides and any other substance which is a fire
hazard or a hazard to the system.
§ 226-17 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-18
1:324
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interferences with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities, such as but not limited to grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
(3) Grease, oil or sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent and/or Borough, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
in such amounts as to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of
a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and/or the
Borough and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper
removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal, which are subject to review by the Superintendent and/or
the Borough. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials
not performed by owner's (owners') personnel must be performed
by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
(4) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(5) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5,
unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such
wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment and/
or personnel of the POTW.
(6) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure, to
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a
hazard to humans and animals, to create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters or the POTW or to exceed the limitations set forth
in a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant
shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant
to Section 307(a) of the Act.105
105. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
§ 226-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-18
1:325
(7) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
(8) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation or reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.106
(9) Any substance which will pass through and as a result cause the
POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality
standards.
(10) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(11) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into
the POTW which exceeds 40° C. or 104° F., unless the POTW
treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature.
(12) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which cause
interference to the POTW. In no case shall a wasteload have a flow
rate or contain concentrations or qualities of pollutants that exceed
for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during
normal operation, unless otherwise authorized, in writing, by the
Superintendent and/or the Borough.
(13) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Superintendent and/or the Borough in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
(14) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
106. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1345, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq., and
15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., respectively.
§ 226-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-18
1:326
§ 226-19. Use of publicly owned treatment works facilities required.
(15)No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
swimming pool drainage, cooling water, unpolluted industrial or
nonresidential process water. The discharge of cooling water from
air-conditioning units with cooling towers or recirculating systems
or from air-conditioning units using flow-through or
nonrecirculating systems is prohibited. The sanitary sewers are not
designed to handle the cooling water volumes produced by airconditioning
units. Cooling water free from bacteria and harmful
chemicals should be drained into storm sewers in accordance with
state and federal requirements.
B. When the Borough determines that a user is contributing to the POTW
any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as interfere
with the operation of the POTW, the Borough shall advise the user of the
impact of the contribution on the POTW and develop effluent limitations
for such user to correct the interference with the POTW.
C. Any user, other than a significant industrial user, who shall contribute
any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, upon conviction thereof by a
summary proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay costs of prosecution
and pay a fine in the amount of $1,000 per offense, and in default of
payment of such fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that the user contributes any of the
above-enumerated substances shall constitute a separate offense for
the purposes of this section. [Added 12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1147,
approved 12-3-2001]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Borough of Middletown or in any area under the jurisdiction
of said Borough any human or animal excrement, garbage or
objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Borough or under the jurisdiction of the Borough any wastewater,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this article.
C. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, business, industry or other purposes situated
within the Borough and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located a POTW of
the Borough is hereby required at the owner's (owners') expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the POTW in accordance with the provisions of this article
within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said
POTW is within 100 feet of the property line.
§ 226-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:327
§ 226-20. Building sewers and connections.
A. No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb the POTW or any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written wastewater discharge permit
from the Superintendent and/or Borough as set forth in § 226-31 of this
article, as applicable.
B. There shall be two classes of wastewater discharge permits: a general
permit for commercial and nonsignificant industrial discharges, and a
significant industrial user permit for significant industrial discharges.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Borough. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent and/or
Borough. All wastewater discharge permit applications shall be
reviewed and approved, in writing, by the Borough prior to permit
issuance. Permit and inspection fees for wastewater discharge permits
shall be paid to the Borough at the time the wastewater discharge
permit is issued. Permit and inspection fees for wastewater discharge
permits shall be in such amounts as may be established from time to
time by the Borough.107
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the building
owner(s). The building owner(s) shall indemnify the Borough from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and tested by the Superintendent,
to meet all requirements of this article.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building
sewer, and the methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joint
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
of the Building and Plumbing Code108 or other applicable ordinances of
the Borough. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the POTW, wastewater
107. Editor's Note: See § 226-29 of this article.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 114, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 226-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-20
1:328
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
H. Floor drains, appliance connections and sewer connections below first
floor level may be attached to the Borough sewer system only if the
owner shall maintain a permanent water seal in the traps and provide
the same with a check or backwater valve; and, further, even if said
sewer drain is provided with a permanent water seal in the trap and a
check or backwater valve, the Borough will not be responsible for any
damages caused by the flooding or stoppage of said sewers into the
basement where said drain or sewer connection is made.
I. No person shall make connection of sump pumps, roof downspouts,
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is in turn
connected directly or indirectly to the POTW. [Amended 9-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 1184, approved 9-7-2004]
(1) Enforcement. [Amended 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 1212, approved
8-7-2006]
(a) Prior to the transfer of title of any property within the Borough
of Middletown, the owner shall request the Borough to inspect
the property's sewer connections for compliance with this
Chapter 226. If this inspection reveals the connection is not in
compliance, the property owner shall repair the connection
prior to transfer. Upon completion of the repairs, the Borough
shall reinspect the property and provide the property owner
with certification of compliance with this Chapter 226. The
Borough shall not permit the transfer of the sewer account to a
new property owner until such time as this inspection and
certification is completed. The fee for this inspection shall be
set by resolution of Borough Council from time to time.
(b) It shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer, the Utility
Operations and Maintenance Supervisor or their designee to
immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any
violation of this subsection.
(c) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to notify
the offending user to make all necessary corrections to any
noted violations within 10 days of receipt of said notice. The
Code Enforcement Officer may extend the correction deadline
in the event of extraordinary circumstances as long as no
immediate or imminent threat exists as set forth in Subsection
I(1)(d) below.
(d) If, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer or the Utility
Operations and Maintenance Supervisor or their assigns, the
violation constitutes an immediate or imminent threat to the
health and welfare of the general public, the violation poses an
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-20
1:329
immediate or imminent threat to the environment or poses an
immediate or imminent threat to the sewer system, the tenday
notice will be waived and the user will be ordered to make
immediate corrections. If the user fails to make immediate
corrections, the Code Enforcement Officer shall order that all
necessary corrective actions be taken.
(e) The cost of any corrective actions shall be borne by the user.
Payment of such costs shall not indemnify the user from any
penalties prescribed by this subsection or any penalties
prescribed by state or federal law.
(2) Violations and penalties.
(a) Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to the
following penalties:
[1] First violation: a fine of $250.
[2] Second violation: a fine of $500 or 30 days' imprisonment,
or both.
[3] Third and each subsequent violation: a fine of $1,000 or 90
days' imprisonment, or both.
(b) This subsection and the foregoing penalties shall not be
construed to limit or deny any person to such equitable or
other remedies as may otherwise be available with or without
process of law, including payment of damages to the Borough
of Middletown by any person causing damage to the sewer
system.
J. The connection of the building sewer into the POTW shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations set forth in appropriate specifications
of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
K. When required by the Superintendent and/or Borough, any person
discharging to the sewer system any industrial wastes or combined
industrial wastes and sanitary sewage shall install a suitable manhole
or manholes or metering chamber on his connecting sewer or sewers to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the combined flow
of wastes from his premises. Such manhole or manholes or metering
chamber shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the Borough or its designated
representative. The manhole or metering chamber shall be installed by
such person at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible to the Borough or its designated representative at
all times. The construction and maintenance of such manhole or
§ 226-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-20
1:330
§ 226-21. Compliance with federal pretreatment standards
required.
Upon promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard
under Section 307 of the Clean Water Act109 for a particular industrial
subcategory, the categorical standard, if more stringent than limitations
imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall supersede
the limitations imposed by the Borough. The Borough shall notify all
affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 226-22. Modification of federal pretreatment standards.
Where the Authority's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, the Borough may apply to the Approval Authority for
modifications of specific limits in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean the reduction in the amount of
metering chamber shall be mandatory for significant industrial users,
and if deemed necessary by the Borough, flows from such manhole or
metering chamber shall be continuously monitored, transmitted and
recorded by means of an approved receiving device.
L. The applicant for the wastewater discharge permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the POTW. The connection to the POTW and testing shall
be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or his
representative.
M. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and light, so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough.
N. No excavation, construction or connection work shall be commenced
within an Authority right-of-way until the owner, his agents and/or
independent contractor shall have first filed a bond in double the
amount of the cost of the work to be performed as determined by the
Borough and Authority, agreeing to indemnify and save harmless the
Authority against any and all loss, damages, costs and expenses which
the Authority may thereafter suffer, incur, be put to or pay by reason of
the failure to complete properly any of the aforesaid excavation,
construction or connection work. The term "owner" as used herein shall
be deemed to include the owner or owners in fee simple, lessees of the
premises, occupiers of the premises and all other parties having a
beneficial use or interest in the premises and occupying the same with
the consent and permission of the owner of the fee title.
109. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
§ 226-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-22
1:331
a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which
is achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when measured
according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c). The Borough
may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are
fulfilled and prior approval from the Approval Authority is obtained.
§ 226-23. Specific pollutant limitations. [Amended 12-3-2001 by
Ord. No. 1147, approved 12-3-2001]
A. The following technologically based limits were developed based on
prevention of pass-through in compliance with NPDES and water
quality limits and prevention of interference with POTW operations
regarding process inhibition and sludge quality. No user shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of:
Parameter
Daily Maximum
Concentration
(mg/l)
Monthly Average
Concentration
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.18 0.16
Biochemical oxygen
demand
750 600
Cadmium 0.01 0.01
Chemical oxygen
demand
1200 950
Total chromium 0.09 0.08
Copper 0.42 0.38
Total cyanide 0.18 0.16
Lead 0.15 0.14
Mercury 0.007 0.006
Nickel 0.12 0.11
Ammonia nitrogen 30.0 25.0
Oil and grease 100 100
pH 6.0 to 9.0 6.0 to 9.0
Total phosphorus 15.0 12.0
Silver 0.44 0.40
Total suspended solids 1100 880
Zinc 0.12 0.11
B. Any user, other than a significant industrial user, who shall be in
violation of this section, upon conviction thereof by a summary
proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay costs of prosecution and pay a
fine in the amount of $1,000 per offense and, in default of payment of
§ 226-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-23
1:332
§ 226-24. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges apply in any case where
they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those
in this article.
§ 226-25. Borough's right of revision.
The Borough reserves the right to establish through a wastewater discharge
permit more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
wastewater treatment system if deemed necessary and appropriate to
comply with the objectives presented in § 226-15 of this article.
§ 226-26. Unlawful substitutes for treatment prohibited.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or with any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the Borough, state or federal agencies.
§ 226-27. Accidental discharges.
such fines and costs, to a term of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that the user contributes any of the
above-enumerated substances shall constitute a separate offense for
the purposes of this section.
A. Protection. Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Borough
for review and shall be approved by the Borough before construction of
the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan when
designated by the Borough. No user who commences contribution to
the POTW after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until the accidental discharge
procedures have been approved by the Borough. Review and approval
of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from
the responsibility to modify its facility, as necessary, to meet the
requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is
the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the
POTW of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the
discharge, the type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective
actions.
B. Written report. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the Borough a detailed written report describing
the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
§ 226-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-27
1:333
§ 226-28. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedures.
§ 226-29. Fees.
mitigate and prevent any expense, loss, damage or other liability which
may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW or aquatic life or
any other damages to person or property. Such report shall not relieve
the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed by this article or other applicable law. This written report shall
be signed by an authorized representative of the user.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Authority's wastewater treatment system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the Borough's Schedule of Charges
and Fees.110
B. Charges and fees.
(1) The Borough may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs for setting up and operating
the Borough's pretreatment program.
(b) Fees for sampling, monitoring, inspections and surveillance
procedures.
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(d) Fees for permit applications.
(e) Fees for filing appeals.
(f) Fees for consistent removal by the Borough of pollutants over
and above the limitations specified herein and/or pollutants
otherwise subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
(g) Other fees the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Borough.
110. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 226-27 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-30
1:334
§ 226-30. Wastewater discharges regulated.
In the absence of a permit from the Borough, it shall be unlawful to
discharge to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized, in writing, by
the Borough in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 226-31. Wastewater discharge permits.
§ 226-32. Significant industrial user permits.
A. All users proposing to connect to and contribute to the POTW shall
obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or
contributing to the POTW.
B. Classes of permits.
(1) There shall be two classes of wastewater discharge permits:
(a) General permit: for commercial and nonsignificant industrial
discharges; and
(b) Significant industrial user permit: for significant industrial
discharges.
(2) In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Borough. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent and/or
Borough. All wastewater discharge permit applications shall be
reviewed and approved, in writing, by the Borough prior to permit
issuance. Permit and inspection fees for a significant industrial
user wastewater discharge permit shall be paid to the Borough at
the time the significant industrial user wastewater discharge
permit is issued. Permit and inspection fees for general wastewater
discharge permits shall be in such amounts as may be established
from time to time by the Borough.
A. Permit. All significant industrial users proposing to connect or
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to
the POTW. All existing significant industrial users connected to or
contributing to the POTW shall apply for a significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date of
this article.
B. Permit application.
(1) A significant industrial user required to obtain a significant
industrial user wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file
with the Borough an application in the form prescribed by the
Borough. In support of the application, the significant industrial
§ 226-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-32
1:335
user shall submit in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
(a) The name, address and location.
(b) The SIC number, according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Office of Management and Budget,
1987, as amended.
(c) A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(d) Water usage and disposal.
(e) The time and duration of contribution.
(f) The average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(g) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(h) The type and amount of raw materials processed.
(i) The number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(j) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in §§ 226-18 through 226-28 of this
article, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory;
sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g)
of the Clean Water Act111 and contained in 40 CFR 136, as
amended.
(k) Site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
(l) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any local, state or federal
pretreatment standards and a statement regarding whether or
not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the significant user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards.
111. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g).
§ 226-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-32
1:336
(m) If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the significant industrial user will provide such
additional pretreatment The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions
shall apply to this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the significant
industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in B(1)(m)[1] shall exceed nine
months.
[3] No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the significant industrial
user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent,
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps
being taken by the significant industrial user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Superintendent.
(n) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(o) The permit application shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the significant industrial user.
(2) The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the significant
industrial user and may require further information. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the Borough may
issue a significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit
subject to the terms and conditions provided herein.
C. Permit modifications. Within nine months of promulgation of a Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a significant industrial user,
subject to a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not
previously submitted an application for a significant industrial user
§ 226-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-32
1:337
wastewater discharge permit as required in Subsection A above, the
significant industrial user shall apply for a significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of
the applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition,
the significant industrial user with an existing significant industrial
user wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the Borough within
180 days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standard the information required in Subsection B(1)(l)
and (m).
D. Permit conditions. Significant industrial user wastewater discharge
permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all
other applicable regulations, significant industrial user charges and
fees established by the Borough. Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of significant industrial user charges
and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the sewer system.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedules.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports. (See Subsection L below.)
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge for five years or longer as specified by the
Borough and affording the Borough access thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification of the Borough of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per § 226-27.
(11) Other conditions as deemed necessary by the Borough to ensure
compliance with this article.
E. Permit duration. Significant industrial user wastewater discharge
permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. A significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit may be
§ 226-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-32
1:338
issued for a period of less than one year or may be stated to expire on a
specific date.
F. Public notification. The Borough shall publish in The Press and Journal
a notice of intent to issue a significant industrial user wastewater
discharge permit at least 14 days prior to issuance. The notice will
indicate a location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an
address where written comments may be submitted.
G. Permit appeals. The Borough will provide interested parties with notice
of final significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit
decisions. Upon notice by the Borough, any person, including the
permittee, may petition to appeal the terms of the significant industrial
user wastewater discharge permit, in writing, within 30 days of the
notice.
(1) Failure to submit a petition for review shall be deemed a waiver of
the appeal.
(2) In the petition, the permittee must indicate the permit provisions
objected to, the reasons for the objection and the alternative
condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending
reconsideration by the Borough. If, after reviewing the petition and
any arguments, the Borough determines that reconsideration is
appropriate, the Borough shall remand the permit for reissuance.
(4) A Borough decision not to reconsider a final permit shall be
considered a final administrative action for purposes of judicial
review.
(5) The permittee seeking judicial review of the Borough's final action
must do so by filing a complaint with the Court of Common Pleas
for Dauphin County within 30 days.
H. Permit action.
(1) The terms and conditions of the significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit may be subject to modification by the
Borough during the term of the permit. These reasons include but
are not limited to the following:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Any changes in the permittee's process or discharge
characteristics.
(c) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the Authority's collection and treatment facilities,
personnel or receiving waters.
§ 226-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-32
1:339
(d) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
(e) Misrepresentation or failure, upon the permittee's part, to
disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or any
required reporting.
(f) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
(g) To reflect transfer of facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner/operator.
(h) Upon request by the permittee, provided that such request
does not create a violation of any applicable requirements,
standards, laws or rules and regulations.
(2) The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in his
significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit at least 30
days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance as determined by the Borough. The filing of a
request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation or
reissuance or termination or a notification of planned changes or
anticipated noncompliance does not stay any permit condition.
I. Permit transfer. Significant industrial user wastewater discharge
permits are issued to a specific significant industrial user for a specific
operation. A significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new
significant industrial user, different premises or a new or changed
operation without the written approval of the Borough.
(1) The permittee must give at least 30 days' advance notice to the
Borough.
(2) The notice shall include a written notarized certification by the new
owner which:
(a) States that the new owner has no intent to change the facility's
operations or processes.
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing permit.
J. Permit termination. Significant industrial user wastewater discharge
permits may be terminated for the following reasons:
(1) Falsifying monitoring reports.
(2) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(3) Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and records.
§ 226-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-32
1:340
(4) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(5) Failure to pay fines.
(6) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(7) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
K. Permit reissuance. The permittee shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 180 days prior the expiration of the significant industrial
user's existing significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit.
If the significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit is not
reissued by the Borough prior to its expiration date, the conditions of
the existing permit shall continue until such time that a new permit is
issued by the Borough, though not to exceed three months.
L. Reporting requirements.
(1) Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any significant industrial user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Borough a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by pretreatment standards or requirements and the
average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the
significant industrial user facility which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall state
whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O &
M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the significant
industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the significant industrial user and
certified to by a qualified professional.
(2) Periodic compliance reports.
(a) Any significant industrial user subject to a categorical standard
after the compliance date of such categorical standard or, in
the case of a new source, after commencement of the
discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the Superintendent,
during the months of June and December, unless required
more frequently in the categorical standard or by the
Superintendent, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by
such categorical standards. In addition, this report shall
include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting
period, exceeded the average daily flow allowed in the permit.
If sampling by the significant industrial user indicates a
violation, the significant industrial user shall notify the POTW
§ 226-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-32
1:341
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
significant industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
POTW within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation,
except if the POTW performs sampling at least once per month
at the significant industrial user's facility or if the POTW
performs sampling at the significant industrial user's facility
between the time when the significant industrial user performs
its initial sampling and the time the significant industrial user
receives the results of this sampling. At the discretion of the
Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local
high and low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which
the above reports are to be submitted. This report shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the significant
industrial user.
(b) The Borough may impose mass limitations on significant
industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases
where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In
such cases, the report required by Subsection L(2)(a) of this
section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the significant
industrial user. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and
the nature and concentration or production and mass where re
quested by the Borough, of pollutants contained therein which
are limited by the applicable pretreatment, standards. The
frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the
applicable pretreatment standard or by the Borough. All
analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with
any other test procedures approved by EPA. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
EPA. (Comment: Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and
Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for
Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or
with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved
by EPA.)
M. Monitoring facilities. The Borough shall require to be provided and
operated at the significant industrial user's own expense monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of
building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring
facility should normally be situated on the significant industrial user's
premises, but the Borough may, when such a location would be
§ 226-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-32
1:342
§ 226-33. Pretreatment.
impractical or cause undue hardship on the significant industrial user,
allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area
and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole
or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility and sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the significant industrial user. Whether constructed
on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities
shall be provided in accordance with the Borough's requirements and
all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written
notification by the Borough.
N. Inspection and sampling. The Borough shall inspect the facilities of a
significant industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this
article is being met and all requirements are being complied with.
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the Borough or its representative ready access
during all working hours to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the
performance of any of their duties. The Borough, state and EPA shall
have the right to set up on the significant industrial user's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a significant
industrial user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the
significant industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the Borough, state and EPA will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
A. Significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve
compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within
the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment
regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the Borough shall be provided, operated and maintained
at the significant industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the Borough for review and shall be acceptable to the Borough before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the significant industrial user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the Borough under the provisions of this article.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
§ 226-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-33
1:343
operation shall be reported to and be accepted by the Borough prior to
the significant industrial user's initiation of the changes.
B. The Borough shall annually publish in the largest newspaper of general
circulation a list of the significant industrial users which were in
significant noncompliance (SNC) with applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements at least once during the previous 12 months.
The notification also shall summarize any enforcement actions taken by
the Borough against the significant industrial users during the same 12
months.
(1) For the purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user is in
SNC if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements
taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the
daily maximum limit or the average monthly limit for the same
pollutant.
(b) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for
each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period
equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the
average monthly limit multiplied by the applicable TRC. (TRC
equals 1.4 for BOD, O&G and TSS and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH.)
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum or longer-term average) that the Borough
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public).
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused an imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment
or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency
authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent
such a discharge.
(e) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance milestone contained in the significant industrial
user wastewater discharge permit or separate enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance.
(f) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, semiannual and
annual compliance reports, monthly monitoring reports and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
§ 226-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-33
1:344
§ 226-34. Confidentiality of information.
§ 226-35. Enforcement; remedies; appeals; violations and penalties.
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(h) Any other violation or group of violations which the Borough
determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the Borough's pretreatment program.
(2) All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available to officials of the state or EPA upon request.
A. Information and data on a significant industrial user obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction unless the significant
industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Borough that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the significant industrial user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret presses shall not be
made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
article, the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES)
permit, state disposal permit and/or the pretreatment program;
provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for
use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.
C. Information accepted by the Borough as confidential shall be
transmitted to any governmental agency immediately when requested,
but not to the general public unless a ten-day notification is given to the
significant industrial user by the Borough.
A. Administrative enforcement remedies.
(1) Notification of violation (NOV). Whenever the Borough finds that a
significant industrial user has violated or is violating this article,
the significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit or any
order, prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the
Borough may serve upon such person a written notice stating the
nature of the violation. Within 10 days of the receipt date of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted to the Borough by the
significant industrial user. If the significant industrial user fails to
§ 226-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-35
1:345
submit a plan within this ten-day period, the Borough shall develop
and enforce a plan to correct the violation in question at the
significant industrial user's expense. The provisions of this section
shall not relieve the significant industrial user of any responsibility
under this article, statute, law, rule or regulation.
(2) Cease and desist orders. When the Borough finds that a significant
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this article, the
significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, the Borough may issue an order to cease and
desist all such violations and direct the significant industrial user in
noncompliance to:
(a) Comply forthwith; and
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
necessary to properly address a continuing or threatening
violation, including halting operations and terminating the
discharge.
(3) Compliance order. When the Borough finds that a significant
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this article, the
significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, the Borough may issue a compliance order to the
significant industrial user responsible for the discharge directing
that, following a specific time period, sewer service shall be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances have been installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders may also contain other requirements as might
be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices.
(4) Consent orders. The Borough is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the significant
industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will
include specific action to be taken by the significant industrial user
to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by
the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as
compliance orders issued pursuant to Subsection A(3) above.
(5) Show cause orders.
(a) Notwithstanding the aforesaid enforcement provisions, the
Borough may order any significant industrial user who causes
or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to
show cause before the Borough why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the
significant industrial user specifying the time and place of a
hearing to be held by the Borough regarding the violation, the
reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed
§ 226-35 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-35
1:346
enforcement action and directing the significant industrial
user to show cause before the Borough why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served by certified or registered mail (return
receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service
may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(b) The Borough or other person designated by the Borough shall
conduct the hearing and be authorized as follows:
[1] To issue notices of hearings requesting the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
[2] To take the evidence.
[3] To transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Borough for action thereof.
(c) At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony shall be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public
or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
(d) After the Borough has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the significant industrial user responsible for the
discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the
sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been
installed and existing treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders
and directives deemed necessary and appropriate may be
issued by the Borough.
(6) Administrative fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this
article, any significant industrial user who is found to have failed to
comply with any provision of this article, and the orders, rules,
regulations, and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined an
amount not to exceed $25,000 for each violation. Each day on
which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided
herein, the Borough may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court
costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by
appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated
this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a
lien against an individual significant industrial user's property.
Significant industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file
a request for the Borough to reconsider the fine within 10 days of
being notified of the fine. Where the Borough believes a second
§ 226-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-35
1:347
request has merit, the Borough shall convene a hearing on the
matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the significant
industrial user.
(7) Emergency suspensions.
(a) The Borough may suspend wastewater treatment service and/
or the significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit
when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the
Borough, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, causes interference with the POTW or causes the
POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
(b) Any significant industrial user notified of a suspension of
wastewater treatment service and/or the significant industrial
user wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the discharge to the POTW. In the event of a failure
by the significant industrial user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Borough shall take steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or its
receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The
Borough shall reinstate the significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit upon proof of the elimination of
the noncomplying discharge by the significant industrial user
and payment of any damages, fines, penalties or costs
associated with the discharge.
(c) A significant industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in
part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any further
occurrence to the Borough within 15 days of the date of
occurrence.
(8) Revocation of permit.
(a) Any significant industrial user who violates the following
conditions of this article or applicable state and federal
regulations, is subject to having his significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit revoked for, but not limited to,
the following changes:
[1] Failure of the significant industrial user to factually report
the wastewater constituents and characteristics of
discharge;
[2] Failure of the significant industrial user to report
significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
§ 226-35 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-35
1:348
[3] Refusal to permit reasonable access to the significant
industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling; or
[4] Violation of the conditions of the significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit.
(b) Noncompliant significant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their significant industrial user
wastewater discharge permit and be offered an opportunity to
show cause under Subsection A(5) above why the proposed
action should not be taken.
B. Judicial remedies. If any significant industrial user or other person
discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the POTW
contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment
requirements or any order of the Borough, the Borough Solicitor may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County. Some of these actions
include the following:
(1) Injunctive relief. Whenever a significant industrial user has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the significant
industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, the Borough Solicitor may petition the court for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, (as may
be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the
part of the significant industrial user. The Borough shall have such
remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer
service charges.
(2) Civil penalties.
(a) Any significant industrial user who has violated or continues to
violate this article and the orders, rules, regulations and
permits issued hereunder shall be liable to the Borough for a
civil penalty of not more than $25,000, plus actual damages
incurred by the POTW per violation per day as the violation
continues. In addition to the above-described penalty and
damages, the Borough may recover reasonable attorney's fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with the
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
(b) The Borough shall petition the court to impose, assess and
recover such sums. In determining the amount of liability, the
court shall take into account all relevant circumstances,
including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the
violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit
gained through the significant industrial user's violation,
corrective actions by the significant industrial user, the
§ 226-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-35
1:349
compliance history of the significant industrial user and any
other factor as justice requires.
(3) Criminal prosecution. Any significant industrial user who willfully
or negligently violates any provision of this article, the significant
industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $25,000 per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
(4) Falsifying information. Any significant industrial user who
knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article
or significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $25,000 per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year, or
both.
C. Affirmative defenses.
(1) Treatment upsets.
(a) Any significant industrial user which experiences an upset in
operations that places it in a temporary state of
noncompliance, which is not the result of operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or
improper operation, shall inform the Borough thereof
immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. Where such
information is given orally, a written report thereof shall be
filed by the significant industrial user within five days. The
report shall contain:
[1] A description of the upset, its causes and impact on the
discharger's compliance status.
[2] The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance is
continuing, the time by which compliance is reasonably
expected to be restored.
[3] All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of such an upset.
(b) A significant industrial user which complies with the
notification provisions of this section in a timely manner shall
have an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought
by the Borough for any noncompliance with this article, the
significant industrial user wastewater discharge permit or
§ 226-35 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-35
1:350
order issued hereunder by the significant industrial user,
which arises out of violations attributable to and alleged to
have occurred during the period documented and verified
upset.
(2) Treatment bypasses.
(a) A bypass of the treatment system is prohibited unless all of the
following conditions are met:
[1] The bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage.
[2] There is no feasible alternative to the bypass, including the
use of auxiliary treatment or retention of the wastewater.
[3] The significant industrial user properly notifies the
Borough as described in this section.
(b) Significant industrial users must provide immediate notice to
the Borough upon discovery of an unanticipated bypass. If
necessary, the Borough may require the significant industrial
user to submit a written report explaining the cause, nature
and duration of the bypass and the steps being taken to
prevent its recurrence. A significant industrial user may allow
a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for
essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the
treatment system. Significant industrial users anticipating a
bypass must submit notice to the Borough at least 10 days in
advance. The Borough may only approve the anticipated
bypass if the circumstances satisfy those set forth in this
section.
§ 226-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-35
1:351

ARTICLE III
Tapping Fees
[Adopted 12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1145, approved 12-3-2001]
§ 226-36. Purpose.
Middletown Borough Council has determined, based upon a study and
report prepared by its consulting engineer, that a substantial expenditure
must be made for capital additions and improvements to the sewer system
operated by Middletown Borough in order to provide service for future
users of the sewer system, and has further determined that the cost of
construction and financing of such capital additions and improvements
would create an unreasonable and inequitable economic burden upon the
Borough and the existing users of the sewer system. It is, therefore, deemed
to be in the public interest of the Borough, the existing users of the sewer
system, and future users, that all improved properties hereafter connected
to the sewer system pay a tapping fee designed and calculated to create
a capital reserve fund to provide the cost of construction and financing of
such capital additions and improvements. The purpose of this article is to
provide for the imposition and collection of such tapping fees.
§ 226-37. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
prescribed to them the meanings hereafter set forth:
APARTMENT or OFFICE USE — A building which is intended to be used
for continuous or periodic habitation by human beings and containing two
or more family dwelling units; or which contains business or professional
offices and one or more family dwelling units; or which contains business,
professional or any other similar type of office or offices.
AUTHORITY — Middletown Borough Municipal Authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL USE — A property which is intended to be used for the
purpose of carrying on a trade, business or profession, or for social,
religious, educational, charitable or public uses.
DOMESTIC USE — A property which is intended to be used for continuous
or periodic habitation by human beings in a single family unit.
EDU — Equivalent domestic unit, which is equivalent to the flow of 250
gallons per day.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within Middletown Borough
upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL USE — A property located within Middletown Borough upon
which is intended to be used in whole or in part for the manufacture,
§ 226-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-37
1:353
fabrication, processing, cleaning, laundry, conversion or assembly of any
product, commodity or article.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, government entity,
and other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include the
plural where indicated by context.
SCHEDULE OF FEES — The schedule of connection fees, customer
facilities fees and tapping fees to be charged to sewer and water customers
as established by the Borough Council, in accordance with the provisions of
Act 203 of 1990.112
SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer collection system, including related
and necessary facilities in addition to treatment and disposal facilities,
for rendering sewage service in the Borough, together with any future
additions, alterations, improvements, or extensions thereto.
§ 226-38. Application to connect.
No person shall connect any improved property with any part of the sewer
system owned by the Authority and leased to the Borough without first
making application, securing a permit therefor in writing from this Borough,
making payment of the connection fee, customer facilities fee, and tapping
fee as set forth in the schedule of fees. Such application shall be made on a
form to be provided by the Borough and shall be obtained from the office of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 226-39. Imposition of fees.
A. A tapping fee is hereby imposed against any improved property and
against the owner of such improved property whenever the owner
hereafter shall connect any such improved property with a sewer main
constituting a portion of the sewer system owned by the Authority and
leased to the Borough, for each EDU within, or the equivalent flow
generated by, regardless of whether the sewer mains or extensions
thereto are installed by the owner, developer or by this Borough. In the
case of residential uses having multiple units or uses therein, a
separate tapping fee shall be paid for each dwelling unit or apartment.
In all other types of uses, a separate tapping fee shall be paid for each
EDU or the equivalent flow generated by such use, based upon the total
estimated average flow of sewage to be generated from such improved
property. However, where the actual average daily flow discharged by
such property during any quarterly billing period during the first year
after substantial occupancy exceeds the estimated flow, the owner of
112. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607.
§ 226-37 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-39
1:354
§ 226-40. Due date and collection.
Any fees imposed hereunder shall be due and payable at the time
application is made by the owner of any improved property for a permit to
connect such improved property with the sewer system.
§ 226-41. Enforcement.
The fees imposed by this article shall be a lien on the improved property
connected to and served by the sewer system where such fees or charges
such improved property shall be required to pay the additional tapping
fees as determined from the actual flow records.
(1) In those cases where an improved property is already connected to
the sewer system, and where there is an expansion of, addition to
or a change in the use of such improved property which results in
an increase in the volume of sanitary sewage discharged from such
property, an additional tapping fee shall be paid for each additional
EDU or the equivalent flow generated by such expansion, addition
or change in use, based upon the additional estimated average
daily flow of sewage to be generated by or discharged from such
improved property. If, during any full quarterly billing period
during the first year after substantial occupancy, the average daily
flow exceeds said estimated average daily flow, the owner of such
improved property shall be required to pay the additional tapping
fees as determined from the actual flow records. In the case of
domestic uses and apartment or office uses, an additional tapping
fee shall be paid for each additional dwelling unit or apartment or
each office or suite of offices added as a result of an expansion of,
addition to, or a change in the use of such improved property.
(2) The Borough Council shall establish a fee schedule for sewer
tapping fees by a properly approved resolution of the Borough
Council.
B. A sewer connection fee is hereby imposed against any improved
property and against the owner of such improved property whenever
the owner hereafter shall connect any such improved property with a
sewer main constituting a portion of the sewer system owned by the
Authority and leased to the Borough. The Borough Council shall
establish a fee schedule for sewer connection fees by a properly
approved resolution of the Borough Council.
C. A sewer customer facilities fee is hereby imposed against any improved
property and against the owner of such improved property whenever
the owner hereafter shall connect any such improved property with a
sewer main constituting a portion of the sewer system owned by the
Authority and leased to the Borough. The Borough Council shall
establish a fee schedule for sewer customer facilities fees by a properly
approved resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 226-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-41
1:355
are not paid as provided herein. Said lien shall be filed in the office of the
Prothonotary of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collecting of municipal claims.
In addition, the payment of said tapping fees imposed hereunder may be
enforced by this Borough in any manner appropriate under existing laws at
the time they become due and payable.
§ 226-42. Segregation of funds.
All revenues received by this Borough from the tapping fees imposed by this
article shall be segregated by accounting practices from other revenues of
the Borough received in connection with the operation of the sewer system
and shall be credited to a capital reserve account. Said revenues shall be
used for the purpose of construction and financing of such capital additions
and improvements to the sewer system as may be required from time to
time.
§ 226-41 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 226-42
1:356
Chapter 227
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
§ 227-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Megan's Law
Registrant Residency Ordinance."
§ 227-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A licensed day-care center, child-care facility or
any other child-care service facility exempt from licensing pursuant to the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building and its related facilities used for
educational, social, cultural or recreational activities, which is operated by
a not-for-profit entity.
PUBLIC PARK or RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any land, or tract of land,
or facility used for passive or active recreation, including any playground,
park, skate park, athletic field, swimming pool, and any other facility owned
or operated by the Borough or any other governmental agency or notfor-
profit organization, including Dauphin County or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
RESIDENCE — A location where an individual resides or is domiciled or
intends to be domiciled for 30 consecutive days or more during a calendar
year.
SCHOOL — Any educational building or facility, whether public or private,
that provides educational services, including secondary schools, trade or
professional institutions or institutions of higher education.
SEX OFFENDER — Any individual required to register under 42 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 9795.1(a), (b)(1) or (2).113
§ 227-3. Restrictions established.
A. It shall be unlawful for any sex offender or other person who has been
convicted of a violation which requires registration in another
jurisdiction, to reside, lodge, abide or live within 500 feet of any school,
child-care facility, community center, public park, recreational facility
or library in the Borough.
B. For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirements shall be measured by following a straight line from the
outer property line of the permanent residence of the sex offender to
113. Editor's Note: See now 42 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 9799.14 and 9799.15.
§ 226-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-3
1:357
§ 227-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any person or sex offender who has:
§ 227-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
before a Magisterial District Justice, be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not more than 90 days and shall be fined not more than
$1,000 for each violation, plus the cost of prosecution and reasonable
attorneys' fees.
§ 227-6. Publication of restricted areas.
The Borough Manager shall prepare, and place at the Borough Zoning
Office, a map of the Borough of Middletown depicting the areas where sex
offenders are restricted from residing pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
Chapter 229
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER BLADES AND SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 105. Coasting — See Ch. 235, Art. I.
§ 229-1. Use on certain streets prohibited; ramps. [Amended
11-6-2000 by Ord. No. 1132, approved 11-6-2000]
the nearest outer property line of a school, child-care facility,
community center, public park, recreational facility or library.
A. Established a residence at a location that may be in violation of § 227-3
above prior to the date of adoption of this chapter; or
B. Established a residence not in violation of § 227-3 above but which
becomes in violation of § 227-3 because a school, child-care facility,
community center, park, recreational facility or library is established
subsequent to the establishment of the sex offender's residence; or
C. Established a residence that is in violation of § 227-3 above prior to any
obligation of the sex offender to register under Megan's Law II.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in skateboarding, rollerblading
or ride upon or propel any skateboard, roller blades or scooters
upon:
(1) Union Street from Spring Street to Ann Street.
(2) Any sidewalk along Union Street from Spring Street to Ann Street.
§ 227-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 229-1
1:358
§ 229-2. Parental responsibility.
Neither the parent of any minor (person under the age of 18) nor the legal
guardian of any minor shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor
to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 229-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-6-2000 by Ord. No.
1132, approved 11-6-2000]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof:
(3) Emaus Street from Catherine Street to Pine Street.
(4) Any sidewalk along Emaus Street from Catherine Street to Pine
Street.
(5) Brown Street from Scott Avenue to Peony Avenue.
(6) Any sidewalk along Brown Street from Scott Avenue to Peony
Avenue.
B. There shall be no placing of any type of skateboard, roller blade or
scooter ramps on any street in the Borough of Middletown.
A. For a first offense. The skateboard, roller blades or scooter used in
violation of this chapter shall be impounded by the Police Department
of the Borough for a period not exceeding 15 days. If the person
violating the chapter is a minor, in addition to the confiscation of the
skateboard, roller blades or scooter as aforementioned, the Borough
police shall notify the parents, guardian or other person having legal
custody of said minor of the violation of this chapter and the
impounding of the skateboard, roller blades or scooter. In addition, said
individual shall be provided with a copy of this chapter.
B. For a second or subsequent offense. The skateboard, roller blades or
scooter of any person violating the provisions of this chapter for the
second and/or subsequent time shall be impounded by the Police
Department of the Borough for a period not exceeding 30 days, and said
person shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $15 and
costs. In the event that said person is a minor, the skateboard, roller
blades or scooter of said minor shall be impounded by the Police
Department of the Borough for a period not exceeding 30 days, and the
parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of said minor
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $15 and costs.
§ 229-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-3
1:359
Chapter 235
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open containers on streets — See Ch. 98. Art.
II.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 127.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 226, Art. I.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
§ 229-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 229-3
1:360
ARTICLE I
Coasting
[Adopted 1-20-1883114]
§ 235-1. Coasting on streets and sidewalks prohibited.
No person or persons shall coast or ride on any sled or similar conveyance
upon any of the public sidewalks in the Borough or upon any of the streets
or alleys of the Borough not set apart and blocked off at the time, by action
of the Borough authorities, for the purpose of coasting.
§ 235-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No.
288, approved 2-9-1953]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $5 and costs of
prosecution.
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared as Section 103 of the 1953 Code of Ordinances.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-2
1:361

ARTICLE II
Water and Gas Connections
[Adopted 4-24-1891115]
§ 235-3. Placement on sidewalks; manner of making openings.
§ 235-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus
costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. No permit shall be issued
to anyone so offending until all fines and penalties have been paid.
A. All water and gas connections on sidewalks shall be so placed as to
conform to the grade of the street.
B. All openings in existing sidewalks for water and gas connections shall
be made only in an approved manner by a concrete saw cut. In
replacing concrete, new work shall be separated at all points along the
outside sides or circumference thereof from the existing concrete
sidewalk by expansion joints. [Added 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 766,
approved 12-17-1979]
115. Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. XVI, Part 2B, of the 1953 Code of
Ordinances.
§ 235-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-4
1:363

ARTICLE III
Littering
[Adopted 12-14-1920116]
§ 235-5. Deposit of refuse on streets and sidewalks prohibited.
[Amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 297, approved 2-9-1953]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw, deposit,
sweep or leave any dirt, paper, leaves, rubbish or sweepings of any kind
or character upon the streets, sidewalks or highways of the Borough of
Middletown, provided that no violation shall be prosecuted under this
article which can be prosecuted under any specific provision of the laws of
Pennsylvania.
§ 235-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1953 by Ord. No.
297, approved 2-9-1953; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved 7-11-1988]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, for each offense, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
fine and costs of prosecution, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than 30 days.
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. XVI, Part 3, of the 1953 Code of Ordinances.
§ 235-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-6
1:365

ARTICLE IV
Street Openings
[Adopted 8-14-1950117]
§ 235-7. Definitions.
§ 235-8. Plan required.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
OPEN — When used in reference to any street, includes the opening,
grading, construction, paving and/or resurfacing.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, firm, association or
corporation.
STREET — Includes any street, highway, lane, road or alley.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine.
A. No person shall open or dedicate any street for public use or travel or
any drainage facility in connection therewith in the Borough without
first submitting a suitable plan thereof to the Borough Council for its
approval in accordance with the following rules and regulations:
(1) Such plan shall be dated and shall contain the name of the person
preparing the plan and the owner of the property.
(2) Such plan shall show courses and distances of all streets, together
with the size of lots and any building restrictions in effect.
(3) Such plan shall show a total area and also the area of each drainage
section.
(4) Such plan shall show the profile of every street, the course,
structure and capacity of drainage facilities and the method of
drainage of the adjacent and contiguous territory.
(5) Such plan shall show details whereby every proposed street is to
connect to streets adopted by the Borough and shall show the
connecting plans for drainage facilities along the proposed streets
and those of the Borough.
(6) Such plan shall show all unusual conditions existing, either as to
grades, obstructions, streams, public utility facilities or any other
feature, and shall give such further details as the Council may
require.
117. Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. XVI, Part 1B, of the 1953 Code of
Ordinances.
§ 235-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-8
1:367
§ 235-9. Council authorized to modify plan.
The Borough Council shall have the power to alter any such plan and to
specify any changes or modifications of any kind which it, in its discretion,
may deem necessary with respect thereto and may make its approval of any
such plan subject to any such alterations, changes or modifications.
§ 235-10. Approval, signing and filing of plan. [Amended 4-6-1987
by Ord. No. 943]
Any plan, when so approved by the Council, shall be signed on behalf of the
Borough Council by the Chairman of the Public Works Committee and the
Borough Secretary and shall be filed in the office of the Borough Engineer,
where the same shall be available for public inspection.
§ 235-11. Nonliability of Borough.
If any street or drainage facility in connection therewith shall be opened
or dedicated for public use or travel except in strict accordance with a
plan approved by the Council or by the Court on appeal as provided by
law, neither the Borough Council nor any other public authority shall have
any responsibility of any kind in respect to such street or drainage facility,
notwithstanding any use of the same by the public; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall prevent the laying of trunk sewers,
drains and water or gas mains if required by engineering necessity for the
accommodation of other territory.
§ 235-12. Liability for costs.
Every new street in any building development shall be opened at the cost,
expense and liability of the person promoting, sponsoring, constructing,
developing or erecting such building development, and the Borough shall
not hereafter be required to accept any street until it shall have been so
opened; provided, however, that any street not so opened may be opened by
the Borough, with not more than 2/3 of the cost and expense thereof or, in
case of any street for which state or county aid is given, not more than 2/
3 of the cost and expenses thereof not so aided to be assessed against the
abutting property owners, such assessments to be levied according to the
foot-front rule, and with the remaining portion of such cost and expense to
be paid by the Borough.
(7) Upon application therefor, a public hearing may, at the discretion
the Council, be arranged for by the Borough authorities after giving
such notice as the Council may deem desirable in each case.
B. No plan shall be approved by the Council until at least three weeks after
its first presentation at a Council meeting.
§ 235-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-13
1:368
§ 235-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the penalties provided in the Act of 1927, P.L. 519, Section 1668,
as amended by the Act of 1947, P.L. 1621, Section 48.118
118. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1735.
§ 235-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-13
1:369

ARTICLE V
Street Excavations
[Adopted 11-17-1950119]
§ 235-14. Permit and bond requirements. [Amended 4-20-1981 by
Ord. No. 794, approved 4-20-1981; 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1116,
approved 5-3-1999; 7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1316, approved
7-20-2015; 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
§ 235-15. Contents of permit; permit charges. [Amended
11-23-1951; 12-10-1951; 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 794, approved
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
opening or excavation in or under any street, alley or thoroughfare
within the limits of the Borough of Middletown unless and until a permit
for that purpose is secured from the Borough Secretary for each
separate undertaking, such permit and the application for it to be in the
form prescribed by said Secretary and to contain a statement that the
applicant agrees to the terms of this article. Permits herein required
include, but are not limited to, permits to connect with the sanitary
sewer system of the Borough or to open or to make an excavation in
connection therewith, and for any work conducted by, or on behalf of, a
public utility. The police officers of the Borough shall promptly prohibit
any work being done without a proper permit or contrary to the terms
hereof.
B. All references in this article to the Secretary of the Borough shall
extend to and constitute authorization with respect to the Highway/
Property Division Supervisor and/or Code Enforcement Officer.
C. As a permit requirement, it shall be the responsibility of the contractor
to notify residences, business, and emergency services a minimum of 48
hours prior to any work. Residences and businesses shall be notified
door-to-door and/or with door hangers.
D. Before any permit shall be issued to excavate any street, the permittee
shall give Middletown a bond with corporate surety acceptable to
Middletown in an amount of at least $2,000, or such greater amount as
Middletown may determine is necessary, conditioned that the permittee
shall complete and maintain the work in accordance with the terms of
this article and comply with all provisions of this article. In lieu of bond,
Middletown may accept other security acceptable to it. Where a person
anticipates repeated applications, the Borough may accept, in advance,
a bond of such permittee in the amount determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer or Borough designee to be held in connection with
all applications of such permittee to be made during the current
calendar year.
119. Editor's Note: This ordinance appeared in Ch. XVI, Part 1C, of the 1953 Code of
Ordinances.
§ 235-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-15
1:371
4-20-1981; 4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1039, approved 4-5-1993; 5-3-1999
by Ord. No. 1116, approved 5-3-1999; 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358,
approved 3-5-2019]
§ 235-16. Liability insurance and indemnification requirements.
[Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987; amended
5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1116, approved 5-3-1999; 3-5-2019 by Ord. No.
1358, approved 3-5-2019]
A. The application for the permit and every such permit shall specify a
time when said opening or excavation may remain open and the street
address and GPS geolocation of where said opening or excavation may
be made, together with the probable length, width and depth thereof,
and such further information as the Secretary may require; and any
additional surface to be disturbed and any additional time required may
be endorsed on the permit by said Secretary, provided that emergency
breaks or leaks may be repaired and a permit therefor secured within
24 hours.
B. Permit charges shall be $100 for the first 50 square feet excavated plus
$50 for each additional 50 square feet excavated or portion thereof,
plus a $100 GIS fee. This fee shall be for a four-week period beginning
with the date of the commencement of the street excavation, inspection
of GIS location, and review service. For any street excavation exceeding
this four-week period, there shall be added a sum of $50 per week until
work on the undertaking has been satisfactorily completed.
C. In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface
pipe, line, connection or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person
owning or responsible for such pipe, line, connection or apparatus, to
commence an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a
permit, provided that application for a permit shall be made within 24
hours and all other provisions of this article are fully complied with.
A. Liability insurance. No permit provided for under the provisions of this
article shall be issued until the applicant shall first file with the Borough
Secretary a certificate of insurance showing that he carries public
liability insurance as hereby specified:
(1) Each occurrence: $500,000.
(2) Aggregate: $1,000,000.
(3) Property damage: $100,000.
B. Work at applicant's expense; indemnification. All work pursuant to the
permit shall be done at applicant's expense. Applicant shall agree fully
to indemnify and save harmless the Borough of and from all liability for
damages or injury occurring to any person or persons or property
through or in consequence of any act or omission of any contractor,
agent, servant, employee or person engaged or employed in, about or
upon said work by, at the instance or with the approval or consent of the
§ 235-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-16
1:372
§ 235-17. Safeguarding of excavations. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
§ 235-17.1. Excavation of newly improved streets. [Added 3-5-2019
by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
applicant or from the failure of the applicant to comply with the
provisions for maintenance as set forth herein.
A. It shall be the duty of any person or persons, firms or corporations to
whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening or excavation is made
as aforesaid to provide and maintain proper and adequate guards,
barriers and lights to prevent accidents, and they shall assume all risks
and be liable for all damages by reason of the openings and excavations
and by reason of any failure to properly fill the hole or trench and
maintain the disturbed surface in a safe condition.
B. Maintenance and protection of traffic during road work shall be carried
out in accordance with standards established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT), as set forth in PennDOT
Publications 212 and 213, as may be amended from time to time.
C. The permittee shall provide and maintain all necessary precautions to
prevent injury or damage to persons and property. A traffic control plan
shall be submitted to and approved by the Borough before any traffic
may be detoured.
D. Warning signs shall be placed in advance of commencing the street
excavation and at distances and intervals as to be visible to the
traveling public, and substantial barricades with adequate illumination
shall be provided and maintained for any open trench or hole in the
excavation site. Blinking lights and barricades shall be used for
overnight protection of the work site.
E. The permittee shall designate and assign employees to direct traffic,
when necessary. Flagmen shall be provided as specified in the permit
and in accordance with Publications 212 and 213, as may be amended
from time to time.
F. A narrative of the traffic control plan shall be submitted with
information about duration of the work and length of anticipated road
closures.
G. At the end of each workday, the excavated area shall be completely
backfilled and/or steel plates shall be placed over the excavation to
accommodate traffic.
H. The contractor is required to comply with the latest OSHA safety
standards.
A. Middletown shall give timely notice of planned street improvements to
all persons owning property abutting on any street within the Borough
§ 235-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-17.1
1:373
§ 235-18. Street surface restoration. [Amended 11-23-1951;
12-10-1951; 5-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1116, approved 5-3-1999]
that is about to be paved or improved and to all public utility companies
operating in the Borough. All such persons and utility companies shall
make all water, gas, sewer, electrical, etc., connections, as well as
any repairs thereto, which would necessitate excavation of the said
street within 60 days from the date of such notice, unless such time is
extended, in writing and for cause shown, by the Borough.
B. Newly improved streets shall not be excavated for a period of five years
after the completion thereof, except in the case of an emergency
determined to exist by Middletown. If any person seeks to excavate a
street within five years after the completion of its paving or
improvement for any reason other than an emergency as above stated,
the application shall be approved and permit issued only after express
approval of Middletown Borough Council and payment of a fee of $500,
and said permit may contain those conditions deemed necessary by
Middletown to preserve the quality of the street and its appearance as
described in § 235-18C(4) (pavement restoration time period).
A. Disposition of materials. The responsibility of the permittee for
disposition of materials is as follows:
(1) The permittee shall keep the improved area free of material which
may be deposited by vehicles traveling upon or entering onto the
roadway during the performance of work authorized by the permit.
(2) The permittee is responsible for controlling dust conditions created
by its own operations.
(3) Excess material and material that is not suitable for backfill shall
be promptly removed and properly disposed of outside the right-ofway
as the work progresses.
(4) Other material shall be stored so that there will be no interference
with the flow of roadway drainage.
(5) The permittee is not authorized to close a portion of the pavement
or shoulder to traffic for the primary purpose of storing material. If
the permittee stores material on the roadway or shoulder, the
permittee hereby acknowledges its obligation and commitment to
repair or reconstruct the pavement and shoulder, if damaged, to its
former condition.
B. Backfilling.
(1) It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation causing an
opening or excavation to be made to thoroughly and completely fill
the same with select granular material, unless retained suitable
material is authorized. The fill is to be tamped back in place with an
§ 235-17.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-18
1:374
approved mechanical air or gasoline tamper in not more than eightinch
layers so as to prevent any settling thereafter.
(2) 120Compaction shall be completed to the bottom elevation on the
existing roadway. The Highway/Property Division Supervisor and/
or Code Enforcement Officer may require the permittee to have
material proposed for use as backfill and compacted material
tested, at the expense of the permittee.
C. Street surface restoration.
(1) The base course shall consist of bituminous concrete meeting the
requirements authorized by the Highway/Property Division
Supervisor and/or Code Enforcement Officer. The base course
material shall have a minimum depth of five inches or a depth equal
to the existing base course, whichever is greater.
(2) (Reserved)121
(3) The wearing course shall consist of Superpave HMA wearing
course, PG 64-22, 9.5 mm, and shall have a minimum compacted
depth of 1 1/2 inches, or a depth equal to the existing wearing
course, whichever is greater. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No.
1358, approved 3-5-2019]
(4) If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous concrete
surface and the wearing course is less than five years old or several
openings have been made within a two-year period, the permittee
shall, in addition to the restoration conditions outlined in this
section, mill and overlay the roadway in accordance with the
following conditions: [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358,
approved 3-5-2019]
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than 100 linear feet has
been made in the pavement, the permittee shall mill and
overlay the lane in which the opening was made for the entire
length of roadway that was opened, in a manner authorized by
the Borough designee.
(b) When two or more transverse openings have been made in the
roadway within 100 linear feet of each other, the permittee
shall mill and overlay lanes in which the openings were made
for the entire length of roadway between the openings, in a
manner authorized by the Borough designee.
(c) When two or more emergency openings have been made by the
same permittee within 50 linear feet of roadway, the permittee
120. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding flowable backfill, was repealed 3-5-2019
by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation
of former Subsection B(3) as Subsection B(2).
121. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2), regarding the binder course, was repealed
3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019.
§ 235-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18
1:375
shall mill and overlay lanes in which the openings were made
for the entire length of roadway between the openings, in a
manner authorized by the Borough designee.
(5) Regardless of the age of the wearing course: [Amended 3-5-2019
by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
(a) If more than 50 linear feet of longitudinal or transverse
openings, or both, are made in the roadway, the Borough
designee may require the permittee to mill and overlay lanes in
which the openings were made for the entire length of roadway
that was opened, if the Borough determines that the rideability
or structural integrity of the roadway has been impaired by the
openings.
(b) If four or more openings are made by the same permittee
within 100 linear feet of roadway, the Borough may require the
permittee to restore the entire disturbed roadway between the
openings by milling, planing or other authorized method and
overlaying the entire disturbed roadway.
(6) It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation causing an
opening or excavation to be made in or on a thoroughfare within
the Borough of Middletown to replace the removed surface of the
thoroughfare and any damaged surface adjacent to the removed
surface with the same materials and using the same design as was
in place before the opening or excavation unless the preexisting
design or materials violates the specifications of § 235-18, in which
case the specifications of § 235-18 shall apply. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Borough designee may, at his or her sole discretion,
require the permittee to replace the removed or damaged surface
of the thoroughfare with the same material as that adjoining the
opening or damaged surface. The replaced surface must be
maintained for a period of two years at the proper grade, without
ridges or depressions, and in as good of a condition as it was prior
to the opening or excavation. If, to meet the requirements of this
section, the replaced surface requires a base course or binder
course inconsistent with the requirements of this Article V, the
requirements of the replaced surface shall prevail and be followed
in lieu of the requirements of this Article V. [Amended 7-20-2015
by Ord. No. 1316, approved 7-20-2015; 3-5-2019 by Ord. No.
1358, approved 3-5-2019]
(7) Restored openings in the roadway or paved shoulder shall have all
edges sealed with PG 64-22 liquid asphalt, minimum six-inch width.
[Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
(8) At the time of permit application, the Public Works Director may
waive the requirement to replace the surface course of the
excavation if general roadway improvements are scheduled to be
§ 235-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-18
1:376
started within the next 30 days. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No.
1358, approved 3-5-2019]
D. Restoration of plain or reinforced cement concrete pavements. The
permittee may be required to restore the structural integrity of a
damaged cement concrete pavement by:
(1) Replacing the opened pavement transversely the full lane width.
(2) Replacing the opened pavement longitudinally to a transverse joint
or opening within six linear feet of the opening.
E. It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation causing an
opening or excavation to be made in or on a thoroughfare within the
Borough of Middletown to restore any removed or damaged
appurtenances using the same materials and design as was in place
prior to the work unless the preexisting design or materials violate the
specifications of this Article V, in which case the specifications of this
Article V shall apply. Examples of such appurtenances include, but are
not limited to, the restoration of curbing, sidewalks, crosswalks, lights
or lampposts, benches, trees or other vegetation, tree wells, flower
beds or holders, drain pipes, inlets, and signs. [Added 7-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 1316, approved 7-20-2015]
F. Construction requirements. [Added 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358,
approved 3-5-2019]
(1) Any person who shall excavate a Middletown Borough street shall
thoroughly and completely excavate and restore the excavation in
such manner as to prevent any settling thereafter, and shall restore
the surface to the same condition as it was before the excavation,
all in accordance with the specifications set forth in the attached
"construction requirements" which are incorporated herein by this
reference and which may be amended from time to time by
Borough resolution.122 If within two years after the restoration
defects shall appear therein, the applicant shall be liable for the
cost of repairing said defects and for any injury or damages
resulting therefrom. In the event of settlement creating a hazard to
traffic or public safety, said applicant shall cause the same to be
repaired within 24 hours after notice by the Borough to the
applicant; said notice need not be in writing. In the event of a
defect not constituting an immediate hazard, same shall be
repaired within one week after notice by the Borough.
(2) If the work in excavating, restoring or maintaining shall not be
promptly executed or shall be unskillfully, improperly or
incompletely done, Middletown may cause the same to be done in a
manner conforming to this article, and the expense thereof,
including overhead expense, plus 25% shall be charged to the
applicant. No permit shall be issued to any person in default of this
122. Editor's Note: Said attachments are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 235-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18
1:377
section until that person pays the cost and penalties herein
provided. No permit shall be granted to any person who, at the time
of application, is not in full compliance with all provisions of this
article.
(3) Where pavement is to be disturbed, the excavation or opening shall
be made by a clean cut using a diamond wheel or similar tool or
instrument. Openings shall be sawcut back 12 inches from the limit
of the trench. Minimum sawcut opening shall be a nominal three
feet in width.
(4) Trenching shall not be permitted across the improved area of a
street unless specifically authorized by the permit. Trenching
across the improved area of a street may be authorized by the
permit where drilling, boring, and driving or tunneling is not
feasible because:
(a) The subsurface is solid rock.
(b) There are other facilities located longitudinally under the
improved area and their location precludes methods other than
trenching.
(c) Adjacent development in a congested area makes the
construction of a tunneling or boring shaft impracticable.
(5) To protect the pavement and shoulders of the existing street
surface, all equipment shall have rubber wheels or runners and
shall have rubber, wood, or similar protective pads between the
outriggers and the surface, unless otherwise authorized by permit.
In the event that non-rubber-equipped machinery is authorized for
use under the permit, the pavement and shoulders shall be
protected by use of matting, wood, or other suitable protective
material having a minimum thickness of four inches, unless the
permit requires the permittee to repave the full width of the street.
If the equipment damages the pavement or shoulders of the street,
the permittee shall restore the pavement or shoulders to their
former condition, at permittee's expense.
(6) All excavation restoration work shall be subject to inspection by the
Borough. Upon completion of the excavation work, the permittee
shall give written notice to the Borough. The Borough shall reserve
the right to inspect the work, and, when necessary, enforce
compliance with the conditions, restrictions, and regulations
prescribed by the permit and this article. Approval of the work by
the Borough or its inspector shall not constitute acknowledgment
or acceptance that the work was actually performed in accordance
with the permit or this article, nor shall such approval by the
Borough or its inspector act as a release of the permittee or waiver
by the Borough of its right to seek performance or restitution from
the permittee, as permitted under this article.
§ 235-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-18
1:378
(7) Construction for street restoration shall be in conformance with the
latest revisions of Publication 72, entitled "Roadway Construction
Standards," and Publication 408, entitled "Roadway
Specifications," published by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. In the event that the aforementioned publications
do not apply, the construction shall be in accordance with
requirements set forth by the Borough Engineer.
(8) The Borough reserves the right to waive these requirements based
upon the recommendations of the Borough Engineer.
(9) When any edge of the trench is located within two feet of an
existing pavement joint, the remaining pavement between the edge
of trench and the joint shall be removed and replaced in the same
manner as the trench restoration, with the following specifications:
(a) Width of two feet plus widest dimension, for forty-eight-inch
facility and less.
(b) Width of 2.5 feet plus widest dimension, for forty-eight-inch
facility or greater.
(c) In all cases, facility to be centered in the trench.
(10) Generally, excavation shall be backfilled with a No. 2A coarse
aggregate to a height not to exceed one foot over the top of the
facility and compacted in not more than four-inch layers. Metallic
marking tape shall be installed to identify the facility. The opening
shall then be backfilled with No. 2A coarse aggregate and
compacted throughout its full width in accordance with industry
accepted vibrator compactions standards in layers not to exceed six
inches. Restoration shall be as follows:
(a) For openings that have existing reinforced concrete base
paving, backfilling shall be placed within 10 inches of the base
of the pavement. The opening shall then be enlarged one foot
on each side to a depth of 10 inches. An eight-inch layer of
High Early Strength Concrete, whose composition conforms to
the latest PennDOT specifications, shall be placed and
protected from traffic for a least 24 hours. Superpave HMA
wearing course, PG 64-22, 9.5 mm, and having a minimum
compacted depth of two inches, shall then be used to close the
excavation or opening. Tack coat shall be applied to all sides
and surfaces receiving bituminous paving. After application of
the wearing course, the edges of the opening shall be sealed
with PG 64-22 sealer or equivalent to a width of not less than
six inches.
(b) For openings in bituminous pavement, backfilling shall be
placed to the bottom elevation of the base course. The opening
shall then be enlarged to one foot on each side to the depth of
the base paving. Tack coat shall be applied to all sides and
§ 235-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18
1:379
surfaces receiving bituminous paving. Superpave HMA base
course, PG 64-22, 25.0 mm, shall match existing base paving or
minimum five-inch compacted depth. Superpave HMA wearing
course, PG 64-22, 9.5 mm, shall be placed having a minimum
compacted depth of two inches. After application of the
wearing course, the edges of the opening shall be sealed with
PG 64-22 sealer or equivalent to a width of not less than six
inches.
(c) Backfilling of tunnels shall be done in a manner designated by
the Borough. The Borough may require that materials be
tested to determine conformance with the above.
G. Temporary restoration. [Added 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358,
approved 3-5-2019]
(1) As soon as work is completed at the excavation site, the permittee
shall take immediate steps to temporarily restore the street
surface. Cold or hot (Superpave, or other materials approved by
Borough) asphalt mix shall be installed immediately after the work
is completed within the street excavation on a daily basis within
paved areas open to traffic. The asphalt mix shall be placed and
compacted to a minimum thickness of two inches and be flush with
the surrounding pavement.
(2) Temporary paving shall be maintained at all times in a condition
satisfactory to the Borough. In the event temporary restoration
must be repaired or replaced, the permittee shall cause the same to
be repaired or replaced within 24 hours of notification by the
Borough. If permittee fails to repair or replace temporary paving
within 24 hours of being notified by the Borough the Borough may
repair or replace the temporary paving and the cost of said work,
plus 25%.
(3) Weather permitting, 30 days following substantial completion of
the excavation work, the permittee shall cause permanent
restoration of the excavation site to be completed in accordance
with the provisions set forth in this article. In the event permittee is
unable to perform permanent restoration as required by this article
within 30 days following substantial completion because of
weather, for example because paving asphalt plants have ceased
operations because of cold weather, then permittee shall perform
permanent restoration as required by this article within 30 days of
paving asphalt plants reopening.
H. Additional restoration. [Added 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358,
approved 3-5-2019]
(1) All disturbed portions of a street, including all appurtenances and
structures such as guardrails or drainpipes, shall be restored to a
§ 235-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-18
1:380
§ 235-19. Failure of permit holder. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987]
If the work in opening or in filling or maintaining the surface shall not be
promptly or shall be unskillfully or improperly or incompletely done, the
authorized representative of the Borough or any other person designated by
the Council may cause the same to be done in the manner he deems proper,
and the expense thereof, including any overhead expense, shall be charged
to the person, firm or corporation by whom the opening or excavation was
condition equal to that which existed before the start of any work
authorized by permit.
(2) If the applicant opens the pavement, whether to install a new
facility or to modify any existing facility or for any reason other
than to perform emergency work, and the wearing course is less
than five years old or several openings have been made within a
two-year period, the applicant shall, in addition to the required
minimum restoration conditions, overlay the pavement in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than 10 feet and wider
than two feet is made in the pavement, the permittee shall mill
and overlay the land(s) in which the opening was made for the
entire length of the lane that was opened.
(b) When two or more transverse trench openings are made in the
pavement less than 100 feet apart, the permittee shall mill and
overlay all lanes in which the openings were made for the
entire length of roadway between such openings.
(c) When the opening is nonlinear along the alignment of the road,
i.e., crossing the center line of the road, the permittee shall
overlay all lanes in which the openings were made for the
entire length of roadway between the limits of the trench.
(d) When the opening is made within two feet of the curb or any
other pavement joint, pavement restoration shall be made to
the joint and sealed.
(3) Regardless of the age of the wearing course, when both
longitudinal and transverse trench openings are made in the
pavement, the Borough may require the permittee to mill and
overlay all traffic lanes in which such openings were made for the
entire length of highway that was opened, if the Borough
determines that the structural integrity or the riding quality has
been substantially impaired.
I. The Borough reserves the right to place an inspector on any and all jobs
it deems necessary in order to insure good workmanship, and actual
expense of said inspection shall be charged to the permittee. [Added
3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
§ 235-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-19
1:381
made, together with 25% additional as a penalty.123 No permit shall be
issued to any person, firm or corporation in default under this section until
the costs and penalty herein provided are paid, and no further permit shall
be granted to any person, firm or corporation unless and until the openings
or excavations already caused by him or it have been properly filled and the
surface maintained as aforesaid, in a safe condition and at the proper grade,
of which said authorized representative of the Borough shall be the judge.
§ 235-20. Jurisdiction over excavation; manner of resurfacing.
In no case shall any opening or excavation made by any person, firm or
corporation be considered in the charge or care of the Borough or any
officer or person employed by the Borough, and no officer or employee is
authorized to, in any way, take or assume any jurisdiction over any such
opening or excavation. However, if the person, firm or corporation causing
the opening to be made deems it to his or its advantage to employ the
same workmen as do similar work for the Borough, he or it may do so. In
resurfacing on a paved street, an additional 12 inches on each side of the
opening shall be cut back in order to assure a neat and complete job.124
§ 235-20.1. Permittees' responsibility for future relocation of work.
[Added 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the
alignment or grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change
or relocate all or any part of the structures covered by the permit which
interfere with the improvement of the roadway at its own cost and expense.
§ 235-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988; 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1358, approved 3-5-2019]
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any violation of this article shall constitute grounds for doing any or all
of the following:
(1) Upon receipt of verbal or written notice of any violations from the
Borough, the permittee shall cease to perform any further work in
the permitted area except to restore the area to a safe condition.
No further work shall commence in the permitted area until the
violations have been remedied, unless the Borough gives the
permittee written directions for the contrary. Where the permittee
123. Editor's Note: For information about fees, see Ch. 127, Code Enforcement, § 127-10.
124. Editor's Note: Original Section 8, Supervision of Work by Borough, which followed this
section, was deleted 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987.
§ 235-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-21
1:382
has received verbal notice of the violation(s), written notice shall be
sent to the permittee within 10 days of receipt of the verbal notice.
(2) Confiscation of the permittee's permit.
(3) Revocation of the permittee's permit.
(4) Removal of facilities installed without a permit or in violation of this
article.
(5) Such fines, imprisonment or other penalties as are provided by law.
(6) Such other action as may be deemed necessary or proper after
consultation with the Borough Solicitor.
§ 235-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-21
1:383

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 2-9-1953 by Ord. No. 314, approved 2-9-1953]
§ 235-22. Time limit for removal from sidewalks. [Amended
3-9-1970 by Ord. No. 566, approved 3-9-1970; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987]
The owner of every property fronting upon or alongside any of the streets
of the Borough of Middletown is hereby required to remove all snow, slush
and ice from the sidewalk in front of or along such premises within 24 hours
after such snow or slush has ceased to fall or ice to form thereon. In case
of any property occupied by any person other than the owner, the occupier
instead of the owner shall be subject to the provisions of this section, and
in case of any property such as an apartment house or business property
where there is more than one occupant, an agent shall be appointed by the
owner thereof to perform his duties and be subject to the responsibilities
otherwise applicable to the owner under this section.
§ 235-23. Determination of sidewalk area. [Added 1-9-1984 by Ord.
No. 874, approved 1-9-1984]
For the purposes of §§ 235-22 and 235-25, the sidewalk required to be
cleared shall mean:
§ 235-24. Maintenance obligation. [Added 1-9-1984 by Ord. No.
874, approved 1-9-1984]
The owner, occupant or agent required to clear the sidewalk or path under
§ 235-22, under penalty as prescribed in §§ 235-25 and 235-27, shall have
a continuing duty to maintain such sidewalk or path thereon in a safe
condition, free from snow, slush or ice, under the same penalties prescribed
in §§ 235-25 and 235-27.
§ 235-25. Failure to comply; removal by Borough.
In any case where the owner, occupant or agent, as aforesaid, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of § 235-22 above
within the time limit provided therein, the Borough authorities may proceed
A. A path not less than 18 inches in width where the abutting property is
used exclusively for residential purposes and is improved with a onefamily
or a two-family dwelling.
B. A path not less than 48 inches in width where the abutting property is a
commercial establishment located on Main Street or located on Union
Street from Ann Street to Park Circle Road.
C. The established sidewalk, measured by the entire width of its paved
walkway, in all areas of the Borough other than those specifically
referred to in Subsection A or B above.
§ 235-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-25
1:385
immediately to clear all snow, slush and/or ice from the sidewalk of such
delinquent and to collect the expenses thereof, with any additional amounts
allowed by law, from such owner, occupant or agent, which shall be in
addition to the fine imposed by § 235-27 herein.
§ 235-26. Shoveling or pushing snow into streets prohibited. [Added
1-12-1970 by Ord. No. 562, approved 1-12-1970]
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
dump, shovel, push or otherwise place or to cause to be dumped, shoveled,
pushed or otherwise placed any snow, slush, ice or any combination thereof
onto the main cartways, streets or avenues of the Borough of Middletown,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania; provided, however, that this dumping,
shoveling or pushing is begun after such time as the cartway has been
cleared for the purpose of allowing free and safe passage of vehicular
traffic through snow, slush, ice or any combination thereof. The term "main
cartway," as used herein, means the area along streets or avenues or
portions thereof where passage of vehicular traffic is not prohibited or
street area other than that provided for the parking of vehicles and area
along streets or avenues or portions thereof where parking of vehicles is not
prohibited or area reserved along the streets for the free and safe passage
of vehicular traffic, but in no way less than all street area other than that
within three feet of the cartway.
§ 235-27. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972,
approved 7-11-1988]
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 235-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-27
1:386
ARTICLE VII
Curb and Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 3-5-1990 by Ord. No. 996, approved 3-5-1990125]
§ 235-28. Time limit for construction by property owner.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Middletown shall, on 60 days'
notice from the Borough Council, through its agent (Code Enforcement
Officer), construct or reconstruct either a sidewalk or curb, or both, as
specified in the notice, which shall conform to all applicable requirements
of this article or any previous ordinance, in front of or alongside of such
property.
§ 235-29. Time limit for repair by property owner.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Middletown shall, on 30 days'
notice from the Borough Council, through its agent (Code Enforcement
Officer), repair the sidewalk or curbing, or both, in the manner stipulated in
such notice, in front of or alongside of such property.
§ 235-30. Specifications and permits. [Amended 7-6-1992 by Ord.
No. 1030, approved 7-6-1992; 7-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1316, approved
7-20-2015]
For the purposes of this article, when used in connection with sidewalks
or curbs, "repair" is defined as any maintenance or work done on or to a
sidewalk, or a portion thereof, that is less than the construction, removal,
or replacement of the sidewalk, or a portion thereof. It shall be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to make any opening or excavation in or
under any sidewalk, or to construct, remove or replace any sidewalk or curb
within the limits of the Borough of Middletown, unless and until a permit
for that purpose is acquired in accordance with this article. Any such work,
including minor sidewalk or curb repairs not requiring a permit, shall be
completed in accordance with this article and according to the following
specifications:
A. Specifications for new sidewalks.
(1) All new sidewalks shall be a width of four feet, unless the proposed
sidewalk abuts an existing sidewalk, in which case the new
sidewalk shall conform to the width of the abutting sidewalk. Any
variation in width must have approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer prior to construction. New sidewalks constructed on streets
of the Borough of Middletown shall be of one-course concrete
construction or brick, as per specifications on file in the Borough's
Code Enforcement Office. The concrete shall conform to the
requirements of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form
408 Specifications and shall be Class AA portland [3,000 pounds
125. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VII, Curb and Sidewalk
Construction, adopted 9-9-1963 by Ord. No. 445, approved 9-9-1963, as amended.
§ 235-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-30
1:387
per square inch] cement concrete with air-entraining admixture.
Proper means of soil compaction and removing surplus water shall
be used to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer or other
person designated by the Council.
(2) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four inches thick. Sidewalks shall
be scored, in general, in four-foot sections, and in no case shall
scored sections be more than six feet in length. A one-half-inch
expansion joint shall be provided at least once in every fifth section
length of sidewalk and shall be filled with approved joint filler. An
expansion joint shall be provided where the sidewalk meets a curb
and at such other places as may be directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or other person designated by the Council.
(3) All backfilling under sidewalk forms shall be 2B stone or modified
stone. In excessively poor drainage areas, the Borough may require
a minimum of three inches stone base as directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(4) Future construction of sidewalk and curb as a single integral unit is
prohibited; however, under certain conditions and upon approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer, a curb and sidewalk may be
constructed as an integral unit.
B. Repair of existing sidewalks.
(1) No sidewalk may be repaired or resurfaced with asphalt.
(2) When lawfully constructed existing sidewalks, or portions thereof,
are damaged or removed, the sidewalk shall be repaired, rebuilt or
replaced with the same material as was in place prior to the
damage or removal. Restoration described in the preceding
sentence shall replicate the exact design used prior to the sidewalk
being damaged or removed unless the preexisting design violates
the specifications of § 235-30A, in which case the new sidewalk
specifications of § 235-30A shall apply. The replaced surface must
be maintained for a period of two years at the proper grade,
without ridges or depressions, and in as good condition as it was
prior to the damage or removal.
(3) All water and gas connections on sidewalks shall be so placed as to
conform to the grade of the street.
(4) All openings in existing sidewalks for water and gas connections
shall be made only in a manner approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Except for sidewalks consisting of bricks or other disjointed
material, all such openings shall be created by a concrete saw cut.
When replacing concrete or other similar material lacking a natural
joint, new work shall be separated at all points along the outside
sides or circumference thereof from the existing concrete sidewalk
by expansion joints.
§ 235-30 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-30
1:388
(5) All water and gas curb boxes, utility poles, fire hydrants and traffic
signs shall be enclosed in expansion joints as detailed in the
construction specifications as approved by the Borough Council.
Water and gas curb box covers shall be free of concrete in order to
permit easy access during the winter months.
(6) All details of construction not mentioned in this article shall be in
accordance with approved construction specifications.
(7) It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation causing
damage and repair to, or the removal and replacement of, any
sidewalk within the Borough of Middletown to also restore any
appurtenances removed or damaged in connection with the
sidewalk using the same materials and design as the original
appurtenance unless the original design violates the current
specifications. Examples of such appurtenances include, but are
not limited to, the curbing, adjacent sidewalks, crosswalks, lights
or lampposts, benches, trees or other vegetation, tree wells, flower
beds or holders, drain pipes, inlets, and signs.
C. Specifications for new curbs.
(1) All new curbing along any streets of the Borough of Middletown
shall be of concrete construction. The concrete shall conform to the
requirements of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form
408 Specifications and shall be Class AA [3,000 pounds per square
inch] portland cement concrete with air-entraining admixture.
Proper means of soil compaction and removing surplus water shall
be used to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer or other
person designated by the Council. All new curbing shall include
contraction joints constructed of three-fourths-inch premolded
expansion joint material on center at a maximum of 15.5 feet to a
minimum of 10 feet, except where actual field conditions dictate a
shorter on center, the minimum distance may be four feet, subject
to the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) All cuts in the street for curb replacement, whether concrete or
asphalt, must be made with a saw. Jackhammer cuts are no longer
permitted.
(3) All new curbing of concrete shall meet the following dimension
requirements: a standard concrete curb in the Borough of
Middletown shall be a minimum of eight inches in thickness at the
bottom and six inches at the top and 18 inches in depth.
(4) The height above the gutter line shall be six inches, with a
minimum of four inches and a maximum of eight inches under
certain conditions of the gutter line, and such variations shall be
permitted only upon approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. The
top of the curbing shall be floated smooth with a wooden float. The
front or face of the curb shall have a smooth rubbed finish to the
§ 235-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-30
1:389
gutter line. The top of the curb shall slope toward the street with a
slope of 1/4 inch to the foot.
(5) Where present curbs are of stone, they may be reset if stone is
sound and dressed along the original dimension lines. No stone
may be used for new curbing or reset if condemned by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(6) In case of private driveways crossing any sidewalk, the curb shall
be depressed across the driveway by providing a sloping section on
either side with a slope of six inches per foot. No ramp or filler in
the gutter will be permitted.
(7) It is the responsibility of the contractors to install a minimum of two
inches of 2B modified stone adjacent to the street side of the curb
prior to the Borough patching the street with asphalt or concrete,
as the case may be.
(8) The contractor shall allow two inches for asphalt patching by the
Borough. Since the Highway Department blacktops the street after
contractors replace the curbing, it is important that the area in the
street be of a straight cut. Also, the area must be filled with 2B
stone at least one inch from the top, and it must be tamped.
(9) At limits of new work, the existing curb will be cut in an approved
manner with a concrete saw, the entire curb will be removed within
the limits of the work, and expansion joints will be placed at the
limits of work. The driveway will be built with a flair on each side so
as to make the curb cut three feet as a maximum, and there shall be
no sharp dip, two inches per foot being the maximum.
(10) All details of construction not mentioned in this article shall be in
accordance with approved construction specifications.
D. Permits.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct
or replace any sidewalk or curb within the limits of the Borough of
Middletown unless and until a permit therefor is secured from the
Borough Secretary for each separate undertaking, such permit and
the application therefor to be in the form prescribed by said
Secretary and to contain a statement that the applicant agrees to
the terms of this article. Permits herein required include, but are
not limited to, permits to connect with the sanitary sewer system of
the Borough or to open or to make an excavation in connection
therewith, and for any work conducted by, or on behalf of, a public
utility. The police officers of the Borough of Middletown shall
promptly prohibit any work being done without a proper permit or
contrary to the terms hereof.
(2) All references in this article to the Secretary of the Borough of
Middletown shall extend to and constitute authorization with
§ 235-30 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-30
1:390
§ 235-31. Downspout drainage.
In cases where downspout water from any building is so discharged that
it would be drained onto the sidewalk, new sidewalks shall be constructed
that a four-inch pipe must be placed under the sidewalk and through the
curb. This will outlet the water into the gutter. This shall apply also to
reconstruction of a sidewalk involving the same considerations of public
policy and tantamount to new construction.
§ 235-32. Line and grade.
The Borough will provide all line and grade. All sidewalks and curbing shall
be constructed, reconstructed and repaired and the grading therefor done
upon the line and grade obtained by the property owner from the Code
Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative and not otherwise.
Upon notice as provided in §§ 235-28 and 235-29 of this article, as the case
may be, such work of construction, reconstruction or repair shall be done
by the owner or owners of such property. It is the responsibility of the
contractor to notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any inspections needed
prior to or after completion of the forms before concrete is poured.
respect to the Public Works Supervisor and/or Code Enforcement
Officer.
(3) The application for the permit and every such permit shall specify a
time when said construction or replacement shall occur and the
place where said construction or replacement shall be made,
together with such further information as the Secretary may
require; and any additional surface to be disturbed and any
additional time required may be endorsed on the permit by said
Secretary, provided that emergency breaks or leaks may be
repaired and a permit therefor secured within 24 hours.
(4) Permit charges shall be $50 for the first 50 square feet of sidewalk
constructed or replaced plus $25 for each additional 50 square feet
constructed or replaced, or portion thereof. Permit charges shall be
$50 for the first 100 linear feet of curb constructed or replaced plus
$25 for each additional 100 linear feet constructed or replaced.
These fees shall be for a four-week period beginning with the date
of the commencement of the work. For any work exceeding this
four-week period, there shall be added a sum of $50 per week until
work on the undertaking has been satisfactorily completed.
(5) It shall be the duty of any person or persons, firms or corporations
to whom a permit is issued or by whom any sidewalk or curb is
constructed or replaced to provide and maintain proper and
adequate guards, barriers and lights to prevent accidents, and they
shall assume all risks and be liable for all damages by reason of the
openings and excavations and by reason of any failure to properly
fill the hole or trench and maintain the disturbed surface in a safe
condition.
§ 235-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-33
1:391
§ 235-33. Grass plots.
All grass plots must conform to the established grass plots of adjoining
property owners. Any variation thereof must be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 235-34. Handicapped ramps.
Every corner shall have a handicap ramp. This applies for all new curbing
going in.
§ 235-34.1. Inspections.
The Code Enforcement Officer may, at any time during the course of work
of construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalks or curbing, visit
the site of such work to ascertain whether or not such work is being
done according to the requirements of the ordinances of the Borough of
Middletown, and he shall visit any such site for such purpose whenever
requested by the property owner. Within five days after the completion
of the work of construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk or
curbing, it shall be the duty of the owner of the property where such work
was done to notify the Code Enforcement Officer of the fact so that he may
cause the same to be inspected to determine whether the grade thereof has
been observed and followed.
§ 235-34.2. Performance of work by owner.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from any
Borough authority, may construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk or curb
in front of or alongside his property, provided that such owner shall first
make application to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall conform to
the requirements of this article and shall not violate any ordinance of the
Borough as to the line and grade and as to materials used and that he shall
notify the Code Enforcement Officer within five days after the completion of
the work.
§ 235-34.3. Performance of work by Borough.
Upon failure of any owner of property in the Borough of Middletown to
construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk or curbing after notices have
been given in accordance with this article, the Borough may cause the
necessary construction, reconstruction or repair thereof to be done at the
expense of said owner, either by employees of the Borough of Middletown
or by contract between the Borough of Middletown and paving and curbing
contractors lawfully entered into, and may collect the cost thereof and all
additional charges, expenses and penalties as authorized in Section 1807 of
the Act of May 4, 1927, P.L. 519, as last amended.126
126. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1805.
§ 235-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-34.4
1:392
§ 235-34.4. Additional rules and regulations.
The Code Enforcement Officer, subject to approval from the Borough
Council, may establish rules and regulations for implementing the
requirements established under this article.
§ 235-34.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-34.4
1:393

ARTICLE VIII
Encroachments
[Adopted 5-9-1983 by Ord. No. 853, approved 5-9-1983]
§ 235-35. Permit required.
Any future encroachment on or above sidewalks or any portion, outside
of the cartway, of the right-of-way of any public street is illegal unless
the person, firm or corporation making or responsible for the same shall
have first obtained a permit therefor from the Code Enforcement Officer.
Penalties hereunder shall supplement and not preclude other remedies for
preventing or removing the same.
§ 235-36. Application for permit; fee.
The application for permission to encroach shall be made, in writing, on
a form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be signed by
the applicant. Filing of an application shall constitute an agreement to
abide by all rules and regulations promulgated by the Borough Manager.
The application shall set forth the location and ownership of the property
and a description of the proposed encroachment, along with plans and
specifications. In addition, the applicant shall furnish such other or further
information as said Manager may require. The application shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of $25 and by any inspection fee or deposit as
prescribed by such regulation.
§ 235-37. Issuance of permit; criteria and standards.
The Borough Manager may grant a permit if, to the extent that and for so
long as the encroachment is and remains consistent with the public interest,
use, convenience and necessity. He shall consider the factors and standards
developed in 1976 and thereafter in a series of ordinances each permitting
a specific encroachment, including pedestrian safety, accidentally crossing
the curb, parking space markings and location of poles, light standards, sign
posts or trees, also the informed judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer
and of the Chief of Police. Said permit will be personal to the applicant
and, upon sale of the abutting premises (in the absence of a new permit) or
within 60 days after the giving or posting of notice that the encroachment
has ceased to be consistent with the public interest, said encroachment
shall immediately be removed by and at the expense of the applicant or
owner of abutting premises. Acceptance of the permit shall constitute an
agreement by the applicant to save the Borough, its officers, police and
agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may
accrue or be claimed by reason of such encroachment or work thereon or
lack of maintenance thereof.
§ 235-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-38
1:395
§ 235-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
A penalty under this article, upon conviction for violation (including failure
to remove an encroachment as aforesaid), shall be sentencing the violator
to pay not less than $100 nor more than $600 for each day the violation
continues, and costs, and, upon refusal to pay the same, to be imprisoned
for not more than 30 days.
§ 235-38 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-38
1:396
ARTICLE IX
Sidewalk Obstructions
[Adopted 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1351, approved 7-9-2018]
§ 235-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — That portion of a sidewalk area which is free of
any obstruction, fixture or appurtenance and is used for pedestrian travel.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, association,
trust, estate or other legally recognized entity.
RESTAURANT SIDEWALK DINING — An outdoor dining area operated by
a restaurant located on an immediately adjacent public sidewalk area and
containing nonpermanent outdoor furnishings such as tables and chairs,
which is not located on and does not obstruct the pedestrian walkway as
established under the provisions of this article. It shall not be enclosed by
fixed walls and shall be open to the air, except that it may have a canopy.
SIDEWALK — An area constructed in accordance with Chapter 235, Streets
and Sidewalks, Article VII, Curb and Sidewalk Construction, and open for
the pedestrian use of members of the general public.
§ 235-40. Restaurant sidewalk dining requirements.
A. A person in compliance with all applicable Borough Code requirements
and other applicable county, state and federal legal requirements with
regard to the operation of a restaurant and desiring to operate
restaurant sidewalk dining shall meet the requirements set forth in this
chapter and otherwise described in the Borough Code.
B. The use of public sidewalk space adjacent to a restaurant for restaurant
sidewalk dining shall only take place following the issuance of a valid
permit pursuant to this article and the satisfaction of any and all
conditions as may be applied to said use by the Borough through
Borough Council.
C. Restaurant sidewalk dining shall be restricted to areas immediately
adjacent to the property on which the restaurant establishment
operating the sidewalk dining area is located, and when the designated
outdoor dining area is located on a public sidewalk there shall be an
unobstructed path available for pedestrian traffic a minimum of 48
inches wide. Under no circumstances shall a restaurant sidewalk dining
area obstruct access to or be located less than 48 inches from a bus
stop, fire hydrant, light post, mailbox, planter, street sign or similar
public structure.
D. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the restaurant sidewalk dining area
shall be inspected by the Borough Code/Zoning Officer for compliance
with this article.
§ 235-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-41
1:397
§ 235-41. Permit required.
§ 235-42. Hours of operation; months of operation.
§ 235-43. Regulatory conditions.
A. Written application must be submitted to the Borough Manager making
clear a request to use a public sidewalk area for restaurant sidewalk
dining. The person submitting the application concerning property
located in the Borough must show sufficient authority to submit the
application (e.g., property owner, tenant, power of attorney).
B. A permit issued pursuant to this article shall be issued on the basis of a
calendar year and written application for renewal must be made in each
new calendar year.
C. The permit application fee and annual permit renewal fee shall be set
by resolution of the Borough Council. Permit fees and renewal fees are
not subject to proration.
A. Restaurant sidewalk dining areas shall only operate from 10:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m. during the permitted months of use.
B. Restaurant sidewalk dining areas shall only be open for use April 1
through October 31.
A. The following conditions must be met prior to the issuance of a permit
to operate a restaurant sidewalk dining area and continued compliance
is required during the term of any permit issued:
(1) Serve no food or beverages to a patron in a restaurant sidewalk
dining area unless that patron is seated at a table.
(2) Outdoor furnishings located in a restaurant sidewalk dining area
shall be limited to nonpermanent partitions, tables, chairs,
umbrellas, canopies and safely operated heat lamps.
(3) All outdoor furnishings must be removed from the restaurant
sidewalk dining area at the close of business each day and stored
within an interior structure when the area is closed per business
hours. No outdoor furnishings shall be placed in a restaurant
sidewalk dining area outside the season of operation.
(4) A nonpermanent, rigid, aluminum or resin partition shall be used to
separate the restaurant sidewalk dining area from the
unobstructed pedestrian sidewalk. The height of the partition shall
be 36 inches. The partition shall be black or white in color.
(5) High-top and pub-style table and chair sets are prohibited.
(6) Any sign placed in the restaurant sidewalk dining area must meet
the requirements of Chapter 260, Zoning, Article XVII, Signs, of the
Code of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 235-41 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-43
1:398
§ 235-44. Noise.
The holder of a permit to operate a restaurant sidewalk dining area shall
control the noise created by the operation of the restaurant sidewalk dining
area, including, but not limited to, the conduct of patrons, or any other
disturbances prohibited by Chapter 185, Noise, Article I, Noise
Disturbances, of the Code of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 235-45. Lawful sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
§ 235-46. Revocation of permit.
Failure to comply with the requirements of this article, conditions, and any
other provisions of the Borough Code incorporated herein, may result in
the revocation of a permit by the Borough Manager. Borough Council may
revoke a permit without cause.
(7) The restaurant sidewalk dining area shall be maintained in a clean
manner and kept free of all trash and debris.
(8) Permittees shall not use the pedestrian walkway for the service of
food or beverage or the conduct of any other business.
(9) Execute an indemnification and hold-harmless agreement in favor
of the Borough against all claims and losses, including costs and
expenses, resulting from injury to person or property as a direct or
indirect result of the operation of the restaurant sidewalk dining
area.
(10) Provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 per
individual and $300,000 per occurrence.
(11) Proof of licensure by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
authorizing the sale and/or service of alcoholic beverages in the
restaurant sidewalk dining area shall be provided to the Borough
Manager, where applicable.
A. A restaurant sidewalk dining area permitted pursuant to this article and
duly licensed for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board shall not be subject to Chapter 98,
Alcoholic Beverages, Article II, Open Containers, of the Code of the
Borough of Middletown and the restrictions set forth thereunder.
B. Alcoholic beverages served in the restaurant sidewalk dining area shall
not be transported outside of the restaurant sidewalk dining area.
C. No alcoholic beverage shall be consumed directly from its original
bottle, can, carton or other original packaging.
§ 235-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-47
1:399
§ 235-47. Nontransferable.
Restaurant sidewalk dining area permits are not transferable. Changes in
ownership/operation require reapplication for a permit.
§ 235-48. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
and not less than $50 and costs of prosecution for each offense and,
upon refusal to pay such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. Each day during which a violation occurs shall constitute
a separate offense.
B. This article and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the Borough or any person to such equitable or
other remedies as may otherwise be available with or without process
of law.
§ 235-47 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-48
1:400
Chapter 236
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Council — See Ch.
19.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 164.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 224.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
Water — See Ch. 256.
Wells — See Ch. 257.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 235-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-48
1:401

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 236-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of
Middletown Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 236-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of rainwater
and increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtaxes the carrying
capacity of existing streams and storm sewers and greatly increases the
cost to the public to manage stormwater.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
C. A program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation
of land development and redevelopment causing loss of natural
infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the
protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
G. Illicit discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems can
contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
§ 236-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-3
1:403
§ 236-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 236-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
§ 236-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater impacts by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864,
Act 167, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et. seq., as amended (the Storm Water Management
Act); the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1966 (1965 P.L. 1656, No.
581), as amended; and the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.127
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
B. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
C. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
D. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
E. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
F. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
G. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect and maintain existing
uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all
streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection
streams.
H. Prevent scouring and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
I. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management best management practices that are
implemented in the municipality.
J. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater illicit discharges into the municipality's
separate storm sewer system.
§ 236-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-5
1:404
§ 236-5. Applicability.
§ 236-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 236-7. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 236-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
A. This chapter applies to any regulated earth disturbance activities
within the municipality, and all stormwater runoff entering into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system from lands within the
boundaries of the municipality.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do
not conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
127. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., and 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., respectively.
§ 236-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-8
1:405

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 236-9. Word usage; terms defined.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender, and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land,
through the combined action of human activities and the natural
processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated earth disturbance activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet
the purposes of this chapter. BMPs include but are not limited to
infiltration, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds,
permeable paving, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters,
detention basins and manufactured devices.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Dauphin County Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
"redevelopment."
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
§ 236-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-9
1:407
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project
site which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited
to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act,128 which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — Point source as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.129
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity on one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters or the municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more,
128. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code § 92a.2.
§ 236-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-9
1:408
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion, part or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities involving five
acres or more within the existing road cross section, such as grading
and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks,
cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96.), including:
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such
as cold water fishery or potable water supply, which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under
state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by the addition of pollutants, such as sediment, and
changes in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates
as a result of changes in land surface area from those activities.
Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters must be
managed to protect the stream bank, streambed and structural
integrity of the waterway to prevent these impacts.
(3)
§ 236-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-9
1:409
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
§ 236-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-9
1:410
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management for Water Quality
§ 236-10. General requirements for stormwater management.
§ 236-11. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
be designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the
purposes of this chapter through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control prevention during the earth
disturbance activities (e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (e.g., postconstruction), including operations
and maintenance.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities shall be addressed as required by § 236-12.
D. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 236-13. Operations and maintenance of permanent
stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as required by Article IV.
E. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements,
unless more stringent requirements are needed as determined by the
municipality.
F. Techniques described in Appendix A (Low Impact Development)130 of
this chapter are encouraged because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainage ways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
130. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 236-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-11
1:411
§ 236-12. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 236-13. Water quality requirements after completion of regulated
earth disturbance activities.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under 25
Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,131 a DEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality. The
issuance of a NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under the
statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of
Subsection A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements after
construction is complete.
B. The BMPs must be designed, implemented and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements and any other more stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
C. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
131. Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92A.
§ 236-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-13
1:412
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(No. 392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions.
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff; and
(3) Stream bank protection: management of volume and rate of
postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical
degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
D. DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement postconstruction
stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term operations and
maintenance of those BMPs.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to
the municipality. The issuance of a NPDES construction permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies
the requirements of Subsection A.
F. BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in Article
IV of this chapter.
§ 236-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-13
1:413

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 236-14. General requirements.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin
County, that shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-sixinch
or thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets. The contents of the
maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others, as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way.
§ 236-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-14
1:415
§ 236-15. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of BMPs.
§ 236-16. Municipality review of BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance;
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the municipality.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The municipality shall review the BMP operations and maintenance
plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The municipality may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
§ 236-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-17
1:416
§ 236-17. Adherence to approved plan required.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an
approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, unless an exception is
granted, in writing, by the municipality.
§ 236-18. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
§ 236-19. Stormwater management easements.
§ 236-20. Recording of approved plan and related agreements.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix B132 of this chapter.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration and
detention areas, and other BMPs, by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under § 236-18.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Dauphin County within 15 days of approval of
the BMP operations plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 236-18; and
(3) Easements under § 236-19.
132. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 236-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-20
1:417
§ 236-21. Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
the municipality may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to
pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation
and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 236-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-21
1:418
ARTICLE V
Inspections and Right of Entry
§ 236-22. Inspections.
§ 236-23. Right of entry.
A. DEP or its designees (e.g., county conservation districts) normally
ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
municipality or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
municipality or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the municipality may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the
deficiencies are corrected.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a BMP is a
violation of this article.
§ 236-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-23
1:419

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 236-24. Review fee.
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP operations
and maintenance plans to defray review costs incurred by the municipality.
The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 236-25. Expenses covered by fees.
A. Administrative/clerical costs.
B. The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Municipal Engineer.
C. The site inspections, including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater BMPs and
final inspection upon completion of the stormwater BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any provisions of
this chapter, correct violations and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 236-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-25
1:421

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 236-26. Prohibited discharges; exceptions.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in
Subsection B below and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the
municipality that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the Commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springs.
(8) Water from crawl space pumps.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(10) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(14) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
§ 236-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-26
1:423
§ 236-27. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 236-26B
above:
§ 236-28. Roof drains.
§ 236-29. Alteration of BMPs.
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in § 236-27B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the
municipality.
§ 236-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-29
1:424
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 236-30. Violations deemed public nuisances.
§ 236-31. Enforcement.
§ 236-32. Suspension and evocation of permits and approvals.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analysis and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or illegal discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs;
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building permit or land development approval issued by the
municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
§ 236-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-32
1:425
§ 236-33. Violations and penalties.
§ 236-34. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the relevant judicial
or administrative body according to law within the time period allowed.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater BMPs, or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
§ 236-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 236-34
1:426
Chapter 238
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 58.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Water — See Ch. 256.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 236-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-34
1:427

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 238-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Middletown Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance."
§ 238-2. Application of regulations.
§ 238-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
located in the Borough of Middletown shall be effected and no street,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facilities in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon
unless and until a final subdivision or land development plat has been
approved by the Borough Council, in the manner prescribed herein, and
recorded, nor otherwise except in strict accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect, alter or repair
any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued; or no building
may be erected in a subdivision unless and until:
(1) A final subdivision plat has been approved by Borough Council and
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania; and
(2) Construction of the improvements required in connection
therewith has been guaranteed in the manner prescribed herein.
A. The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings hereby ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors
and assigns.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers
used for human habitation.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line, set
so as to provide the required yard.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Middletown.133
133. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 58, Planning Commission.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:429
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities, arranged
for occupancy by one family.
ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer of Middletown.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The mandatory technical
requirements of the Borough relating to the installation of any required
improvements or for any facility subject to public use.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land
area adjoining a stream, river or watercourse which is subject to partial
or complete inundation, or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of a given
magnitude.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Middletown.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or type of tenancy; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Land development does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building,
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(b)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For the purposes of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
(c)
(3)
§ 238-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-3
1:430
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
MOBILE HOME — A portable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and
obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance with this
act.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
REGULATORY FLOOD — A flood having an average frequency of
occurrence on the order of once in 100 years, although the flood may
occur in any year.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by the proper authorities.
ALLEY — A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
(1)
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic
artery for intercommunication among large areas.
(2)
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street or highway which carries
traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
(3)
§ 238-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:431
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not public or
private.
SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted from the requirement of subdivision.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street which is parallel
and adjacent to an arterial street and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
MINOR STREET — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
(5)
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines
delineating the right-of-way of a street.
(6)
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
§ 238-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-3
1:432
ARTICLE II
Plat Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 238-4. Compliance required.
Whenever a subdivision or land development of land is desired to be
effected, a plat of the layout of such subdivision shall be prepared, filed and
processed according to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 238-4.1. County review.
Upon receipt by the Borough of the application and application fee, all
applications for subdivision or land development shall be forwarded to
the county Planning Commission for review and report, provided that the
Borough shall not act on such applications until the county report is
received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was
forwarded to the county, whichever first occurs.
§ 238-4.2. Properties owned by trusts or equitable owners. [Added
5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1176, approved 5-3-2004]
§ 238-5. Preapplication plans and data procedure.
A. Applications for subdivision or land development of lands or property
owned by or leased from a trust or an equitable owner shall include a
letter attached to the application from the trustee(s) or equitable
owner(s), or their authorized representative, stating the following:
(1) That the trustee(s) or equitable owner(s) are aware of the
application for subdivision or land development;
(2) That the trustee(s) or equitable owner(s) have reviewed the
application; and
(3) That the applicant(s) has authorization from the trustee(s) or
equitable owner(s) to file the application for such subdivision or
land development approval.
B. No applications for subdivision or land development of property owned
by or leased from a trust or an equitable owner shall be accepted by the
Borough without a letter pursuant to Subsection A above.
A. Prior to the preparation and filing of the preliminary plat, the applicant
shall submit to the Commission the following plans and data and shall
ascertain from the Commission those elements which should be
considered in the design of the subdivision. These shall include any
features of the Borough's plan of future land use, thoroughfare plan,
community facilities plan or of any plans of the Commission, including
but not limited to proposed streets, recreation areas, drainage
reservations, shopping centers and school sites.
§ 238-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-5
1:433
§ 238-6. Preapplication plans and data specifications.
Preapplication plans and data shall include the following:
B. At this stage, if the applicant's tract is located where a flood hazard
exists, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) The applicant shall prepare a contour map of the proposed area
with such contour intervals as the Engineer shall determine to be
necessary and shall prepare drainage plans or flood control devices
satisfactory to the Engineer whenever the Engineer shall consider
that such are necessary. No plat shall be approved until the
Engineer shall certify to the governing body that the proper plans
for drainage and flood control have been made. In the event that
the Engineer so certifies, he shall also present the governing body
with cost estimates for the construction of such facilities.
(2) Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding and deemed to be
topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential
occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to
health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such
land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such
uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
(3) Adequate building site. To ensure that residents will have sufficient
land upon which to build a house which is flood free, the
Commission may require elevations and flood profiles. Each lot
shall contain a building site which shall be completely free of the
danger of floodwaters.
(4) Street elevation. The Commission shall not recommend approval of
streets subject to inundation or flooding by water. All streets must
be adequately located above the line of flood elevation to prevent
isolation of areas by flood. Profiles and elevations of streets in areas
subject to flooding are required.
C. In response to a written request by the applicant, the Commission may
waive the requirement of preapplication plans and data, provided that
no new streets are involved and that fewer than six lots are proposed in
the total subdivision.
A. General information describing or outlining existing covenants, land
characteristics, community facilities and utilities and information
describing the proposed subdivision, such as the number of residential
lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
playgrounds, park areas, other public areas, proposed protective
covenants, proposed utilities and street improvements.
B. A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
existing community facilities which serve or influence it and shall
include the development name, location of any existing facilities, traffic
§ 238-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-6
1:434
§ 238-7. Preliminary plat procedure.
arteries, public or other schools, parks, playgrounds, utilities, churches,
shopping centers, airports, hospitals, principal places of employment,
title, scale, North arrow and date.
C. A topographic map, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or less,
showing:
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision.
(2) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(3) The name of the registered owner.
(4) The North point, scale and date.
(5) The name of the engineer, surveyor or other qualified person
responsible for the map.
(6) The tract boundaries, with bearings and distances.
(7) The topography, with elevations based on datum approved by the
Commission, and showing contours at vertical intervals of five feet
unless the topography dictates two-foot intervals.
(8) The approximate location of watercourses, tree masses, rock
outcrops and existing buildings and the actual location of sewers,
inlets, water mains, easements, fire hydrants, railroads, existing or
confirmed streets and their established grades.
(9) The adjacent streets.
D. A sketch plan, drawn on a print of the topographic map, showing in a
simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other
features in relation to existing conditions.
A. Ten days prior to the meeting of the Borough's Planning Commission at
which consideration is desired the applicant shall file nine copies of a
preliminary plat of the proposed layout of the subdivision or land
development with the Commission.
B. Upon filing of a preliminary plat, the Borough shall forward a copy of all
documents to the Dauphin County Planning Commission pursuant to
§ 238-4.1 of this chapter.
C. The Planning Commission shall review the plat content in respect to
completeness at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The Commission
may submit copies of the plat to the Borough Engineer, public utilities
or other public agencies as deemed necessary by the Commission.
D. The Planning Commission shall render a decision on the plat within 60
days after the plat filing date, or at a later date agreed to by the
§ 238-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-7
1:435
§ 238-8. Preliminary plat specifications.
applicant, and submit copies of the plat documents and the Planning
Commission's recommendations to the Borough Council for action.
E. The Borough Council shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the plat and shall communicate said decision to the
applicant within 90 days from the first Commission meeting after the
receipt of the plat. However, in no instance will the 90 days begin more
than 30 days after the receipt of the plat. Said notice shall be in writing,
shall specifically cite any condition of approval and/or any plat defects
and shall be communicated to the applicant not later than 15 days
following the decision. In the event that any alteration of requirements
from this chapter is requested by the applicant or is deemed necessary
by the Commission, the modification and the reasons for its necessity
shall be entered in the records of the Commission.
F. When the plat is not approved in form as filed, the decision shall specify
the defects found in the application and describe the requirements
which have not been met and shall, in any case, cite the provisions of
this chapter.
G. Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it
to the applicant within the prescribed time and in the manner described
herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as
presented, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension
of time or change in the prescribed manner of communication.
H. Before acting on any plat, the Borough Council may hold a public
hearing pursuant to public notice.
I. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat by the governing body.
A. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on a copy of the topographic map
and shall show:
(1) The layout, names and widths of rights-of-way and cartways and
paving of proposed streets, alleys and easements.
(2) The layout of lots, showing dimensions, lot numbers and
approximate area of each lot.
(3) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds or other public, semipublic or community
purposes.
B. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following data and
maps:
(1) A profile of each street, including grades at a minimum scale of 40
feet horizontal and four feet vertical.
§ 238-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-8
1:436
§ 238-9. Final plat procedure.
(2) The location of existing and proposed utility mains.
(3) Location plans of proposed sanitary, stormwater or sewers and of
any proposed water distribution system.
(4) A completed sewage Plan Revision Module for Subdivision or Land
Development or equivalent information sufficient to comply with
the applicable forms and/or regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection shall be submitted.
(5) Applicants shall present evidence to the governing body or
planning agency, as the case may be, that the subdivision or
development is to be supplied with water by a certified public
utility, bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a letter from
the municipal authority and the municipal electric department,
whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
(6) No plat which will require access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall
be finally approved unless the plat contains a notice that a highway
occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of
June 2, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway
Law,"134 before access to a state highway is permitted.
C. In addition to the requirements set forth in § 238-5, the following
information shall be required as part of the preliminary plan and shall
be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor:
(1) The name of the engineer, surveyor or other qualified person
responsible for providing the information required in this section.
(2) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to the municipality's flood-prone areas,
including information on but not limited to the regulatory flood
elevations, boundaries of flood-prone areas, proposed lots and
sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities and areas subject to
special deed restrictions.
(3) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely in a flood-prone area or where the subdivision and/or
land development borders on a flood-prone area, the preliminary
plan map shall include detailed information giving the location and
elevation of proposed roads, public utilities and building sites. All
such maps shall also show contours at intervals of two or five feet,
depending upon the slope of the land, and shall identify accurately
the boundaries of the flood-prone areas.
134. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 238-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-9
1:437
A. Not later than five years after the date of approval of the preliminary
plat, the applicant shall file with the Commission a final plat. Failure to
comply with the time limitation herein provided shall make the approval
of the preliminary plat null and void, unless an extension of time is
requested by the applicant and, for good cause, granted by the
governing body.
B. The final plat shall incorporate all the changes and modifications
required by the Commission, otherwise it shall conform to the approved
preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the applicant proposes to record and develop at
the time, provided that such portion conforms to all of the requirements
of this chapter.
C. The final plat shall be drawn on a reproducible material on the
topographic map. Forty-five days prior to the meeting of the governing
body at which consideration is desired, the applicant shall file six copies
of the final plat with the Commission.
D. Upon receipt by the Borough, applications for subdivision or land
development shall be forwarded to the county Planning Commission for
review and report together with a fee sufficient to cover the costs of the
review and report which shall be by the applicant, provided that the
Borough shall not approve such application until the county report is
received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the application
was forwarded to the county.
E. Before approval of a final plat, the Borough Council must be assured of
the completion of all improvements required by Article IV of this
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or the Borough Council.
Also assurance must be received by the Borough that phased land
development not intended for the immediate erection of buildings
where streets, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, water and
sewage facilities and other improvements which may not be possible to
install as a condition precedent to final approval of plats must be
completed prior to the erection of buildings on lands included in the
approved plat. Such assurance shall be by means of financial security
deposited with appropriate municipal officials in sufficient amount to
cover the costs of any improvements and be in the form of federally or
commonwealth-chartered-institution irrevocable letters of credit or
restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions, or any other
type of financial security which the Borough Council may approve. Such
financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or federally
or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the party
posting the financial security, provided that such bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth. Such financial security shall provide for improvements
which may be required within one year of the date fixed in the
subdivision plat for completion of such improvements.
§ 238-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-9
1:438
(1) The amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the cost
of the required improvements for which financial security is to be
posted. The cost of such improvements shall be established by
submitting to the Borough Council a bona fide bid or bids from the
contractor or contractors chosen by the party posting the financial
security to complete the improvements. In the absence of such
bona fide bids, the costs shall be established by an estimate
prepared by the Borough Engineer. The municipality, upon the
recommendation of the Municipal Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer
and the municipality are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the
estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed in this commonwealth and chosen
mutually by the municipality and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the municipality and the applicant or developer.
(2) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year to complete the required improvements, the amounts of
financial security may be increased by an additional 10% for each
one-year period beyond the first anniversary date of the posting of
the financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the
cost of completion of the required improvements as reestablished
on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period,
through the use of the above bidding procedure. Where
development is projected over a period of years, the Borough
Council may authorize submission of final plats by sections or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees
as to improvements in future sections or stages of development as
it finds essential for the protection of the development.
(3) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may, from time to time, request
the Borough Council to release or authorize the release of such
portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests
shall be in writing addressed to Borough Council. Borough Council
shall then have 45 days from receipt of such request in which the
Borough Engineer shall certify to Borough Council, in writing, that
such portion of the work upon the improvements has been
completed in accordance with the approved plat. Upon such
certification, Borough Council shall authorize release by the
bonding company or lending institution of an amount fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed, as
estimated by the Borough Engineer. If Borough Council fails to act
within the forty-five-day period, it shall be deemed to have
approved the release of funds as requested. Prior to final release at
the time of completion and certification by its Engineer, Borough
§ 238-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-9
1:439
Council may require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the
aforesaid improvements.
(4) Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, it may require the
posting of financial security for a term not to exceed 18 months
from the date of acceptance of dedication to secure the structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plat. Said financial security shall be of the
same type as otherwise required in this section with regard to
installation of such improvements, and the amount of such financial
security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of
said improvements.
(5) If sanitary sewer lines, along with apparatus or facilities related
thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to
the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal authority
separate and distinct from the Borough of Middletown, financial
security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall
be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling
public utility or municipal authority and shall not be included
within the financial security as otherwise required by this section.
(6) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a
plat as set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the
erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted on the final plat, upon actual
completion of the improvements depicted on the approved final
plat. If financial security has been provided, occupancy certificates
for any building or buildings to be erected shall not be withheld
following the improvement of the streets providing access to and
from existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mudfree
or otherwise permanently passable condition, as well as the
completion of all other improvements as depicted on the approved
plat either on the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question, if
such improvements are necessary for the reasonable use of or
occupancy of the building or buildings.
(7) When the developer has completed all of the required
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the
Borough Engineer.
(a) Within 10 days after receipt of such notice, the Borough
Council shall direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to
inspect all of the required improvements.
§ 238-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-9
1:440
(b) The Borough Engineer shall thereupon file a written report
with Borough Council and shall promptly mail a copy of the
same to the developer by certified or registered mail. Within 30
days after the Borough Engineer receives authorization for
inspection from Borough Council, the report shall be made and
mailed.
(c) The report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and
if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Borough Engineer, said
report shall contain a statement of reasons for nonapproval or
rejection.
(d) The Borough Council shall notify the developer, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of its action with relation thereto.
(e) If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
developer shall be released of all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty.
(f) If any portion of the improvement shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by Borough Council, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same, and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification as contained herein shall be followed.
F. Borough Council shall determine whether the final subdivision plat
shall be approved or disapproved and shall give notice to the applicant
in the following manner:
(1) Before Borough Council acts on any final subdivision plat the
Planning Commission shall review any final plat at its next
regularly scheduled meeting to occur not more than 30 days from
the date the application is filed. Upon review, the recommendations
of the Commission shall be forwarded to Borough Council for
further action, and, after notice to the public, the Borough Council
may hold a public hearing.
(2) The Borough Council shall determine whether the final plat shall be
approved or disapproved and shall notify the applicant, in writing,
not later than 15 days following the decision. If the final plat is
approved with conditions or disapproved, a statement of reasons
for such action shall be included with the notification to the
applicant.
(3) Borough Council shall act on any such final plat not later than 90
days following the date of the Planning Commission meeting which
referred the matter to Borough Council. In the event that any
alteration of requirements from this chapter is requested by the
applicant or is deemed necessary by the Commission for approval,
§ 238-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-9
1:441
the alteration and the reason for its necessity shall be entered in
the records of the Commission.
(4) When the application is not approved as filed, the decision shall
specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Failure of Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it
to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein
shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as
presented unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner for
communication of the decision, in which case failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of communication shall have
like effect.
(6) No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made on
any final plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the
governing body and endorsed, in writing, on the plat unless the plat
is first resubmitted to the governing body. Before acting on any
subdivision plan, the Council may conduct a public hearing after
giving such notice as the Council may deem necessary in each case.
(7) Within 90 days after the date of approval by the governing body of
the final plat, the owner shall record an approved duplicate copy
thereof in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County
and shall forthwith file with the governing body a Recorder's
certificate that the approved plat has been recorded, with the deed
book and page numbers indicated, and two copies of the recorded
plat, containing the time stamp of the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Dauphin County.
(8) After a subdivision or land development plan shall have been
officially recorded, the streets, parks and other public
improvements shown thereon shall be considered to be a part of
the official plan of the Borough. Streets, parks and other public
improvements shown on a subdivision plan to be recorded may be
offered for dedication to the Borough by formal notation thereof on
such plan, or the owner may note on such plan that such
improvements have not been offered for dedication to the Borough.
Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision
plan that shall have been recorded as provided herein shall be
deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until such time
as the same shall have been offered for dedication to the Borough
and accepted, by ordinance or resolution, or until it shall have been
condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
(9) The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for
assessment increases until such time as lots are sold or
§ 238-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-9
1:442
§ 238-10. Final plat specifications.
The final plat shall show:
improvements are installed on the land included within the subject
plat.
(10) In accordance with Section 508(4) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended,135 when an
application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, has
been approved or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the
applicant, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
adversely affect the right of the applicant to commence or to
complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval.
A. Primary control points approved by the Engineer or description and ties
to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and
similar data on the plat shall be referred.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
C. The name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
D. The location, dimensions and purposes of easements.
E. A number to identify each lot and/or site and proposed street number of
each lot.
F. The purpose for which sites other than residential lots are dedicated or
reserved.
G. Building lines on all lots and other sites.
H. The location and description of survey monuments. All permanent
reference monuments shall be shown by an "X" on the plat.
I. The names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
J. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
K. Certification by a licensed surveyor or licensed engineer certifying to
accuracy of survey and plat.
L. Certification of title showing that the applicant is the owner of the land.
135. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 238-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-10
1:443
M. A statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any
sites for public uses if such are to be dedicated.
N. Text of proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
O. Proposed contours, at vertical intervals, as required by the
Commission.
P. Other data. The plat shall be accompanied by the following data in a
form prescribed by the engineering specifications:
(1) Profiles of streets and alleys showing grades at a minimum scale of
40 feet horizontal and four feet vertical.
(2) Cross sections of streets and alleys showing the width of right-ofway,
width of cartway, location and width of sidewalks and location
and size of utility mains.
(3) The location and method of streetlighting facilities.
(4) Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary, stormwater or combined
sewers, with grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of any
proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location
of valves, service connections and fire hydrants.
(5) The location, size and type of shade trees as approved by the Shade
Tree Commission.136
(6) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required by the governing body in the enforcement of this
chapter.
(7) A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed
buildings, structures, roads and public utilities to be constructed in
flood-prone areas.
(8) A completed sewage Plan Revision Module for Subdivision or Land
Development or equivalent information sufficient to comply with
the applicable forms and/or regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection shall be submitted.
(9) Applicants shall present evidence to the governing body or
planning agency that the subdivision or development is to be
supplied with water by a certified public utility, bona fide
cooperative association of lot owners or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable
evidence.
136. Editor's Note: The Shade Tree Commission was abolished 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1312.
§ 238-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-10
1:444
(10)No plat which will require access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall
be finally approved unless the plat contains a notice that a highway
occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of
June 2, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway
Law,"137 before access to a state highway is permitted.
137. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 238-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-10
1:445

ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 238-11. Streets.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Official Map of the Borough of Middletown or the
Community Master Plan of the Borough of Middletown, if one has been
adopted, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and
in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served
by such streets. Where not shown on the Official Map or Community Master
Plan, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall conform
to the provisions found herein.
A. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions
for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
B. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets
in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the proper projection of
streets.
C. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land appropriate for
subdivision, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of
the tract proposed to be subdivided.
D. Proposed streets shall conform to any local, county and state road or
highway plans which have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
required by law.
E. Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts. In commercial and
industrial areas, adequate alleys or off-street loading and unloading
space, where needed for loading and unloading or access purposes,
shall be provided.
F. Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic.
G. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet shall be
avoided.
H. Whenever the proposed subdivision or land development contains or is
adjacent to a highway designated as a "limited-access highway" by the
appropriate highway authorities, provision shall be made for a marginal
access street at a distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the
land between the highway and such street. The Borough Engineer may
also require rear service access, reverse frontage lots or such other
treatment which will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with major streets and
separation of local and through traffic.
I. New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential
to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other
§ 238-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-11
1:447
§ 238-12. Easements.
§ 238-13. Blocks and lots.
requirements and standards of this chapter and where, in addition,
satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street
can be secured.
J. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
K. New reserved strips, including those controlling access to streets, shall
be prohibited.
L. Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently shall not be longer
than 500 feet nor shorter than 200 feet and shall be provided with a
turnaround having an outside diameter of at least 80 feet and a
property line diameter of at least 100 feet.
M. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street
names or approximate such names by the use of suffixes such as "lane,"
"way," "drive," "court" or "avenue." New streets shall bear the same
name of any continuation or alignment with an existing or platted
street.
A. Minimum widths. The following minimum widths of easements shall be
observed unless otherwise specified:
(1) Underground public utility facilities: 15 feet.
(2) Overhead public utility facilities: 10 feet.
(3) Storm or sanitary sewers and natural watercourses: 20 feet.
(4) Road or trail: 20 feet.
B. Location. Easements for public utilities shall, whenever possible, be
centered on side or rear lot lines. Drainageways, channels or stream
easements may be located as necessary to adequately meet the
engineering requirements for the facility.
C. Transmission lines. Where natural gas, petroleum or high-tension lines
are located within or adjacent to the subdivision or land development,
the application shall provide the Planning Commission with a statement
from the utility company involved setting forth any special conditions
which they may require.
D. Responsibility. Where easements are necessary for utilities, roadways,
etc., over adjoining properties, the developer will be required to
provide them.
A. Blocks.
§ 238-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-13
1:448
§ 238-14. Cul-de-sac streets and dead-end streets.
§ 238-15. Street alignment.
(1) The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(a) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(b) Topography.
(c) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation.
(2) Blocks should have a maximum length of 1,200 feet and, so far as
practicable, a minimum length of 500 feet. In the design of blocks
longer than 1,100 feet, special consideration shall be given to the
provision of satisfactory fire protection.
B. Lots. The arrangement and other design standards of lots shall conform
to the following requirements:
(1) Every lot shall abut a public, minor, marginal access, collector or
arterial street. Side lot lines should be substantially at right angles
or radial to street lines.
(2) Double frontage lots shall not be platted, except that, where
desired along limited access highways, lots may face on an interior
street and back on such thoroughfares. In that event, a planting
strip for a screen at least 20 feet in width shall be provided along
the back of the lot. Where lots back on a railroad, creek or other
natural barrier, a twenty-foot planting screen strip may also be
required. Interior lots having frontage on two streets shall be
prohibited, except where unusual conditions make it desirable.
(3) All lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of Chapter 260,
Zoning, as to area and dimensions for the zones in which the
subdivision is located.
A. Residential cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a
paved turnaround having a minimum radius to the outer pavement edge
or curbline of 40 feet and a property line radius to 50 feet.
B. Commercial and industrial culs-de-sac shall be adequate for the type of
use to be serviced.
C. Temporary dead-end streets, on approved plans, may be used, provided
that the developer, on his own land, constructs a stabilized all-weather
turnaround of the same radius as would be required for a permanent
street, the turnaround to be removed when the street is continued.
D. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum length of 200 feet
and not exceed 500 feet in length.
§ 238-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-15
1:449
A. Curves.
(1) Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 1°, connection
shall be made by horizontal curves.
(2) A tangent shall be required between curves, except on minor
streets.
(3) The center lines of streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles
as possible, but in no case shall they intersect at less than 75° or
more than 105°.
(4) Minimum center-line radii for horizontal curves shall be as follows:
(a) Arterial roads: as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(c) Minor streets: 150 feet.
(d) Rear service or alley: 75 feet.
B. Sight distances.
(1) Minimum vertical and horizontal sight distances shall be provided
as follows:
(a) Arterial roads: as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(b) Collector streets: 350 feet.
(c) Minor streets: 250 feet.
(d) Rear service or alley: 150 feet.
(2) A height of eye of 4.5 feet and height of object of four inches shall
be used in designing for the above minimums.
C. Clear sight triangles. Minimum clear sight triangles shall be provided
as follows:
(1) Intersection involving and distance along center lines:
(a) Arterial roads: as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(b) Collector streets: 100 feet.
(c) Minor streets: 75 feet.
(d) Rear service or alley: 50 feet.
(2) Distances shall be measured along street center lines from their
intersection. No building or structure or any other obstruction to
§ 238-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-15
1:450
§ 238-16. Street widths.
§ 238-17. Street grades.
Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce usable
roads and reasonable grades. The grade of streets shall be as follows:
vision, including shrubbery, in excess of three feet in height shall
be permitted within such areas.
A. Street right-of-way and cartway widths shall not be less than as shown
in the following table:
Street Type
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet)
Sidewalk
(feet)
Arterial 80 to 100 To be
determined by
the Planning
Commission and
Borough Council
Collector 60 to 80 40 4
Minor 60 34 4
Marginal access 50 34 4
Alley 20 Paved the full
width
B. Short extensions of already existing streets with right-of-way or
cartway widths less than the requirements above may be permitted,
provided that the Planning Commission and the Borough Council
determine that such an extension would be reasonable and necessary
for the orderly and efficient completion of that street.
C. Provisions for additional street width (right-of-way, cartway or both)
may be required by the Borough Council and/or the Planning
Commission in specific areas:
(1) For public safety and convenience.
(2) In commercial and industrial areas or in high-density residential
development.
(3) For widening of existing streets which do not meet the
requirements of § 238-17.
A. Center-line grades.
(1) Center-line grade shall be not less than 1/2 of 1%.
(2) Center-line grades shall not exceed:
§ 238-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-17
1:451
§ 238-18. Street intersections.
§ 238-19. Storm drainage.
(a) Collector and major street: 7%.
(b) Minor street and cul-de-sac: 10%.
(c) Rear service or alley: 12%.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade where the
algebraic difference exceeds 1% and shall be designed in relation
to the extent of the grade change.
B. Leveling area. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having
grades not greater than 4% for a distance of 25 feet, measured from the
nearest right-of-way line on the intersecting street.
A. Intersection design.
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than
75° or more than 105°.
(2) Multiple intersections involving the junction or crossing of more
than two streets are prohibited. Where this proves impossible, such
intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
(3) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall be located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from
center line to center line.
(4) Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of
150 feet between their center lines.
B. Curb radii. Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 20 feet
for intersections involving only minor streets, 35 feet for intersections
including other type streets or such greater radius as is suitable to the
specific intersection. Property line corners shall be rounded with a
concentric radius as provided for the curb.
A. Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive
drainage away from new and existing buildings.
B. Storm sewer installation. Storm sewers, culverts and related
installations shall be installed in accordance with § 238-21 to provide:
(1) The unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(2) Adequate drainage of streets.
§ 238-17 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-19
1:452
§ 238-20. Community facilities.
(3) The interception of stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
C. Stormwater runoff. In the design of storm sewerage installations,
specific consideration shall be given to avoidance of problems which
may arise from concentration of stormwater runoff over adjacent
properties. The Council will review storm sewer plans on the basis of a
ten-year storm.
D. Open drainageways. When open drainageways are used for the disposal
of stormwater, the Planning Commission shall review the design of such
open drainageways in relation to the following:
(1) Safety. Steep banks and deep pools shall be avoided.
(2) Erosion. Adequate measures shall be taken, such as seeding,
sodding, paving or other measures as necessary, to prevent the
erosion of banks and the scouring of the channel bottom.
(3) Stagnation. Design of open drainageways shall not create stagnant
pools or swampy areas.
E. Approval. Any structure in, along or across any stream having a
drainage area of 1/2 mile square or more shall be subject to approval by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The
applicant shall submit to the Commission a copy of the approved permit
for a structure from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
A. In reviewing subdivision and land development plans, the Council will
consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to
serve the additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
B. The applicant shall give earnest consideration to the desirability of
providing or reserving areas for facilities normally required in
residential sections, including churches, libraries, schools and other
public buildings, parks, playgrounds and playfields, and shopping and
local business centers.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking as appropriate to the use proposed. Prior to preparation of final
plans, subdividers of large tracts should review with the Council staff
minimum standards for various community facilities applicable to the
tract to be subdivided.
§ 238-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-20
1:453

ARTICLE IV
Improvement and Construction Requirements
§ 238-21. Responsibility for improvements.
The applicant shall provide all improvements required by this chapter and
in accordance with the specifications for the improvements contained
herein.
§ 238-22. Street construction.
A. General. Streets must be constructed to the grades and dimensions
drawn on the plans, profiles and cross sections submitted by the
applicant and approved by the Borough Council. Before any street
construction can begin, the applicant must install the required utilities
and provide, where necessary, adequate stormwater drainage for the
street in a manner acceptable to the Borough. Trenches shall be
backfilled in such a fashion to prevent settlement. The subgrade, base
course and surface course must be constructed according to the
following specifications:
(1) Minor streets.
(a) Subgrade. Prior to the installation of the base course, the
subgrade shall be prepared according to the specifications set
forth in Section 210 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, 1994, as amended. Pipe
underdrains shall be installed according to the specifications
set forth in Section 610 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, 1973, as amended, in such
locations and in such quantities as determined by the Borough
Engineer.
(b) Base course. The base course shall consist of eight inches of
compacted crushed stone constructed according to the
specifications set forth in Section 310 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, 1994, as
amended. As an alternate, a bituminous concrete base course,
constructed according to Section 305 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, 1994, as
amended, may be used, the compacted thickness of which shall
be determined by the Borough Engineer.
(c) Surface courses. The surface course shall consist of a binder
course with a compacted thickness of two inches and a wearing
course with a compacted thickness of one inch. The surface
courses shall be one of the following types: JA-1, ID-2A, ID-2T,
FJ-1A, FJ-1T, FB-1 or FB-2 and shall be constructed according
to the specifications as set forth in Section 400 of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications,
1994, as amended.
§ 238-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-22
1:455
§ 238-23. Sanitary sewers and water.
The applicant shall provide the subdivision or land development with a
complete sanitary sewer system to be connected to the existing or proposed
(2) Collector streets. Collector streets shall be constructed to the same
specifications as set forth in Subsection A(1), except that the base
course shall consist of 10 inches of compacted crushed stone
constructed according to Section 310 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, 1973, as amended.
(3) Arterial streets. For the construction of arterial streets or
highways, the developer shall consult the Borough Council and be
governed by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the
method of construction to be used.
(4) Driveway entrances. Driveway entrances or aprons within the
street right-of-way shall be surfaced to their full width, and in no
case shall they be less 10 feet. Where sidewalks are installed, the
required driveway surfacing shall end at the street side of the
sidewalk.
B. Street classification. The Commission shall determine whether a street
shall be classified as a minor, collector or arterial street.
C. Inspections. All street construction shall be subject to inspection at any
time by the municipality or its appointed agent.
(1) Inspection at the following stages shall be made prior to the start of
subsequent stages:
(a) Inspection and approval of the subgrades prior to the
installation of the base course.
(b) Inspection and approval of the base course prior to the
installation of the binder course.
(c) Inspection and approval of the binder course prior to the
installation of the wearing surface.
(d) Final inspection of the completed roadway and related
improvements as required by and in conformance with Article
V, Section 510, Paragraphs A through F, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.138
(2) The applicant shall notify the Borough a minimum of 24 hours in
advance of each required inspection. Copies of all stone and
material delivery slips shall be kept on file and shall be made
available for inspection until final approval by the Borough
Engineer is received.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 238-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-23
1:456
public sanitary sewer system and a water system to be connected to the
existing or proposed water system.
§ 238-24. Storm drainage.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer system is within 1,000 feet of or where
plans approved by the municipality provide for the installation of such
public sanitary sewer facilities to within 1,000 feet of a proposed
subdivision, the applicant shall provide the subdivision or land
development with a complete sanitary sewer system if, in the Borough
Council's opinion, it is feasible.
B. Where the installation of a sanitary sewer system is not required, the
applicant or owner of the lot shall provide for each lot, at the time
improvements are erected thereon, a private sewage disposal system
consisting of a septic tank and tile absorption field or other approved
sewage disposal system. All such individual sewage disposal systems
shall be constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act No. 537).139
C. Where a water main supply is within 1,000 feet or where plans
approved by the Borough Council provide for the installation of such
public water facilities, the applicant shall provide the subdivision or
land development with a complete water main supply system to be
connected to the existing or proposed water main supply system in
accordance with the Borough's specifications if, in the Borough
Council's opinion, it is feasible.
D. Public sanitary sewers and public water supply systems shall have the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
and shall be constructed according to the specifications and
requirements of the public utility or Borough Authority of which they
will be a part.
A. Whenever the evidence available to the Borough Council indicates that
natural surface drainage is inadequate, the applicant shall install storm
sewers, culverts and related facilities as necessary to permit the
unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, ensure the drainage of all low
points along the line of streets, intercept stormwater runoff along
streets at intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of the
area drained and provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage
disposal facilities.
B. Storm drainage facilities must be designed not only to handle the
anticipated peak discharge from the property being developed but also
the anticipated increase in runoff that may occur when all the property
at a higher elevation in the same drainage basin is fully developed.
Engineering calculations for design must be submitted for review.
139. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 238-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-24
1:457
§ 238-25. Curbs and sidewalks.
The following are specifications for the construction of curb and sidewalk in
the Borough of Middletown:
C. Existing facilities. Whenever evidence available to the Borough Council
indicates that existing storm sewers are accessible, the applicant must
connect the stormwater facilities to the existing storm sewers. Facilities
will be considered available even though the applicant must acquire
right-of-way or easements to connect.
D. Abutting properties. In the design of storm drainage facilities, special
consideration must be given to preventing excess runoff onto adjacent
developed or undeveloped properties. Unless approved by the Borough
Council and the Planning Commission, no change may be made in the
existing topography which would:
(1) Result in increasing any portion of the slope steeper than one foot
of vertical measurement for three feet of horizontal measurement
for fills or one foot of vertical measurement for two feet of
horizontal measurement for cuts within a distance of 20 feet from
the property line, unless an adequate retaining wall or other
structure is provided.
(2) Result in slope which exceeds the normal angle of slippage of the
material involved. All slopes must be protected against erosion.
(3) Result in diverting water onto the property of another landowner.
E. Drainage upon and on streets.
(1) Upon streets. In order to give proper surface water drainage upon
streets, a structure on a lot must be at a grade in satisfactory
relationship:
(a) With the established street grade; or
(b) With the existing street grade where none is established.
(2) On streets. A street must be designed so as to provide for the
discharge of surface water from its right-of-way. The slope of the
crown on a street shall not be less than on 1/8 of an inch per foot
and not more than 1/3 of an inch per foot. Adequate facilities must
be provided at low points along the street and other points
necessary to intercept runoff.
A. Where the curb and sidewalk are laid with a grass plot, the curb and
sidewalk must be laid continuously across the entire width of the
property. All driveways must be at least three feet from the property
line. If the driveway or private walk is concrete, there shall be an
expansion joint on both sides of the sidewalk and at the curb across the
full width of the private walk or driveway.
§ 238-24 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-25
1:458
B. Poles in the concrete must be boxed where there are utility poles or
traffic posts in the walk. The pole or post must be boxed and separated
with an expansion joint so that the pole or post can be replaced with a
minimum of damage to the concrete. There should be three inches of
clearance.
C. For measurements where the curb and sidewalk are laid together, the
concrete must be scored to show the six-inch top of the curb. The walk
must rise (be graded) one inch higher at the back edge than the front
edge.
D. For measurements where the curb and sidewalk are laid separately, the
back of the curb must be vertical and the front edge beveled two inches.
The front edge of the sidewalk should be two inches higher than the top
of the curb, and the back edge must be one inch higher than the front
edge.
E. A dropped section of curb may have a dropped section or lower section
at the driveway (up to six inches depending on the lay of the land), but
the curb must be laid the entire width of the property.
F. Steps for private walks crossing a public walk should not be within 12
inches of the public walk.
G. General specifications.
(1) Curb. All new curbing along any street shall be built of concrete
only. A standard curb in the Borough of Middletown shall be a
minimum of eight inches in thickness at the bottom and six inches
at the top and 18 inches in depth.
(2) Sidewalk. New sidewalks constructed on the streets of the Borough
of Middletown shall be of one-course or two-course concrete
construction. Sidewalks shall be four inches thick, shall be scored,
in general, in four-foot sections, and in no case shall scored
sections be more than six feet in length. A one-half-inch expansion
joint shall be provided at least once every sixth section of sidewalk.
H. Downspout drainage. In cases where downspout water is discharged at
the front of a building, a four-inch pipe must be placed under the
sidewalk and through the curb. This will outlet the water into the
gutter. Downspout water should not be drained onto the sidewalk.
Small depressions in the walk and curb to provide for downspout water
are generally unsatisfactory and, under normal conditions, will not be
approved.
I. Handicap ramps shall be provided at all intersections where sidewalk
and/or curbing is proposed.
§ 238-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-26
1:459
§ 238-26. Curbs and gutters.
Curbs and gutters shall be installed on each side of the street surface in
accordance with the following specifications:
§ 238-27. Sidewalks.
The Borough Council may require installation of sidewalks in any
subdivision where the evidence indicates that sidewalks are necessary for
the public safety.
§ 238-28. Erosion and sediment control measures.
A. Curbs, gutters or combination curbs and gutters shall be constructed
according to the specifications set forth in Section 641, Types A, C and
D, Plain Cement Concrete Curb Gutter in the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Specifications, 1994, as amended.
B. Where vertical curbs are provided, they shall be not less than six inches
wide at the top and eight inches wide at the bottom. The overall depth
of the curb shall be not less than 18 inches. The curbs shall rest on a sixinch
crushed stone base.
C. The cross sections of gutters and combination curbs and gutters shall
be constructed in accordance with the details shown on approved
drawings.
D. Curbs and gutters shall be set and finished to the lines and grades given
on the approved drawings.
E. The applicant shall notify the Borough a minimum of 24 hours in
advance of the start of construction.
A. Sidewalks shall be within the right-of-way of the street and shall extend
in width from the right-of-way line toward the curbline.
B. Sidewalks must be at least four feet wide in residential zoning districts
and at least six feet wide in all nonresidential zoning districts.
C. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the specifications as set
forth in Section 676, Cement Concrete Sidewalks, in the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, 1994, as amended.
D. The applicant shall notify the Borough a minimum of 48 hours in
advance of the start of construction.
A. General standards. Measures used to control erosion and minimize
sedimentation on lands in the Borough shall, as a minimum, meet the
standards and specifications herein described.
B. Performance principles. The following measures for minimizing erosion
and sedimentation shall be included as applicable in all control plans:
§ 238-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-28
1:460
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such manner as will minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features,
minimize land cuts and fills and conform to the general topography
so as to create the least erosion potential and to adequately contain
volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) To the largest degree feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected and supplemented.
(4) Disturbed areas and the duration of exposure thereof shall be kept
to a practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) Permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical during
development.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions, both during
and after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff shall be structurally retarded.
(9) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped, until the disturbed
area is stabilized, by the use of debris or sediment basins, silt traps
or similar measures.
C. Grading for drainage. To provide suitable sites for building and other
uses and to improve surface drainage and control erosion, the following
requirements shall be observed:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings, dispersing it without ponding, and
all land within a development shall be graded to drain and dispose
of surface water without ponding, unless otherwise approved by
the Borough Council.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to adequately
control the runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet. Where
drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from
buildings, they shall be sodded or planted.
(3) Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in
swales or watercourses.
(4) Excavations, cuts and fills:
§ 238-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-28
1:461
(a) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping
surfaces of fills.
(b) Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(c) Fills shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(d) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(e) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(f) Measures necessary for dust control shall be exercised during
grading operations.
(g) Grading equipment shall not cross live streams. Provisions
shall be made for the installation of culverts or bridges, as
necessary.
D. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
person, corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to
remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
watercourses and to repair any damage.
(2) Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
land development or subdivision shall be the responsibility of the
applicant until such responsibility is accepted by the Borough or
other official agency.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of any person, corporation or other
entity performing any action on or across a communal stream,
watercourse or swale or upon a floodplain or right-of-way thereof to
maintain such facilities in their existing states as nearly as possible
during the pendency of the activity and to return them promptly to
their original or equal condition after such activity is completed.
(4) Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses which originate
and continue on an individual private property shall be the
responsibility of the owner of such property to the point of open
discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within
the property.
(5) No person, corporation or other entity shall commit any act which
will affect the normal or flood flow in any communal stream or
watercourse, such as blocking, impeding the flow, altering the
course, installing any structure or depositing any material or
§ 238-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-28
1:462
object, except with the prior approval of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, if required, or of the
municipality.
(6) Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a
watercourse, a drainage easement or right-of-way shall be
provided, substantially conforming with the line of such
watercourse and of such width as will adequately preserve natural
drainage.
(7) Any person, corporation or other entity which makes or causes to
be made any change in a land surface shall be required to provide
the following:
(a) Facilities to collect on-site surface runoff and convey it to a
point of discharge into the common natural watercourse of the
drainage areas.
(b) A proportionate share of the total cost of off-site improvements
to the common natural watercourse, based on a fully developed
drainage area.
(c) Installation of all required drainage and erosion control
improvements (temporary and permanent) in accordance with
the standards and specifications of the municipality.
E. Specifications. The design and installation of erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall be in accordance with the specifications of the
Dauphin County Soil and Water Conservation District for the following
measures:
(1) Temporary cover on critical areas.
(2) Permanent grass and legume cover on critical areas with prepared
seedbed.
(3) Permanent grass and legume cover on critical areas with
unprepared seedbed.
(4) Sodding.
(5) Mulching.
(6) Temporary diversion.
(7) Permanent diversion.
(8) Grassed waterway or outlet.
(9) Grade stabilization structure.
(10) Debris basin.
(11) Drain.
§ 238-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-28
1:463
§ 238-29. Street trees.
Street trees shall not be permitted to be installed anywhere within the
Borough of Middletown. All trees to be installed must be planted within the
borders of any lot and may not be planted within any public right-of-way.
§ 238-30. General requirements for flood-prone areas.140
(12) Drainage mains or laterals.
F. Procedure and compliance with regulations.
(1) Final plans for erosion and sediment control measures, in
accordance with these standards, shall be incorporated in the
agreement of the developer with the municipality for the provision
of improvements as required for approval of a subdivision or land
development plan.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall assure that erosion and sediment control
measures have been carried out in conformance with any approved
plan. For this purpose and for inspections during construction, the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the consultative
technical assistance of the Borough Engineer and the Dauphin
County Conservation District, either or both as may be necessary,
and shall assure continued compliance with the approved
measures.
(3) Temporary easements for the clearing and grassing of tracts prior
to recording plats may be issued under conditions satisfactory to
the municipality.
A. Where not prohibited by this chapter or any other code provision or
ordinance, land located in flood-prone areas may be platted for
development with the provision that the developer construct all
buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance with
this chapter and other code provisions and ordinances regulating such
development.
B. No subdivision and/or land development or part thereof shall be
approved if the proposed development and/or improvements will,
individually or collectively, increase the regulatory flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
C. Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodations shall not be permitted in any floodway area. Sites for
these uses may be permitted outside the floodway area if the sites or
dwelling units are elevated to a height at least 1 1/2 feet above the
elevation of the regulatory flood.
140. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 158, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 238-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-30
1:464
D. Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential uses
shall also not be permitted in any floodway area. Also, such sites for
structures or buildings outside the floodway shall be protected as
provided for in Subsection C above. However, the governing body may
allow the subdivision and/or development of area or sites for
commercial and industrial uses at an elevation less than 1 1/2 feet
above the regulatory flood if the developer otherwise protects the area
to that height or assures that the buildings or structures will be
floodproofed at least up to that height.
E. If the Borough determines that only a part of a proposed plat can be
safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall
require that development proceed consistent with this determination.
F. When an applicant does not intend to develop the plat himself and the
Borough determines that additional controls are required to ensure
safe development, it may require the applicant to impose appropriate
deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in
every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
G. All new or replacement sanitary sewer systems and facilities, whether
public or private, located in flood-prone areas shall be floodproofed up
to a point 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
H. Streets shall comply with regulations set forth in § 238-5B(4) of this
chapter.
I. All new or replacement water systems, whether public or private,
located in flood-prone areas shall be floodproofed up to a point 1 1/2
feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
J. All other or replacement facilities and utilities, whether public or
private, located in flood-prone areas shall be elevated or floodproofed
up to a point 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 238-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-30
1:465

ARTICLE V
Fees and Permits
§ 238-31. Costs and fees.
§ 238-32. Construction and inspection fees.
Following approval and recording of a final plat, the applicant shall pay fees
for the costs incurred by the Borough Engineer or other consultants for
technical review of detailed engineering or construction plans, preparation
of cost estimates for required improvements, inspections of improvements
during construction and upon completion for acceptance, and such other
engineering verifications as may be required to the Borough.
A. The costs incurred by Middletown Borough and its agents for handling
and reviewing and inspections related to land subdivision plans, and by
the Dauphin County Planning Commission for reviewing land
subdivision plans, shall, in general, be defrayed by the payment of fees
by applicants submitting plans for approval, in accordance with this
section.
B. Plan review fees. At the time a land subdivision or land development
preliminary plat, final plat or combined preliminary/final plat is
officially submitted to the Borough of Middletown for approval, the
applicant shall provide a bank check payable to Middletown Borough
and a bank check payable to Dauphin County Planning Commission.
(1) The amount of the fees, related to the size of the proposed
development, shall be as determined in accordance with a separate
land subdivision fee schedule recommended by the Commission
and adopted by the Borough. The Borough shall cause the prompt
transmittal of one copy of the plat and all attachments thereto,
together with the fee check, to the Dauphin County Planning
Commission.
(2) For plats which are combined preliminary and final plan
submissions, the payment of both preliminary plat and final plat
fees may be required.
(3) Failure by the applicant to pay the fees herein required shall cause
and be the sole reason for disapproval of a plat. No review of a plat
for conformity with these and other applicable regulations shall be
performed until the fees required herein have been paid.
(4) The Borough of Middletown fee herein required shall cover the cost
of general review of the plan by the Borough Engineer.
A. The Borough Engineer or other consultants shall submit itemized
statements to the Borough for services rendered in accordance with
this section.
§ 238-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-32
1:467
§ 238-33. Construction permits.
B. The Borough shall cause prompt scheduling for payment by the
Borough of such invoices and the rendering of an invoice in like amount
to the applicant or responsible agent.
C. Failure of the applicant or responsible agent to pay all such invoices
shall be sufficient reason to deny acceptance of required improvements
or other certification of the development for occupancy.
A. Applications for construction permits shall be filed, as provided in
Chapter 113, Building Construction,141 on the forms supplied by the
Borough and shall be accompanied by four sets of plans and
specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer, setting
forth the location and nature of work, together with all engineering
data necessary for completion of work, and shall be verified by an
affidavit made by or on behalf of the owner or owners. A fee, in
accordance with Borough Ordinance No. 1039 (fees and schedules),
shall be required with each application.
B. All highways shall be graded to the full width of right-of-way. All
culverts, bridges and storm sewers shall be constructed for the width
required for grading.
C. Where bridges, dams and/or other structures are placed on streams
with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile or larger, application for a
permit shall be made to the Bureau of Dams and Waterways,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, by the person in interest, and a copy of such
permit shall be filed with the Borough Engineer.
D. Application for a construction permit shall include construction items
and quantities of all planned work.
E. Means of ingress and egress for vehicles to and from each lot or parcel
shall be shown on the plans for installation in accordance with existing
Borough regulations for depressed curbs and driveways across
sidewalks.
F. Upon the approval of the construction application and plans and
specifications by the Borough Engineer, the Secretary shall issue a
construction permit to the owner of the property. Said owner shall pay
the cost of any material tests made and shall reimburse the Borough for
the necessary inspection at the rate of $45 per hour for each hour or
portion thereof that a Borough inspector is on the work site; provided,
however, that if the owner shall employ a registered professional
engineer to supervise and inspect construction, who shall file with the
Borough Engineer a certificate that the construction has been carried
out in compliance with the approved plans and Borough specifications,
141. Editor's Note: Said Ch. 113, Building Construction, was repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No.
1330; see now Ch. 114, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 127, Code Enforcement.
§ 238-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-33
1:468
the foregoing inspection charge at the rate of $45 per hour shall not be
made.
G. Where connection with the sanitary sewer system of the Borough is
practicable, the owner, by special arrangement with the Council, shall
install sanitary sewers and sewer laterals in conformity with Borough
specifications for sanitary sewer construction before streets and roads
shown on the plans are constructed. All gas, water, electric and other
mains, pipes and conduits, together with all service connections or
laterals, shall be laid, when the need for the same can be reasonably
anticipated, before the streets and roads shown on the plans are
constructed.
H. When any highway outlined in the construction permit shall have been
completed in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and in strict
accordance with Borough specifications now in effect or hereafter
adopted, as the case may be, relating to such type of work, the Borough
shall accept, by ordinance, the dedication of such highway or highways.
I. The Borough Engineer shall be notified by the owner or contractor at
least 48 hours in advance of the commencement of any construction
operation, such as grading, sewer installation or paving, in order that
provision may be made for the proper inspection of such construction
operation. Samples of materials and every reasonable facility for
ascertaining whether the work is in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter shall be furnished to the proper offices and employees of
the Borough in the same manner as is required of contractors under the
terms of the construction specifications of the Borough.
§ 238-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-33
1:469

ARTICLE VI
Waiver
§ 238-34. Authority to grant.
The Borough Council or the Planning Commission, if authorized to approve
applications within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, may
grant a waiver of the requirements of one or more provisions if the literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such waiver will not be
contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the
ordinance are observed.
§ 238-35. Application for waiver.
All requests for a waiver shall be in writing and shall accompany and be a
part of the application for development. The request shall state in full the
grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request
is based, the provision or provisions of the ordinance involved and the
minimum modification necessary.
§ 238-36. Right of final approval.
If approval power is reserved by the Borough Council, the request for
waiver may be referred to the planning agency for advisory comments.
§ 238-37. Records.
The Borough Council or the planning agency, as the case may be, shall keep
a written record of all action on all requests for waivers.
§ 238-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-37
1:471

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 238-38. Enforcing official.
The Borough Manager or his representative shall require that the
application for a building permit shall contain all information necessary to
enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building, alteration or use is
located in an approved subdivision. No building permit shall be issued until
the Borough Manager or his representative has certified that the site for the
proposed building, alteration or use complies with all the provisions of this
chapter and conforms to the site description as indicated on the approved
and recorded final plat. The Borough Engineer may advise the Borough
Manager or his representative of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 238-39. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of any subdivision or land development ordinance enacted
under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a
municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. In addition to the above, in cases of a violation of this Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, the Borough, through its designated
representative, shall have the right to issue a stop-work order until such
time as the violation has been corrected. The Borough may also obtain a
cease-and-desist order from the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin
County; refrain from issuing any occupancy certificates for the
subdivision; refrain from issuing any construction permits for the
subdivision; and may withhold any or all municipal services to the
subdivision until the violation is corrected or otherwise resolved to the
satisfaction of the Borough.
§ 238-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-39
1:473
C. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
D. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 238-39 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 238-39
1:474
Chapter 243
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bills for Borough service — See Ch. 108.
Service charge for garbage collection — See
Ch. 164, Art. II.
Homestead Loan Program — See Ch. 168.
§ 238-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-39
1:475

ARTICLE I
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 3-14-1955 by Ord. No. 341, approved 3-14-1955; last
reenacted 12-11-1967]
§ 243-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Deed Transfer Tax
Ordinance."
§ 243-2. Definitions. [Amended 12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 954,
approved 12-7-1987]
The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
DEED — Any "deed," instrument or writing whereby any lands, tenements,
hereditaments or any interest herein, including leasehold interests as
defined in this article, shall be granted, bargained, sold or otherwise
conveyed to a grantee, purchaser or any other person under such
circumstances as to be subjected to the tax imposed by this article.
LEASEHOLD INTEREST — Only those leaseholds where the minimum term
or years, exclusive of options to renew, shall exceed 30 years, but leasehold
shall not include the ordinary lease from week to week, month to month or
year to year.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty, or both, the term "person" or "personnel," as to copartnerships or
associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX COLLECTOR — The person designated by
the Council of the Borough of Middletown to enforce and administer this
article.
TRANSFER — The transfer or change of possession of real property from
the grantor to the grantee by the surrender of possession by the grantor
or his agent and the entry or constructive entry into possession by the
grantee or his agent, which transfer or change of possession takes place
at the sites of the real property involved, regardless of where the deed is
prepared, executed, delivered, accepted or reported or where settlement is
consummated.
VALUE — In case of any deed granting, bargaining, selling or otherwise
conveying any land, tenement or hereditament or interest therein, including
leases, the amount of the actual consideration therefor, including all liens,
mortgages or other encumbrances thereon. "Actual consideration" shall be
§ 243-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-2
1:477
construed to mean the cash paid for the execution and delivery of the deed,
together with the face value of all liens, judgments, mortgages or other
encumbrances secured on the real estate conveyed or transferred by said
deed, together with any other evidence of indebtedness or promises, either
oral or written, given by or on behalf of the grantee to the grantor or
anyone in his behalf as full or part consideration for the deed of conveyance,
provided that, where such deeds shall set forth a smaller or nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set forth
in or actual consideration for the contract or agreement of sale, which, in
any event, shall not be less than the amount of the highest assessment of
such lands, tenements or hereditaments for local tax purposes.
§ 243-3. Tax levied; rate. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987; 12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 954, approved 12-7-1987]
Under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act and the Tax Reform
Code,142 from and after the effective date of this article, the grantor,
grantors or sellers of any real estate, land, hereditaments or any interest
therein, including sellers of any real estate, land, hereditaments or any
interest therein, including leasehold interest as defined in this article, or
the grantor, grantors, sellers or transferors of real property or an interest in
real property (regardless of where the instruments making the transactions
are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on the
transfer take place), to the extent that such transactions are subject to the
tax imposed by Article XI-C of the Tax Reform Code,143 situated wholly or in
part within the Borough of Middletown, shall pay a tax upon the privilege
of transferring said real property or interest therein at the rate of 1% of
the value of the real estate, land, hereditaments or interest therein which is
conveyed or transferred, provided that, where any lands, hereditaments or
interest therein is situated partly within and partly without the boundaries
of the Borough of Middletown, the tax imposed by this section shall be
calculated on the value of that portion of such lands and tenements lying
within the Borough limits.
§ 243-4. When due; exemptions.
A. This tax shall be due and payable and shall be paid by the grantor or
grantors named in the deed at the time of the making and executing of
said deed; provided, however, that it shall be the duty of the grantee or
grantees named in said deed to ascertain that said tax has been paid by
the grantor or grantors before accepting delivery of said deed, and it is
further provided that if said grantee or grantees accept delivery of a
deed which does not reflect, by official stamp or writing, that the tax
has been paid, then the grantee or grantees shall become jointly liable
with the grantor or grantors for the payment of said tax.
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. and 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq., respectively
143. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
§ 243-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-4
1:478
§ 243-5. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by an
official stamp and/or writing affixed to every deed, indicating the amount of
the tax paid, the date paid and the signature of the Real Estate Transfer Tax
Collector.
§ 243-6. Stamps authorized.
The Real Estate Transfer Tax Collector may prescribe, prepare and furnish
adhesive stamps of such denominations and quantities as may be necessary
for the payment of the tax imposed and assessed by this article.
§ 243-7. Enforcement official.
The Real Estate Transfer Tax Collector is hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby authorized to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to:
§ 243-8. Affidavit of property value.
Every deed upon which a tax is imposed by this article and which does
not reflect the actual value of the land, tenements or hereditaments or
interest therein granted, bargained, sold or conveyed by said deed shall be
accompanied by an affidavit executed by a responsible person connected
with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true,
full, complete and actual value thereof.
§ 243-9. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the tax imposed
hereby shall not apply where the transfer involved is a gift from one
person to another or where either the grantee or grantor is a
corporation, association, organization or foundation organized
exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes and from
which no income inures to the benefit of any private shareholder,
member or individual or where such transfer is exempt by the Local Tax
Enabling Act or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.144 [Amended
4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
A. The method and means to be used in the affixing or canceling of stamps
in substitution for or in addition to the method and means provided in
this article.
B. The denominations and sale of stamps.
C. Any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 243-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-9
1:479
§ 243-10. Interest on delinquent taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article not paid when due shall bear interest
thereon at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until paid.
§ 243-11. Recovery of taxes and interest.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest from the due date,
shall be recovered as other debts of like character are recovered.
§ 243-12. Tax becomes lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying, being and
situated, wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Borough of
Middletown, which lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are
described in or conveyed or transferred by the deed which is the subject
of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at
the time when the tax under this article is due and payable and to continue
until discharged by payment or in accordance with law. The Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of
Dauphin County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Lien Act
of 1923, its supplements and amendments.145
§ 243-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972, approved
7-11-1988]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to
a penalty not exceeding $600 for each and every offense, and further shall
be required to pay the amount of the tax, together with interest, and, upon
conviction before the District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay the fine as
above stated and, in default of the payment of the fine and the tax due, shall
undergo an imprisonment in the Dauphin County Prison for a period of not
to exceed 30 days.
A. Fail to pay the tax imposed by this article.
B. Make use of any stamps to denote payment of any tax imposed by this
article without canceling such stamp as required by this article or as
prescribed by the Real Estate Transfer Tax Collector.
C. Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with, or violate, the rules and
regulations adopted and promulgated by the Real Estate Transfer Tax
Collector under the provisions of this article.
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 243-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-13
1:480
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-8-1969 by Ord. No. 561, approved 12-8-1969]
§ 243-14. Definitions.
§ 243-15. Tax levied; rate. [Amended 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 607,
approved 11-13-1972; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
Under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,146 in addition to the other
taxes levied and collected in the Borough of Middletown, there is hereby
imposed, for general revenue purposes, an annual tax of $10 upon every
resident of the Borough of Middletown who shall have attained the age of
18 years on or after the first day of January each year.
§ 243-16. Notice of tax; liability for tax. [Amended 11-13-1972 by
Ord. No. 607, approved 11-13-1972; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943,
approved 4-6-1987]
On or before the first of July of each year, the Tax Collector shall send to
every resident of the Borough of Middletown over the age of 18 years a
notice of the per capita tax due by such resident for the calendar year. Such
notice shall be on a form prescribed by the Borough of Middletown and
procured at the expense of the Borough of Middletown, provided that the
failure or omission of the Collector to send or of any taxpayer to receive
such notice shall not relieve such person from the payment of such tax;
provided, further, that any person who shall become a resident of the
Borough of Middletown after the first day of January shall not be liable for
the per capita tax for that fiscal year; any person who shall cease to be a
resident at any time after the first day of January shall be liable for the full
amount of the per capita tax for such year.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
the purpose of this article, the meanings herein indicated:
COLLECTOR — Refers to the person elected or designated by the
Borough of Middletown to collect or receive the taxes imposed by this
article.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person domiciled in the Borough of Middletown,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — Any person required hereunder to pay a per capita tax.
B. The singular shall include the plural; and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 243-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-17
1:481
§ 243-17. Discount and penalty. [Amended 9-3-2002 by Ord. No.
1150, approved 9-3-2002]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this article shall be
entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making payment
of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax
notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes
imposed against them for four months after the date of the notice shall be
charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the
Collector and collected by him. The Collector shall furnish a receipt to every
person paying such tax.
§ 243-18. Recovery of taxes and penalties.
All taxes levied under this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the Collector in the manner authorized by law in the case of
per capita taxes within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 243-19. (Reserved)147
§ 243-20. Continuation of provisions.
In accordance with Section 4 of Act No. 511 hereinabove referred to,148 this
article is to continue in full force and effect until repealed.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 243-19, Violations and penalties, was repealed 7-7-2003 by Ord.
No. 1158, approved 7-7-2003.
148. Editor's Note: See generally 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 243-17 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-20
1:482
ARTICLE III
Occupation Tax
[Adopted 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 612, approved 12-27-1972]
§ 243-21. Tax levied. [Amended 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1150,
approved 9-3-2002]
Under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257,149 a tax for the purpose of providing revenue for general Borough
purposes at the flat rate of $10 is hereby levied, assessed and imposed on
the occupation of all natural persons of the age of 18 years or over residing
within or being an inhabitant of the Borough of Middletown, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania, at any time during the calendar year beginning
January 1, 1973, and ending on December 31, 1973, and said tax shall
continue in force on a calendar-year basis annually thereafter without
reenactment. Any person whose total income from all sources is less than
$5,000 per annum, and any person whose bona fide occupation is that of
clergy, shall be exempt from the tax herein provided. All other exemptions
are hereby revoked.
§ 243-22. Tax in addition to other taxes.
This occupation tax shall be in addition to all other taxes levied by said
Borough.
§ 243-23. Notice of tax.
On or before the first day of July in 1973 and in each subsequent year, the
Tax Collector elected or designated by said Borough to collect or receive
said occupation tax shall send to every taxpayer or person required
hereunder to pay an occupation tax a notice of the occupation tax due for
the current calendar year. Such notice shall be on a form prescribed by said
Borough and procured at the expense of said Borough. However, failure or
omission of the Tax Collector to send or of any taxpayer to receive such
notice shall not relieve such person from the payment of such tax.
§ 243-24. Discount and penalty. [Amended 9-3-2002 by Ord. No.
1150, approved 9-3-2002]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of said occupation tax shall be entitled
to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making payment of the
whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax notice. All
taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes imposed against
them for four months after the date of the notice shall be charged a penalty
of 10%, which shall be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and collected
by him. The Tax Collector shall furnish a receipt to every person paying such
tax.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 243-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-25
1:483
§ 243-25. Recovery of tax and penalty.
All occupation taxes imposed and levied by said Borough, together with
all penalties, shall be recoverable by the Tax Collector in the manner
authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,
and the amendments and supplements thereto, inter alia by Sections 18
through 20 thereof,150 including distress and sale of goods and chattels of
taxpayer, collection from employers of persons owing delinquent occupation
taxes or whose spouse owes delinquent occupation taxes, collection from
the commonwealth through deduction from wages owing or due to a
delinquent taxpayer or by suit in assumpsit or other appropriate remedy or
as otherwise provided by law.
§ 243-26. (Reserved)151
§ 243-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OCCUPATION — Used in its ordinary sense, includes any business,
enterprise, job, livelihood, profession, services, trade, undertaking or
vocation of any type or kind and shall also include any activity in which a
person is regularly or habitually engaged and shall be liberally construed.
Such occupations may be determined by the Dauphin County Occupational
Assessment List (showing uniform valuation of $250 for occupation of each
person) for all wards of Middletown.
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
151. Editor's Note: Former § 243-26, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 1158, approved 7-7-2003.
§ 243-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-27
1:484
ARTICLE IV
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-20-1978 by Ord. No. 738, approved 11-20-1978]
§ 243-28. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Earned Income Tax
Ordinance."
§ 243-29. Statutory authority.
This Earned Income Tax Ordinance is enacted under the authority of the
Local Tax Enabling Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended, and
this statement of statutory authority is made in compliance with Section 5
of said Act, as amended (53 P.S. § 6905).152
§ 243-30. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes of five mills or 1/2 of 1% is hereby
imposed on:
§ 243-31. Incorporation of state law.
Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,
53 P.S. § 6913, pp. 383-394,153 is hereby incorporated by reference into and
made a part of this article and to the same extent as if the full text of said
section was set out verbatim herein, except that:
A. Earned income earned on and after January 1, 1979, by residents of the
Borough of Middletown.
B. Earned income earned on and after January 1, 1979, by nonresidents of
said Borough for work done or services performed or rendered in the
Borough of Middletown.
C. The net profits earned on and after January 1, 1979, by residents of the
Borough of Middletown.
D. The net profits earned on and after January 1, 1979, from the operation
of businesses, professions or other activity, except corporations,
conducted in said Borough by nonresidents thereof.
A. In the ease of net profits, the Borough of Middletown elects to operate
under the option set out in Subsection IIIA(2) of said Section 13,
requiring, and hereby requiring, an annual declaration of the estimated
net profits and quarterly payments thereof rather than annual
payments of the tax due on net profits for the preceding year as set
forth in Subsection III(A)(1).
152. Editor's Note: See now generally 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
153. Editor's Note: See now generally 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 243-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-31
1:485
§ 243-32. Income Tax Officer designated. [Amended 9-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 1182, approved 9-7-2004]
The Borough Council shall designate one person or agency, by resolution,
for the assessment and collection of any such income taxes as may be levied
by the Borough, to act as Income Tax Officer, with the powers and duties
delineated in the Local Tax Enabling Act.154 Further, the designee shall
perform all duties, be subject to all of the requirements and have all the
powers prescribed by local and state law. Said designee shall receive such
compensation for its services as it and this Borough may agree to from time
to time. The Borough expressly authorizes the designee to promulgate and
amend policies and regulations for the collection of said taxes.
§ 243-33. Continuity; applicability. [Amended 9-7-2004 by Ord. No.
1182, approved 9-7-2004]
The tax levied by this article:
B. In the case of earned income not subject to withholding, the Borough of
Middletown elects to operate under the option set forth in Subsection
III(B)(2) requiring, and hereby requiring, a quarterly return with
accompanying payment of the tax rather than an annual return and
payment of the tax for the preceding year as set forth in Subsection
III(B)(1). The Income Tax Officer may provide, by regulation, for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of net profits and for the
payment of the estimated tax on net profits in cases where a taxpayer
who has previously made a declaration of estimated net profits
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds that
said taxpayer has overestimated anticipated net profits.
A. Shall be applicable to earned income received and to net profits earned
in the period beginning January 1, 1979, and ending December 31,
1979, or for taxpayer fiscal years beginning in the aforesaid year, and
the said tax shall continue in force and remain effective on a calendaryear
or taxpayer fiscal-year basis without annual reenactment;
B. May be collected by the Income Tax Officer at the source through
withholding by employers for nonresident as well as residents; and
C. Is hereby affirmed by this subsection to be 1/2 of 1% of the maximum
rate as limited by Local Tax Enabling Act, which is, as of the date of
adoption of this ordinance, 1%.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 243-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-33
1:486
ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-29-2004 by Ord. No. 1192155; amended in its entirety
12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 1230, approved 12-3-2007]
§ 243-34. Title; purpose.
§ 243-35. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purpose of this Article V, the
following terms shall have the meanings below:
COLLECTOR — The person or persons appointed by this article or by
subsequent enactment or the Borough Council to collect the tax imposed by
this article.
EMPLOYER — A corporation, political subdivision, association, company,
firm or individual with a principal location or office within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Middletown.
INCOME — Salary, wages, commission, tip, bonus, fee, or any other
payment or earned income, including net profits from sources within the
political subdivision of the Borough of Middletown.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — The location of the taxpayer's principal place
of employment or location of the principal office on the date the taxpayer
earns more than $12,000 in the annual year.
TAX — The Local Services Tax (LST) imposed by this article.
TAX YEAR — January 1 through and including December 31.
TAXPAYER — An individual employed within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Middletown.
§ 243-36. Tax levied rate.
Under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,156 as amended from
time to time (hereinafter "the Act"), in addition to other taxes levied and
collected in the Borough of Middletown, there is hereby imposed, for the
purposes authorized in the Act, a local services tax (hereinafter "LST")
A. Title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local
Services Tax (LST) Ordinance."
B. Purpose. This article shall levy a tax for the privilege of engaging in an
occupation within the Borough of Middletown; requiring employers to
register and collect the tax; prescribing requirements for returns and
records; conferring powers and duties upon the Tax Collector; and
imposing penalties.
155. Editor's Note: The Mayor allowed this ordinance to go into effect without his approval.
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 243-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-36
1:487
of $52 upon every taxpayer employed within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Middletown.
§ 243-37. Exemption.
§ 243-38. Taxpayers with multiple employment locations.
In the event a taxpayer otherwise subject to this LST is employed at multiple
locations in the Commonwealth, more than one of which imposes this LST,
the Borough of Middletown shall have priority to collect such tax when the
taxpayer's place of employment is located within the Borough.
§ 243-39. Collection of LST from employers.
The Tax Collector elected or designated by the Borough to collect the LST
shall collect the LST from employers in accordance with the requirements
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended.
§ 243-40. Penalties.
§ 243-41. School District LST levy.
If the Middletown Area School District has an LST in effect, the School
District may collect from taxpayers, in accordance with the terms of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended, an amount no greater than was in
effect at the time of the passage of the herein article. The difference
between the total LST owed hereunder and the amount collected by the
School District shall be payable to the Borough of Middletown, unless
otherwise agreed between the Borough and the School District.
§ 243-42. Employer collection.
A. An individual, whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Borough, for any tax year, is less than $12,000.
B. An individual who is a disabled veteran or a member of the Armed
Forces Reserves on active duty during the tax year are exempt.
A. Failure of an employer to make payment as required herein shall result
in the assessment of a penalty in the amount of 10%, plus costs of suit
and reasonable attorneys fees of 5%, if required.
B. The LST levied herein, together with all penalties, shall be recoverable
by the Tax Collector in the manner authorized by the Local Tax Enabling
Act.
A. Every employer not registered under the provisions of an enactment of
the taxing authority imposing a tax on earned income and net profits
shall, within 30 days after the effective date, or within 30 days after first
becoming an employer, register with the Collector the employer's
§ 243-36 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-42
1:488
name, address and any other information required by the collector on
an employer registration form prescribed by the Collector.
B. Every employer is required to deduct the tax as set forth in the
regulations from any compensation payable to any employee on whom
the tax is imposed, unless the employee has filed a local services tax
withholding exemption certificate in accordance with the regulations.
As set forth in the regulations, the full amount of the tax shall be
deducted in lump sum if the combined municipal and school district tax
rate is $10 or less. As set forth in the regulations, the tax shall be
deducted pro rata on a per-payroll basis if the combined municipal and
school district tax rate exceeds $10.
C. As set forth in the regulations, no employee is required to pay LST
through more than one employer during any payroll period.
D. An employer is excused from withholding to the extent provided in the
regulations if the employee has filed a local services tax withholding
exemption certificate in accordance with the regulations. The
exemption certificate may provide exemption from withholding based
on:
(1) Low income or other exemption from tax as stated in the
regulations;
(2) Withholding by another principal employer;
(3) Prior payment to the taxing authority of the full amount of the tax
imposed by the taxing authority; or
(4) Prior payment during the same tax year of $52 as a tax imposed
under the enabling act on an individual based on engaging in an
occupation in Pennsylvania.
E. If an employee has filed a local services tax withholding exemption
certificate and it is determined as set forth in the regulations that the
employee is not eligible for exemption or no longer eligible for
exemption, the employer shall start or restart withholding as set forth
in the regulations.
F. As to each taxpayer employed at any time after the effective date and on
or before March 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the regulations,
and shall file a tax return and pay to the Collector on or before April 30
the amount of tax deducted on or before March 31. As to each taxpayer
for whom the full amount of the tax has not previously been deducted or
paid directly by the taxpayer to the Collector, who is employed at any
time in any of the three-month periods ending June 30, September 30,
and December 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the regulations,
and shall file a tax return and pay to the Collector on or before the
following July 30, October 30, and January 30, the amount of tax
§ 243-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-42
1:489
§ 243-43. Taxpayer direct payment.
Every individual who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason
is not deducted by an employer under § 243-42 of this article, shall file a
tax return and pay the tax directly to the Collector. Except as otherwise
stated in the regulations, every such individual engaged in an occupation
within the taxing authority at any time after the effective date and on or
before March 31, shall file a tax return and pay the full amount of the
tax to the Collector on or before April 30. Except as otherwise stated in
the regulations, every such individual who has not previously paid the full
amount of the tax who engages in an occupation within the taxing authority
at any time in any of the three-month periods ending June 30, September
30, and December 31, shall file a tax return and pay the full amount of
the tax to the Collector on of before the following July 30, October 30, and
January 30, respectively. Every individual who is self-employed, or whose
tax for any other reason is not deducted by an employer under § 243-42 of
this article, shall follow this same procedure in every tax year.
§ 243-44. Tax Collector power and duties.
deducted on or before June 30, September 30, and December 31,
respectively. Every employer shall follow this same procedure in every.
tax year.
G. Tax amounts deducted from compensation by an employer shall at all
times be the property of the taxing authority, and shall constitute a trust
fund held by the employer until remitted to the Collector; and deduction
of tax from wages shall, as between the employee and the taxing
authority, constitute payment of the tax by the employee, regardless of
any insolvency or failure to remit by the employer.
H. Any employer who fails to deduct the tax or who fails to pay the tax to
the Collector shall be liable for the tax and applicable penalties in full as
though the tax had originally been imposed against such employer. If
the employer is a partnership, the partners thereof, and if the employer
is a corporation, limited liability company, or other organization or
entity, all officers thereof, and any other person responsible for
payment of taxes, shall have the same liability as the employer.
A. The Collector shall collect the tax, fines and penalties imposed by this
article, and shall keep records of collection.
B. The Collector may examine the books, papers, and records of any
individual or employer in order to verify compliance with this article.
Every individual the Collector believes might be subject to the tax and
every employer or person the Collector believes might be an employer
shall on request meet with and show to the Collector all books, papers,
and records requested by the Collector. Every employer or person the
Collector believes might be an employer shall also provide access to the
employer's books, papers, and records at the employer's place of
business and provide a place for the Collector's review of such books,
§ 243-42 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-44
1:490
§ 243-45. Tax Collector appointment.
The Lancaster County Tax Collection Bureau, also doing business as
Middletown Area Tax Collection Bureau, is appointed Collector according to
the terms of a Tax Collection Agreement as presented this date or previously
executed. The officers of this taxing authority are authorized to take any
actions necessary or appropriate to carry out the terms of this article and
the tax collection agreement.
papers, and records. For purposes of this article, records shall include
records in any form, including computer and other electronic records.
C. The Collector may file suit in its name or in the name of the taxing
authority for recovery of any amount owed to the taxing authority.
D. Except as limited by any applicable law, the Collector shall have all of
the powers that the taxing authority has or that the law prescribes for
Tax Collectors relating to administration and enforcement of this
article.
E. The Collector may promulgate and enforce regulations relating to
administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 243-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-45
1:491

ARTICLE VI
Tax Certifications
[Adopted 2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 1347 approved 2-6-2018]
§ 243-46. Tax certifications provided.
The Tax Collector may provide tax certifications upon request by the public
on real property within the Township.
§ 243-47. Fees.
The Tax Collector may assess, collect, and retain as compensation from
each person, firm, corporation, association, or other entity requesting the
following services:
§ 243-48. Returned checks.
§ 243-49. Payments.
Any fees paid pursuant to this article shall be paid to the Borough of
Middletown Tax Collector.
§ 243-50. Records.
The Tax Collector shall keep an accurate written record of all funds received
pursuant to this article and shall provide a written accounting thereof to
Borough Council on an annual basis, no later than January 31 of each year
for the prior calendar year.
§ 243-51. Enforcement.
In the event any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity fails
to pay the statement for the service fees authorized by this article, the
Tax Collector is authorized to commence the appropriate civil action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to effectuate a recovery of these service fees
together with court costs.
A. Tax certifications (per certification issued): $15 for one year.
B. Duplicate bill fee: $5.
C. Copies: $0.25 per page.
A. The Tax Collector may impose upon and collect from a taxpayer a fee of
$20 for any payment returned by a bank or other financial institution
because of insufficient funds in the account of the taxpayer, or for any
other reason, to cover the payment submitted by the taxpayer.
B. By further determination of the Borough Council, this fee shall be set,
from time to time, by resolution, in the event the Borough determines a
need to modify the initially established fee.
§ 243-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-51
1:493
Chapter 247
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 247, Trees, adopted 11-27-1961 by Ord. No. 422,
approved 11-27-1961, as amended, was repealed 3-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 1312, which ordinance also abolished the Shade Tree
Commission.]
Chapter 250
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 250, Vector Control, adopted 4-7-1986 by Ord. No. 911,
approved 4-7-1986, as amended, was repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No.
1332. See now Ch. 210, Property Maintenance.]
Chapter 252
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 105.
Parking in fire lanes — See Ch. 153.
Noise from vehicles — See Ch. 185.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 195.
Skateboards, rollerblades and scooters — See
Ch. 229.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
§ 243-51 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 243-51
1:494
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 252-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 252-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Middletown.
§ 252-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 252-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended,157 except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
157. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-4
1:495
§ 252-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 252-6. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough shall have authority to direct traffic on
the streets in the Borough, at intersections in public and in other places
where the Vehicle Code158 or this chapter applies.
A. The Borough Council may from time to time designate places upon and
along the streets in the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90
days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Borough Council shall have the authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
158. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 252-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-6
1:496
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 252-7. Speed limits established. [Amended 7-7-1997 by Ord. No.
1101; 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1112; 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 1118;
5-7-2001 by Ord. No. 1137; 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 1181]
On all streets, avenues, alleys and thoroughfares owned by the Borough
of Middletown, the maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed in the
Borough is established at 25 miles per hour unless a lower speed limit is set
forth below for certain streets or parts of streets. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed
for that street or part of a street.
Name of
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Oak Hill Drive 15 From Spruce Street to Briarcliff Road
Peony Avenue 15 From East Emaus Street to Columbia
Street
Spruce Street 15 From High Street to East Roosevelt
Avenue
§ 252-7.1. School Zone speed limit. [Added 4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
1112]
The following streets have a maximum speed as set forth below. It shall
be unlawful, between the hours specified below, for any person to drive
a vehicle at a speed higher than the maximum prescribed, except on
Saturdays, Sundays and school holidays.
Name of
Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Hours Location
Conewago
Street
15 7:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
Beginning 95 feet, plus or
minus, west of the
intersection of Conewago
Street and Race Street
and continuing east a
distance of 725 feet, plus
or minus
Race Street 15 7:00 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m.
Beginning 245 feet, plus
or minus, north of the
intersection of Race Street
and Conewago Street and
continuing south a
distance of 925 feet, plus
or minus
§ 252-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-8
1:497
§ 252-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated (or are ratified if
previously installed) at the intersections described below:
Intersection
Ann Street and South Union Street
Emaus Street and Union Street
Main Street at intersection of Giant Supermarket located 200 feet) west of
intersection of Nissley Street and Main Street
Race Street and Main Street
Union Street and Main Street
Vine Street and Main Street
Wood Street and Ann Street [Repealed 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. 1234]
§ 252-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal. [Amended 8-1-1988
by Ord. No. 975]
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn Onto
Ann Street East Wood Street
Ann Street West Wood Street
Emaus Street East Union Street
Emaus Street West Union Street
Main Street [Repealed
5-1-2000 by Ord. No.
1128]
Main Street [Repealed
5-1-2000 by Ord. No.
1128]
Union Street North Emaus Street
Union Street
[Repealed 5-1-2000
by Ord. No. 1128]
Union Street South Emaus Street
Union Street
[Repealed 5-1-2000
by Ord. No. 1128]
Wood Street North Ann Street
Wood Street South Ann Street
§ 252-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-10
1:498
§ 252-10. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described below are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction
established for traffic on that street:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Aspen Street East From Chestnut Street to Vine Street
Astor Avenue South From Emaus Street to Brown Street
Briarcliff Road North From High Street to Oak Hill Drive
Brown Street West From South Union Street to Scott
Avenue
Carmany Avenue West From North Union Street to Church
Street
Catherine Street South From Grandview Avenue to Wharton
Avenue
Cedar Avenue North From East Main Street between
Meshey property and Alex Chevrolet
used car lot
Cedar Avenue West From Hoffer Street to Adelia Street
Clinton Avenue South From Frey Square to Columbia Street
Conewago Street West From Frey Square to Columbia Street
Daisy Avenue East From Astor Avenue to Pine Street
East Roosevelt
Avenue
West From Vine Street to Pine Street
Fisher Avenue South From Wilson Street to Ann Street
Girard Avenue West From North Union Street to Spring
Street
Hoffer Street North From East Main Street to Cedar
Avenue
Houser Alley Southwest From Wilson Street to Ann Street
Keystone Avenue West From South Union Street to Wood
Street
Nissley Street
[Added
2-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 1205,
approved
2-6-2006]
East From North Catherine Street to Scott
Avenue
§ 252-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-10
1:499
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Nissley Street
[Added
10-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 1329]
North From Water Street to Main Street
Nissley Street
[Repealed
5-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 1304]
Nissley Street West From Catherine Street to the
intersection of Wood Street and Water
Street
Oak Hill Drive East From Briarcliff Road to Maple Road
Peony Avenue
[Added
2-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 1205,
approved
2-6-2006]
North From Raymond Street to Columbia
Street
Peters Avenue West From North Union Street to Spring
Street
Plane Street West From Vine Street to Chestnut Street
Raymond Street
[Added
2-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 1205,
approved
2-6-2006]
East From Pine Street to Peony Avenue
Scott Avenue
[Added
11-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 1152]
North From Brown Street to Emaus Street
Unnamed 12-foot
alley
South From the rear of the 7-11 Store to
Water Street
§ 252-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any
street or at any intersection within the Borough.
§ 252-12. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described below:
§ 252-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-12
1:500
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn
At Intersection
of
Nissley Street North Left West Main Street
Oak Hill Drive East Left Vine Street
§ 252-13. No-passing zones.
The zones established below are hereby established as no-passing zones,
and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass
another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 252-14. Through streets.
The streets described below are hereby established as through streets,
and the driver of every vehicle, upon approaching any such street at any
intersection thereof (except for such intersections where there are now or
shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to a full stop or
yield the right-of-way before entering any such through street.
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 252-15. Stop intersections.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through
streets established by § 252-14 above) are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position upon the first-named street as to face
traffic approaching the second-named street in the direction or directions
indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon
the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case,
shall come to a full stop before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Adelia Street Both Conewago Street
Adelia Street Both Emaus Street
Adelia Street Both Frey Avenue
Adelia Street Both Main Street
Adelia Street Both Maple Road
Airport Drive [Added
8-1-2005 by Ord.
No. 1196]
North Ann Street
§ 252-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-15
1:501
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Ann Street Both Grant Street
Ann Street [Added
8-1-2005 by Ord.
No. 1196]
East Airport Drive
Ann Street [Added
8-1-2005 by Ord.
No. 1196]
West Airport Drive "left turn only"
Aspen Street Both Cypress Street
Astor Avenue South East Emaus Street
Beechwood Drive Both Pine Street
Beechwood Drive Both Spruce Street
Beechwood Drive Both Union Street
Birch Street Both Pine Street
Birch Street Both Spruce Street
Briarcliff Road Both Cypress Drive
Briarcliff Road Both Oak Hill Drive
Briarcliff Road Both Ridge Avenue
Brown Street West Union Street
Catalpa Street Both Pine Street
Catalpa Street Both Spruce Street
Catherine Street Both Ann Street
Catherine Street Both Emaus Street
Catherine Street Both Pike Street
Catherine Street Both State Street
Catherine Street Both Susquehanna Street
Catherine Street Both Water Street
Catherine Street Both Wilson Street
Catherine Street North Main Street
Cattell Street East Adelia Street
Cattell Street West Rupp Street
Cedar Avenue Both Adelia Street
Chestnut Street Both Maple Road
Chestnut Street Both Ridge Avenue
Chestnut Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Chestnut Street North Aspen Street
Clinton Avenue North Emaus Street
Colfax Street South Lincoln Street
§ 252-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-15
1:502
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Colfax Street [Added
2-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 965]
West Grant Street
Columbia Street Both Adelia Street
Columbia Street Both Hoffer Street
Columbia Street Both Spruce Street
Columbia Street East Race Street
Columbia Street West Pine Street
Commercial Avenue Both Scott Avenue
Conewago Street Both Adelia Street
Conewago Street Both Hoffer Street
Conewago Street Both Race Street
Conewago Street Both Spruce Street
Cortland Avenue Both Gertrude Avenue
Cortland Avenue Both Linden Street
Cypress Street East Chestnut Street
Cypress Street North Aspen Street
Daisy Avenue Both Peony Avenue
Daisy Avenue West Astor Avenue
Deatrich Avenue Both Frey Avenue
Deatrich Avenue Both Maple Road
Deatrich Avenue North Highland Avenue
East End Warehouse
Drive
Both Emaus Street
Emaus Street [Added
10-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 1108]
Both Catherine Street
Emaus Street Both Pine Street
Emaus Street Both Race Street
Emaus Street Both Wood Street
Fisher Avenue Both Pike Street
Fisher Avenue North State Street
Fisher Avenue South Witherspoon Avenue
Frey Avenue Both Vine Street
Gertrude Avenue Both Cortland Avenue
Grandview Avenue Both Union Street
§ 252-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-15
1:503
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Grant Street [Added
3-3-1997 by Ord.
No. 1098]
Both Ann Street
Hamlin Street [Added
2-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 965]
West Grant Street
Hickory Avenue Both Ridge Avenue
Hickory Avenue Both Roosevelt Avenue
High Street Both Pine Street
High Street Both Race Street
High Street Both Spring Street
High Street Both Spruce Street
High Street Both Union Street
High Street East Vine Street
Highland Avenue Both Adelia Street
Highland Avenue Both Deatrich Avenue
Hillside Road Both Pine Street
Hillside Road Both Spruce Street
Hillside Road Both Union Street
Hoffer Street Both Conewago Street
Hoffer Street Both Main Street
Juniper Street Both Pine Street
Juniper Street Both Spruce Street
Keystone Avenue West Catherine Street
Keystone Avenue West Swatara Street
Keystone Avenue West Wood Street
Laurel Avenue Both Adelia Street
Laurel Avenue Both Deatrich Avenue
Lawrence Street Both Ann Street
Lawrence Street Both Wilson Street
Lincoln Street Both Market Street
Lincoln Street South Mud Pike
Lincoln Street South Witherspoon Avenue
Linden Street Both Race Street
Linden Street Both Spruce Street
Linden Street East Adelia Street
Maple Road Both Adelia Street
§ 252-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-15
1:504
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Maple Road Both Oak Hill Drive
Maple Road Both Vine Street
Maple Street Both Emaus Street
Maple Street Both Linden Street
Market Street Both Catherine Street
Market Street Both Grant Street
Market Street Both Lawrence Street
Market Street Both Wood Street
Mill Street Both Union Street
Nissley Street Both Scott Avenue
Nissley Street Both Water Street
Nissley Street East Union Street
Nissley Street North Main Street
Nissley Street West Catherine Street
Oak Hill Drive Both Briarcliff Road
Oak Hill Drive Both Pine Street
Oak Hill Drive Both Spruce Street
Oak Hill Drive Both Union Street
Oak Hill Drive Both Vine Street
Oak Hill Drive East Maple Road
Park Circle Road Both Pine Street
Park Circle Road Both Spruce Street
Park Circle Road Both Union Street
Peony Avenue Both Daisy Avenue
Peters Avenue East Union Street
Pike Street Both Catherine Street
Pike Street Both Union Street
Pike Street Both Wood Street
Pine Street Both Beechwood Drive
Pine Street Both Brown Street
Pine Street Both Columbia Street
Pine Street Both East Emaus Street
Pine Street Both High Street
Pine Street Both Main Street
Pine Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Pine Street Both Water Street
§ 252-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-15
1:505
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Plane Street Both Briarcliff Road
Plane Street Both Chestnut Street
Plane Street North Aspen Street
Poplar Street Both Brown Street
Poplar Street Both Mill Street
Race Street Both Columbia Street
Race Street Both Emaus Street
Race Street Both Main Street
Race Street Both Water Street
Race Street [Added
8-1-2005 by Ord.
No. 1196]
South Mill Street "except right
turn"
Raymond Street Both Race Street
Raymond Street Both Spruce Street
Ridge Avenue Both Briarcliff Road
Ridge Avenue Both Spruce Street
Ridge Avenue Both Vine Street
Race Street Both Conewago Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Briarcliff Road
Roosevelt Avenue Both Catherine Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Pine Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Spruce Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Union Street
Roosevelt Avenue Both Vine Street
Rupp Street Both Conewago Street
Rupp Street Both Emaus Street
Rupp Street Both Linden Street
Scott Avenue Both Commercial Avenue
Scott Avenue Both Nissley Street
Scott Avenue Both Swatara Avenue
Scott Avenue Both West Emaus Street
Scott Avenue Both Witherspoon Avenue
Scott Avenue South Emaus Street
South Union Street North South side of Keystone
Avenue approach to the
bridge
Spring Street Both Grandview Avenue
§ 252-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-15
1:506
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Spring Street [Added
5-4-2015 by Ord.
No. 1315]
Both High Street
Spring Street Both Main Street
Spring Street Both Roosevelt Avenue
Spring Street Both Water Street
Spring Street Both Wharton Avenue
Spring Street South Grandview Avenue
Spring Street South Union Street
Spruce Street Both Columbia Street
Spruce Street Both High Street
Spruce Street Both Main Street
Spruce Street Both Oak Hill Drive
Spruce Street Both Water Street
Spruce Street North Aspen Street
Spruce Street South Emaus Street
State Street Both Catherine Street
State Street Both Union Street
State Street Both Wood Street
Swar Avenue Both Commercial Avenue
Swar Avenue Both Swatara Avenue
Swatara Avenue Both Swar Avenue
Union Street North Witherspoon Avenue
Vine Street Both Water Street
Water Street Both Catherine Street
Water Street Both Hoffer Street
Water Street Both Nissley Street
Water Street Both Pine Street
Water Street Both Race Street
Water Street Both Spring Street
Water Street Both Spruce Street
Water Street Both Union Street
Wharton Avenue Both Catherine Street
Wharton Avenue Both Spring Street
Wharton Avenue Both Union Street
Wilson Street Both Grant Street
§ 252-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-15
1:507
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Wilson Street Both Lawrence Street
Wilson Street Both Union Street
Wilson Street Both Wood Street
Witherspoon Avenue East Union Street
Wood Street Both Pike Street
Wood Street Both Susquehanna Street
Wood Street Both Wilson Street
Wood Street South Emaus Street
Woodland Avenue Both Union Street
Woodland Avenue Both Vine Street
§ 252-16. Yield intersections.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through
streets established by § 252-14 above) are hereby established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position upon the first-named street as to face
traffic approaching the second-named street in the direction or directions
indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon
the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named street so
closely as to constitute a hazard during the time that the driver is moving
across or within such intersection.
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Elm Court [Added
9-8-1987 by Ord. No.
946]
East Oak Hill Drive
Grubb Street North Mill Street
Mansion House Parking
Lot exit
West South Union Street
Oak Hill Drive East Elm Court
§ 252-17. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 252-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-18
1:508
§ 252-18. Vehicle weight limits and truck size limits established.
[Amended 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1343; 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 1353]
A. Vehicle weight limits established. It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive any commercial vehicle or other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer
combination, having a gross weight in excess of that herein respectively
prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges, or portions thereof,
described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on
that street:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Max. Gross
Weight Location
Adelia Street Heavier than 3/
4-ton pickup
North of East Main Street
East Roosevelt
Avenue
Heavier than
1-ton truck
From Vine Street to North
Union Street
Frey Avenue Heavier than 3/
4-ton pickup
Entire length
Maple Road Heavier than 3/
4-ton pickup
East of Vine Street
Nissley Street 7,000 pounds From Water Street to Main
Street
Oak Hill Drive Heavier than 3/
4-ton pickup
From North Union Street to
Vine Street
Ridge Avenue Heavier than 3/
4-ton pickup
From Spruce Street to Vine
Street
B. Truck length limits established. It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive any truck, as defined in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 102, having a total length in excess of that herein
respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges, or portions
thereof, described below, except for the purpose of making local
deliveries on that street:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Max. Truck Length Location
Wharton Avenue Length not to exceed
40 feet
From North Union
Street to Olmsted
Drive
West Roosevelt
Avenue
Length not to exceed
40 feet
From North Union
Street to North
Catherine Street
Grandview Avenue Length not to exceed
40 feet
From North Union
Street to North
Catherine Street
Spring Street Length not to exceed
40 feet
From West Main Street
to Grandview Avenue
§ 252-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-18
1:509

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 252-19. General parking prohibitions.
A. No person shall park any vehicle at any time where no-parking signs
have been erected and/or where the curbs have been painted yellow to
indicate no parking.
B. No person shall park a vehicle, or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended, in any of the following places:
(1) Upon any bridge or in front of any theater or theater exit.
(2) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any stop sign.
(3) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(4) On a crosswalk or within 20 feet of a crosswalk.
(5) In front of a driveway (private or public) or garage.
(a) This includes the drive approach apron or the alley radius. The
phrase "in front of" includes all that area wherein the presence
of a parked vehicle would obstruct free, safe exit from or
entrance to such driveway. It is found as a fact that a
completely unobstructed and safe exit from the entrance to
such driveway in the light of the driveway and street or alley
widths and conditions associated therewith, including turning
and sight hazards, throughout the Borough of Middletown
requires that there be no parking within three feet on both
sides thereof.
(b) The parking in front of a driveway thus prohibited includes an
area, along the curb or cartway of the street or alley with
which it connects, within three feet on both sides of the
driveway. With respect to such three-foot sections,
enforcement may be implemented in the light of practicalities
reflected in the following severable considerations. The
resident owner (or tenant in possession with the owner's
permission) may paint the curb yellow in accordance with
precise measurement of said three-foot section and
specifications provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. Said
owner, or tenant, may notify the police of violations; and in the
absence of such notice, the police shall have no duty of
surveillance, investigation or ticketing. The only defense
before the District Justice of one who parks a vehicle so that it
projects within or occupies such a three-foot section shall be
that such person had the consent of said owner or tenant.
(6) Within an intersection or less than 25 feet from an intersection.
(7) On a sidewalk.
§ 252-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-19
1:511
§ 252-20. Parking of vehicles for repair purposes.
No vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle Code,159 shall be permitted by an
owner, operator or party in possession thereof to stand or be parked upon
any public street of the Borough of Middletown for the purpose of repair or
while undergoing work thereon in the situations specified in the following
Subsection A, and the penalty for violation shall be as set forth in
Subsection B hereof:
§ 252-21. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
(8) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of any street. [Added 8-1-1988 by Ord. No. 975]
(9) Against the flow of traffic. [Added 8-1-1988 by Ord. No. 975]
(10) More than 12 inches from the curb. [Added 8-1-1988 by Ord. No.
975]
A. Situations covered by this section are as follows:
(1) Parking or standing of a vehicle while undergoing work or repairs
involving jacking or blocking, pulling out of transmission or any
other work or repairs, whereby the vehicle is immobilized for more
than 24 hours.
(2) Parking or standing of a vehicle for or during work (or repairing)
involving the vehicle accompanied by or consisting of idling of
motor excessively or excessive emission of fumes, so as to annoy,
disturb or endanger unnecessarily the comfort, peace or repose of
reasonable persons with normal sensitivities.
(3) Parking or standing of a vehicle for or during the draining or
spilling of antifreeze, oil, grease or any substance, including
chemical substances of any kind, deleterious to street paving or to
public health, onto street paving, or the introduction or action
tending to introduction of any such substance or any contaminant
into the Borough storm drainage system.
B. Penalties for violations. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof by a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay the costs in every case and a fine in the
amount of $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense and $100
for the third offense or for any subsequent offense; and upon refusal to
pay such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the Dauphin
County Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days.
159. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 252-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-21
1:512
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 252-22. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or
shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Street Side Location
Market Street North and south
side of center
From South Catherine Street to
Wood Street
South Catherine
Street
East From Wilson Street to Ann Street
§ 252-23. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described below:
Name of Street Side Location
Cedar Avenue Both From Girard Avenue to Locust Avenue
Clearfield Avenue
[Added 7-6-1987
by Ord. No. 945]
West From Columbia Street to a point
approximately 400 feet south thereof
Cortland Avenue Both From Keller Avenue to Main Street
East Main Street
[Added 12-6-1999
by Ord. No. 1123]
— Within the northeast quadrant at the
intersection of Union Street and East
Main Street
East Main Street South From Hoffer Street to a point 127 feet
west thereof (no parking or standing
whether attended or unattended)
Fisher Avenue Both From Wilson Street to Ann Street
Frey Square Both Entire square excluding only the
eastern side of Spruce Street where it
widens in the vicinity of Conewago
Street to form Frey Square
Girard Avenue Both From Union Street to Spring Street
Hoffman Avenue Both From Pine Street to Vine Street
Houser Alley Both From Wilson Street to Ann Street
Keller Avenue Both From Pine Street to Adelia Street
Keystone Avenue North From South Union Street to Wood
Street
§ 252-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-23
1:513
Name of Street Side Location
Keystone Avenue South From Union Street to Swatara Street
Lawrence Street East/West At dead end at northern end thereof
extending from barricade at railroad
right-of-way southwardly a distance of
44 feet
Locust Avenue Both From Union Street to Spring Street
Mattis Avenue
[Added 7-6-1998
by Ord. No. 1107]
Both From Nissley Street to Spring Street
Mill Street North Within 20 feet of the crosswalk east of
entrance to Interfaith Apartments, at
point in line with terminus of concrete
walk extending from Mill Street along
southern side of Interfaith Apartments
Mill Street North From a point opposite Moose Parking
Lot where widening of cartway to 35
feet eastwardly, in conjunction with
construction of Interfaith Apartments,
where Mill Street begins to narrow,
thence eastwardly to southwest corner
of intersection of Mill Street with
Water Department Driveway
Mill Street South From Grubb Street Bridge to a point
50 feet west thereof
Mill Street South From southeast corner of Moose
Parking Lot passing historic Frey Mill
(now apartment building) to a point
approximately 80 feet east of said old
mill apartment building at southeast
corner of its parking lot
Nissley Street Both From Union Street to Catherine Street
Nissley Street
[Added 4-4-1988
by Ord. No. 968]
East From Detweiler Avenue to a point 10
feet north thereof
Nissley Street
[Added 4-4-1988
by Ord. No. 968]
East From Detweiler Avenue to a point 20
feet south thereof
Nissley Street North From a point 280 feet west of
Catherine Avenue to a point 67 feet
west thereof
Nissley Street South/West From Catherine Street to Water Street
Nissley Street West From Main Street to Water Street
§ 252-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-23
1:514
Name of Street Side Location
North Catherine
Street [Repealed
1-2-1990 by Ord.
No. 994]
Poplar Street
[Added 8-1-1988
by Ord. No. 975]
East 25 feet north and south of the
entrance/exit to the Mini-Mall
Race Street West From East Water Street to East Main
Street
Russell Avenue Both From Lawrence Street to South Union
Street
South Catherine
Street
East From Fox's parking lot to West Emaus
Street
South Union Street
[Amended
7-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 1179]
Both 40 feet north and south of the
crosswalk at the Middletown
Municipal Swimming Pool
South Union Street East From Ann Street to Swatara Street
Swar Avenue Both From Susquehanna Street to Emaus
Street
Union Street
[Added 12-6-1999
by Ord. No. 1123]
— Within the northeast quadrant at the
intersection of Union Street and East
Main Street
Union Street
[Added 3-4-1991
by Ord. No. 1013;
amended
12-6-1999 by Ord.
No. 1123]
— Within the northwest quadrant at the
intersection of Union Street and West
Main Street
Vine Street East From East Main Street to High Street
Water Street North From Nissley Street to a point 35 feet
east thereof (no parking or standing
whether attended or unattended)
Water Street South From Nissley Street to a point 45 feet
east thereof (no parking or standing
whether attended or unattended)
West Main Street
[Added 2-1-1988
by Ord. No. 964]
South From a point 132 feet west of Nissley
Street to the plaza entrance
§ 252-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-23
1:515
Name of Street Side Location
West Main Street
[Added 3-4-1991
by Ord. No. 1013;
amended
12-6-1999 by Ord.
No. 1123]
— Within the northwest quadrant at the
intersection of Union Street and West
Main Street
Wilson Street North From South Union Street to Grant
Street
Wilson Street Bridge
[Added 10-7-1991
by Ord. No. 1024]
— Its approach from the intersection of
Grant Street and Ann Street to the
Borough line
Witherspoon Avenue South From Grant Street to Swar Avenue
Witherspoon Avenue
[Added 8-7-2000
by Ord. No. 1130]
South From Lincoln Street east a distance of
116 feet, plus or minus
Wood Street [Added
5-5-2014 by Ord.
No. 1304]
West From Nissley Street to Emaus Street
§ 252-23.1. Parking of certain vehicles prohibited. [Added 1-2-1996
by Ord. No. 1079]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or company to
park or cause to be parked any commercial vehicle of Class 11 or above,
as defined in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1916, which includes trucks, truck tractors,
combinations, semitrailers and stinger steered auto carriers, upon any
street or part thereof described below: [Amended 6-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 1253]
Name of
Street Side Location
Grandview
Avenue
Both North Catherine Street to North Union
Street
North
Catherine
Street
Both Wharton Avenue to Grandview Avenue
North Spring
Street
Both Main Street (SR 230) to Grandview
Avenue
West Roosevelt
Avenue
Both North Catherine Street to North Union
Street
Wharton
Avenue
Both Penn State University to North Union
Street
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or company to
park or cause to be parked any of the following vehicles upon any street
§ 252-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-23.1
1:516
or part thereof within the Borough unless specifically authorized by
the Borough or this Code to park temporarily for a particular purpose:
[Added 8-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1364]
(1) Any vehicle with three or more axles, including, but not limited to,
single unit trucks, truck tractors, truck tractors with semitrailer
combinations and semitrailers;
(2) Travel trailers and recreational vehicles (RVs) of Class 1, 2 or 3 as
defined in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1913;
(3) Boats of Class 2 or 3 that are 26 feet or more in length, as classified
by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, and boats wider
than 10 feet; and
(4) Utility trailers that are more than 20 feet in length or more than 10
feet wide.
C. The following vehicles are exempt from the prohibitions contained in
Subsections A and B of this section: [Amended 8-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 1364]160
(1) Trucks in the process of making local deliveries or engaging in
moving activities at a property adjacent to the roadway.
(2) Utility and construction companies lawfully engaged in work on or
about the roadway or property adjacent to the roadway.
(3) Travel trailers and recreational vehicles parked for the purposes of
loading or unloading for a maximum seventy-two-hour period in a
seven-day cycle.
D. Definitions. The following terms as used in this section shall have the
respective meanings prescribed herein: [Added 8-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 1364]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE and TRAVEL TRAILER — Shall be defined as
a structure or trailer designed or adapted for and used for recreational
or lodging purposes, including but not limited to campers, pop-up
campers and motor homes.
SEMITRAILER — Shall be defined as a trailer so constructed that some
part of its weight rests upon or is carried by a tractor-trailer or other
towing vehicle.
TRAILER — Shall be defined as a vehicle designed for towing in
combination with a motor vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR — Shall be defined as a motor vehicle designed and
used primarily for drawing other vehicles or trailers.
160. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B as Subsection C.
§ 252-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-24
1:517
§ 252-24. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below of any day,
except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below:
Name of Street Side
Hours/
Days Location
East Emaus
Street [Added
12-6-1999 by
Ord. No. 1124;
repealed
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1335]
North Catherine
Street [Added
1-2-1990 by
Ord. No. 994;
repealed
6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 1253]
North Catherine
Street [Added
1-2-1990 by
Ord. No. 994;
repealed
6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 1253]
North Catherine
Street [Added
1-2-1990 by
Ord. No. 994;
repealed
6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 1253]
Race Street
[Amended
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1335]
East School days
from 7:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From bus entrance at Fink
School North to Columbia Street
stop sign
South Wood
Street, 300
Block [Added
12-6-1993 by
Ord. No. 1052;
repealed
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1335]
§ 252-24 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-25
1:518
§ 252-25. Parking time limited. [Amended 12-4-1989 by Ord. No.
943; 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1021; 5-2-1994 by Ord. No. 1056;
3-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1067; 11-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1091; 3-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 1097; 4-3-2000 by Ord. No. 1127; 8-7-2000 by Ord. No.
1131; 10-1-2001 by Ord. No. 1140; 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 1151;
9-18-2007 by Ord. No. 1225; 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 1235; 6-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 1253; 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1335]
A. Cross reference § 252-26.2.
B. No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below, between the
hours specified, for longer than the time indicated below:
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Brown
Street
South Limited to 15
minutes at all times
1 parking space,
consisting of
approximately 20 feet in
length, in front of 100
South Union Street,
beginning approximately
30 feet from the
intersection of Brown
Street and South Union
Street
Brown
Street
South Limited to 2 hours
during the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From Pine Street to
Peony Avenue
East Emaus
Street
South Limited to 15
minutes from 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
From 25 feet east of Aster
Avenue, 2 spaces totaling
approximately 50 feet
Emaus
Street
South Limited to 15
minutes from 8:00
a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
Monday through
Friday
2 parking spaces in
length, consisting of
approximately 45 feet in
total length, in front of 60
West Emaus Street,
beginning approximately
30 feet east of the
intersection of West
Emaus Street and
Catherine Street
Main Street South 2 hours; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through
Saturday
2 car spaces in length in
front of 124 W. Main
Street
§ 252-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-25
1:519
§ 252-26. Special purpose parking zones.
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same
to remain parked in any such zone except as specifically provided for such
zone:
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
South
Union
Street
East Limited to 15
minutes at all times
Approximately 20 feet
totaling 1 parking space
at the northeast corner of
the intersection of Union
Street and Mill Street
Union
Street
Both Except as otherwise
limited herein,
limited to 2 hours
during the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From Spring Street to
Ann Street
Union
Street
West Limited to 30
minutes during the
hours of 11:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m.
2 parking spaces totaling
approximately 44 feet in
length, in front of 23
South Union Street,
beginning approximately
117 feet south of West
Emaus Street
West Water
Street
North Limited to 30
minutes From 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Beginning 30 feet west of
South Union Street, 1
parking space totaling
approximately 22 feet
Woodland
Avenue
Both 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
North Union Street to
dead end
§ 252-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-26
1:520
Name of
Street Side
Authorized Purpose
of Vehicle Location
Adelia Street
[Added
7-5-2016 by
Ord. No.
1324]
East Only vehicles parked
by firefighters when
responding to a call
That area between the
northern edge of the fire
house driveway and the
southern edge of the
entrance to the parking
lot shared by the
Middletown Fire
Department and Dance
Hall opposite Cattell
Street, more specifically
being that area
beginning at a point on
the eastern side of
Adelia Street
approximately 143 feet
north of Pineford Drive,
northward to a point
approximately 260 feet
north of Pineford Drive
Emaus Street
[Amended
5-7-2001 by
Ord. No.
1138;
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No.
1335]
North Street sweeping on
Fridays from 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
From Wood Street to
Pine Street
Emaus Street
[Amended
5-7-2001 by
Ord. No.
1138]
South Street sweeping on
Fridays from 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
From Wood Street to
Pine Street
North
Catherine
Street
[Amended
3-1-2004 by
Ord. No.
1174,
approved
3-1-2004]
East Library parking, from
9:30 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
Monday through
Friday and from 9:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Saturday, for 2 hours
only
In front of public library
south toward West
Emaus Street to the
yellow line
§ 252-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-26
1:521
Name of
Street Side
Authorized Purpose
of Vehicle Location
South
Catherine
Street [Added
4-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 984;
repealed
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No.
1335]
Union Street
[Amended
5-7-2001 by
Ord. No.
1138]
East Street sweeping on
Fridays from 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
From Ann Street to
Spring Street
Union Street
[Amended
5-7-2001 by
Ord. No.
1138;
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No.
1335]
West Street sweeping on
Fridays from 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
From Ann Street to
Spring Street
Union Street
[Repealed
12-8-2003 by
Ord. No.
1168,
approved
12-8-2003]
§ 252-26.1. Grandview Parking District. [Added 6-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 1253]
A. The purpose of this section is to distribute limited on-street parking
resources between the competing needs of different populations,
including students, faculty, and staff of Penn State University
Harrisburg, the residents and visitors of the Grandview Neighborhood,
and others. The goal is to develop a fair and legally enforceable system.
B. The Grandview Parking District shall consist of the following streets
and street segments:
§ 252-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-26.1
1:522
Street Side Location
Grandview
Avenue
South North Catherine Street to North Union
Street
North Catherine
Street
East Grandview Avenue to Wharton Avenue
North Spring
Street
Both From a point two parking spaces south
of Wharton Avenue to Grandview Avenue
West Roosevelt
Avenue
Both North Catherine Street to North Union
Street
Wharton Avenue North North Catherine Street to North Union
Street
Wharton Avenue South North Spring Street to North Union
Street
C. Limited use parking. Parking within the Grandview Parking District
shall be limited to those vehicles properly displaying an official Borough
of Middletown placard. Vehicles with no placard shall be in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
D. Distribution of placards.
(1) Each of the owners of the following property, within the Borough's
corporate limits and contiguous to the Grandview Parking District,
shall receive three placards. Residents wishing to obtain such
placards shall make application to the Borough Manager. Placards
shall allow unrestricted parking use within the Grandview Parking
District by property owners, tenants, or guests. No fee be will
charged for applications granted.
(a) Grandview Avenue: 28, 32, 38, 44, 104, 118, 124.
(b) North Spring Street: 737, 803, 916, 920.
(c) North Union Street: 729, 735, 809, 817, 915.
(d) West Roosevelt Avenue: 26, 27, 31, 32, 35, 39, 40, 42, 45, 46,
49, 50, 53, 54, 57, 60, 101, 108, 109, 112, 115; 116, 119, 120,
124, 125.
(e) Wharton Avenue: 11, 27, 28, 34, 37, 38, 40, 43, 46, 47, 51, 53,
54, 111, 117, 123, 127.
(2) A limited number of placards shall be made available to all
residents of the Borough of Middletown. Residents that wish to
obtain a placard must make application to the Borough Manager,
who is authorized to issue such placards, and must provide proof of
residency and an explanation of need to park in the Grandview
Parking District. No fee will be charged for applications granted.
§ 252-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-26.1
1:523
§ 252-26.2. Downtown Parking District. [Added 1-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 1335]
(3) Nonresidents and those without placards may park on those streets
and street segments detailed herein within the Grandview Parking
District:
Street Side Location
Grandview
Avenue
North North Catherine Street to North Union
Street
North
Catherine
Street
West Grandview Avenue to Wharton Avenue
Wharton
Avenue
North Penn State University to North
Catherine Street
Wharton
Avenue
South Penn State University to North Spring
Street
E. Placards shall be clearly displayed on the dashboard, placed between
the steering wheel and front windshield, of each vehicle parked on the
street. Failure to properly display a placard may result in citation for
illegal parking. Boat trailers, recreation vehicles, and other
miscellaneous vehicles require a placard in order to be parked on the
street.
F. Placards are transferable between vehicles and are the responsibility of
the aforementioned recipient. Recipients may temporarily assign their
placards to visitors or service vehicles that require on-street parking. A
fee may be charged for lost or damaged placards.
A. The purpose of this section is to distribute limited on-street parking
resources between the competing needs of the residents, businesses
and visitors of the Borough, and others. The goal is to develop a fair and
legally enforceable system.
B. The Downtown Parking District shall consist of the following streets and
street segments:
Street Side Location
Brown
Street
North From Pine Street to Union Street
Brown
Street
South Beginning approximately 52 feet east of the
intersection of Brown Street and South Union
Street to Pine Street
Mill Street Both From Union Street to Poplar Street
Poplar
Street
Both From Brown Street to Mill Street
§ 252-26.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-26.2
1:524
§ 252-27. Loading zones.
C. Limited use parking. Parking within the Downtown Parking District is
limited to those vehicles, including boat trailers, recreation vehicles,
and other miscellaneous vehicles, properly displaying an official
Borough of Middletown parking placard and, to any vehicle not
displaying a parking placard, two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. "Proper displaying" meaning the parking placard shall be
clearly displayed on the dashboard, placed between the steering wheel
and front windshield. Failure to properly display a parking placard may
result in citation for illegal parking.
D. Distribution of parking placards. Residents and property owners
wishing to obtain such placards shall make application to the Borough
Manager who is authorized to issue such placards. Applications for
parking placards shall include proof of residency and an explanation of
the need to park in the Downtown Parking District. A limited number of
parking placards shall be made available and shall allow unrestricted
parking use within the Downtown Parking District by property owners,
tenants, or guests. No fee will be charged for applications granted.
E. Use of and liability for parking placards. Parking placards are
transferable between vehicles and are the responsibility of the
aforementioned applicant. Applicants who have received a parking
placard or placards may temporarily assign their parking placard(s) to a
visitor or service vehicle that require on-street parking in excess of two
hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. A fee may be
charged for lost or damaged placards.
A. The Borough of Middletown is hereby authorized to post appropriate
loading zone signs in front of businesses and retail establishments in
said Borough providing for limited parking for the purpose of loading
and unloading merchandise to said businesses and retail
establishments. General parking shall be permitted in these loading
areas at all times not included in the times posted.
B. Fifteen-minute loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in excess
of 15 minutes at a time nor for any purpose other than loading or
unloading merchandise from or to the businesses named below, during
the times specified and posted on appropriate loading zone signs, in the
following zones where (subject to other restrictions on parking, such as
those incident to nearness to intersections, crosswalks, stop signs,
traffic signals or driveways) at all other times not included in the times
posted, general parking shall be permitted:161
161. Editor's Note: Former § 252-27.1, No-standing zones, added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 1019,
and former § 252-27.2, Limited standing zones, added 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 1071, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1335.
§ 252-26.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-27
1:525
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Lawrence Street
[Added 12-2-2002
by Ord. No. 1155;
repealed
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1335]
South Union Street
[Added 4-3-1989
by Ord. No. 984;
amended
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1335]
East 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Tuesdays and
Fridays
One parking space,
beginning approximately
70 feet from the
intersection of South
Union Street and Ann
Street and continuing
Approximately 20 feet
north
South Wood Street
[Added 3-3-2003
by Ord. No. 1156;
repealed
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1335]
West Emaus Street
[Amended
10-1-2001 by
Ord. No. 1140;
repealed
1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 1335]
Wilson Street
[Repealed
4-3-1989 by Ord.
No. 984]
§ 252-27 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-27
1:526
ARTICLE IV
Handicapped Parking
§ 252-28. Designation of spaces.
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped are hereby recognized and
established as special purpose parking spaces, as follows:
A. Existing spaces on present parking lots. The following spaces reserved
exclusively for parking by the physically handicapped are identified by
signs, bearing the internationally recognized wheelchair emblem, that
have been inspected and approved by the Chief of Police as readily
visible to and understandable by an ordinarily observant driver and
their validity and adequacy is hereby confirmed.
(1) Six spaces northward from entrance to Giant Store.
(2) Four spaces at Frey Village at its four entrances (main, personal
care, intermediate care and skilled nursing care).
(3) Two spaces northwestwardly from entrance to Interfaith
Apartments.
(4) Two spaces at west end of entrance to Borough Parking Lot.
(5) One space adjacent to front entrance to Hardee's.
(6) One space immediately north of Middletown Swim Club Building
entrance.
(7) Two spaces at the northwest corner in the parking lot of the
Middletown Municipal Swimming Pool. [Added 8-7-1989 by Ord.
No. 988]
B. Other parking spaces exclusively for the physically handicapped
provided at any time pursuant to building code provisions at any time
enacted. [Amended 7-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1194, approved
7-11-2005]
C. On all parking lots, including those antedating the requirements of
Subsection B emerging in the building code of Middletown, now or
hereafter providing 25 or more parking spaces, for each 25 such
spaces, one space shall be reserved exclusively for parking by the
physically handicapped, and this requirement is comparable to and
extended by analogy to the building code requirement (but postponing
an initial requirement of one such space where total parking in lot is up
to 25 spaces, pending further study). This Subsection C may be
enforced by the same penalties and remedies (hereby made applicable
and incorporated herein by reference) applicable to the building code
requirement concerning the required number of such spaces in relation
to total parking in lot. As under that same building code section, each
such reserved space shall be not less than 12 feet wide. As there, each
such parking space shall be identified by above-grade signs as reserved
§ 252-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-28
1:527
§ 252-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this Article IV shall, upon
conviction thereof by a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay costs in
every case and a fine in the amount of $15 and, upon refusal to pay such
for physically handicapped persons. These signs, complying, as the
Chief of Police may require, with the reserved parking sign R7-8
detailed in Pennsylvania Code § 211.241,162 will be a minimum of 12
inches by 12 inches, with green legend and border on white background
and with white symbol on blue background, the symbol being the
internationally recognized wheelchair symbol. Variations in signs, while
grounds for the Chief of Police to order replacement under the public
policy declared in 67 Pa. Code § 211.8,163 shall not inure as a defense to
the benefit of persons parking in any such space otherwise than for the
special purpose of parking for the physically handicapped.
(1) For cause shown, the Code Enforcement Officer as Building Official
may grant a variance or modify the requirements of Subsection C in
the spirit of the provisions under Section 315 of the BOCA Building
Code for modifications, upon application of the owner or the
owner's representative.
(2) The Chief of Police may allow 180 days from the effective date
hereof for compliance with Subsection C for identification of the
space or spaces advantageous for use of the physically
handicapped, for provision of the required twelve-foot width and
for installation of the above-grade signs, to avoid unnecessary
hardship with respect to existing facilities.
(3) The paving of such parking spaces shall be painted blue, covering
the entire area of each such space, and on that blue ground shall be
superimposed a white decal, approximately 48 by 36 inches in an
overall size, displaying the internationally recognized wheelchair
emblem. The purpose of this is to amplify notice (of which the
above-grade signs are deemed quite sufficient) that these are
special purpose parking spaces for the physically handicapped only.
No variation in and no deterioration in or absence of such decal or
painting shall inure as a defense to the benefit of persons parking
in any such space otherwise than for the special purpose of parking
for the physically handicapped. The Borough Manager is
authorized, but not required, to initiate a cooperative program for
such pavement marking and for future maintenance thereof.
D. Any person parking or causing to be parked a nonhandicapped licensed
vehicle in any handicapped parking zone located in the Borough shall
be ticketed and assessed a fine in accordance with § 252-29 of the
Middletown Borough Code. [Added 3-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1068]
162. Editor's Note: This section has since been reserved; see now 67 Pa. Code § 212.115.
163. Editor's Note: This section has since been reserved; see now 67 Pa. Code § 212.101.
§ 252-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-29
1:528
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in Dauphin County Jail for a period
not exceeding 10 days.
§ 252-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-29
1:529

ARTICLE V
Parking Lots
§ 252-30. Community Building parking lots. [Amended 8-5-2013 by
Ord. No. 1293]
§ 252-31. Borough Park and Ride Lot restrictions.
The Park and Ride Lot of the Borough of Middletown is located on the south
side of Mill Street and along the Philadelphia-Harrisburg rail line of Amtrak.
This Borough Parking Lot, with its western and eastern entrances and exits
on Mill Street and semicircular driveway, plus two traffic aisles paralleling
Mill Street, includes 71 parking spaces.
A. Special purpose parking spaces. The following are established as
special purpose parking spaces, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle to remain parked in any such
space, except as specifically provided for that space, on the property of
the Borough of Middletown bounded by Scott Avenue, Brown Street
and Catherine Street and located south of the Community Building.
These spaces have or shall have appropriate signs or markings readily
visible to an ordinarily observant driver, and generally represent
continuation of existing restrictions for the purpose of making
applicable the tow-away and enforcement and penalty provisions of
Article VII of this chapter: [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1335]
(1) On the first row of parking spaces south of the Community
Building, the first two spaces near Catherine Street are for the
physically handicapped as provided in Article IV.
B. The parking lot on the property of the Borough of Middletown located
on the west side of South Catherine Street, immediately north of the
Brown Avenue right-of-way shall be for Borough employees and permit
holders as established in § 252-30A(4) between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.164
C. Entrances and exits.
(1) Entrance from Catherine Street to said Community Building
parking lot is permitted only near Brown Street, at the southern
curb cut and traffic lane. The other or northern Catherine Street
curb cut and traffic lane near the Community Building may be used
only as an exit from said parking lot to Catherine Street. Violators
of this subsection, which has been found essential to a traffic flow
promoting safety, are likewise subject to the provisions of § 252-43
of this chapter and the penalties therein prescribed.
(2) At the curb cut on Brown Street, vehicles may enter and exit said
parking lot.
164. Editor's Note: This subsection refers to Subsection A(4) as it previously existed prior to
the amendment made by Ord. No. 1335, adopted 1-17-2017.
§ 252-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-31
1:531
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to allow a
vehicle to remain parked, except in accordance with the on-site lines,
markings, signs and directions. For example, a vehicle may be parked
only within one space designated by lines on the bituminous paving as a
space for the parking of one vehicle.
B. The flow and pattern of traffic shall be in accordance with directions,
arrows and signs, and vehicular movement on the semicircular
driveway or on the two traffic aisles (paralleling Mill Street) in any
other manner of direction shall be unlawful.
C. Rules and regulations may be promulgated by resolutions of Borough
Council, in the light of experience, to implement, channel and confine
the uses of the lot in accordance with its design and purposes as well as
to facilitate maintenance, surveillance and related public purposes.
Overnight camping, for example, should thereby be and is hereby
prohibited as grossly beyond the purview of a Park and Ride Lot. The
same is true of the parking of tractor-trailers (or tractors or trailers)
overnight or at any time. Likewise, overnight parking is so inconsistent
with the normal operations of a commuter Park and Ride Lot that it is
prohibited except to the extent that such rules and regulations may
specifically permit as reasonable in certain instances thereof.
§ 252-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-31
1:532
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 252-32. Declaration of emergency.
§ 252-33. Driving restrictions.
During such snow emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any kind of motor vehicle on any street unless such vehicle shall be
equipped with adequate equipment to provide sufficient traction to keep
such vehicle in motion so that other traffic will not be blocked or seriously
impeded. It shall be a violation thereof also for the operator of a
noncommercial passenger vehicle which stalls on any street during such
emergency, if such stalling shall have been by reason of the failure to have
such vehicle equipped with skid chains or with snow tires having antiskid
patterns impressed or cut into the treaded surfaces to form bars, buttons or
blocks especially designed to give effective traction on snow.
§ 252-34. Snow emergency streets designated; no parking.
[Amended 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1059, approved 11-7-1994;
6-4-2019 by Ord. No. 1363]
During such emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to
permit to remain parked, on any street named below any type of motor
vehicle, boat, boat trailer, camper, recreational vehicles or any trailer used
for the purpose of hauling motor vehicles or other items, with respect to the
north side of east-west streets or with respect to the east side of north-south
streets, unless otherwise indicated. However, upon complete removal of all
snow from the total parking area, on such side of the street in front of any
property, parking will at once become again permissible, so long as there
is no interference with the snow removal program of the Borough and no
interference with traffic during the remainder of such emergency.
Name of
Street Side Location
Adelia Street East From Emaus Street to East Main Street
Ann Street North From Swatara Creek west to Grant Street
A. A declaration of snow emergency may be made by the Mayor, in his
discretion, in order to facilitate the movement of traffic on all streets
and to combat the hazards or imminent hazards of excessive snow and
ice on streets named as snow emergency routes in § 252-34 hereof.
Such declaration shall remain in effect until officially terminated by the
Mayor when the facts warrant.
B. Information as to any such snow emergency and declaration thereof by
the Mayor or imminent anticipation thereof may be disseminated by the
Mayor through available media of communication, including radio or
television.
§ 252-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-34
1:533
Name of
Street Side Location
Emaus Street North From Adelia Street west to Wood Street
Grant Street East From Ann Street to Wilson Street
Main Street Both From Swatara Creek to Apple Avenue
Roosevelt
Street
North From Vine Street west to Union Street
Union Street Both From Ann Street to Park Circle Road
Union Street East From Ann Street to its southern limits
Vine Street East From Water Street to Aspen Street
§ 252-34.1. Dumpsters on snow emergency routes; exemptions.
[Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1062, approved 11-7-1994]
It shall be unlawful for any dumpster to be placed on a designated snow
emergency route at any time from December 1 of any year through March
31 of the following year, except through the acquisition of a special
exemption granted by Middletown Borough Council, and then only for the
specified period of time that is approved by Middletown Borough Council.
Violators will be prosecuted in accordance with § 235-27 of Article VI.
§ 252-34.2. Placement of objects to reserve parking spaces. [Added
11-1-1994 by Ord. No. 1063, approved 11-7-1994]
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person from December 1 of any
year and continuing until March 31 of the following year to place or cause to
be placed any item whatsoever for the purpose of reserving parking spaces
on any street in the Borough during any periods of precipitation, whether
or not a snow emergency has been declared.
§ 252-35. Map of streets affected; posting of signs.
The Borough Manager shall cause to be prepared an official map, available
at the Borough office, designating such snow routes and clarifying the
side of each such street on which parking is prohibited, official copies of
such map to be admissible in evidence. On such snow routes, around the
utility poles, the Mayor and Chief of Police, through Borough personnel, are
authorized to place signs reading SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE and may
add thereto reference to this article.
§ 252-34 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-35
1:534
ARTICLE VII
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 252-36. Applicability and scope. [Amended 11-7-1994 by Ord. No.
1060, approved 11-7-1994]
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code165 and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound:
§ 252-37. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 252-36 of this article, provided that no such vehicle
shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions
of this article.
§ 252-37.1. Removal during snow emergency; fines; fees. [Added
11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1061, approved 11-7-1994]
A. Vehicles that are parked overtime on any street in the Borough in
violation of any provision of Article I or Article III of this chapter.
B. Vehicles parked in metered and unmetered parking lots in the Borough
in violation of any provision of Articles IV or V of this chapter.
C. Vehicles parked on snow emergency routes during a snow emergency
declared pursuant to § 252-32.
D. Vehicles not parked parallel to and not parked within one foot of the
curb on any street in the Borough during any period of snowfall.
A. The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked on a snow
emergency route during a snow emergency declared pursuant to
§ 252-32, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 252-36 of this article, provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
B. The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle not parked parallel to and
within one foot of the curb on any street in the Borough during any
period of snowfall, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 252-36 of this article, provided that no
such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence
to the provisions of this article.
165. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 252-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-37.1
1:535
§ 252-38. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by
the Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Council that
it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory
to the Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles
against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage
keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage
shall submit to the Council its schedule of charges for towing and storage
of vehicles under this article, and, when the schedule is approved by the
Council, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage.
No different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval of
the Council, and no different charges shall be demanded of or collected
from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this article
by any approved storage garage. The Council shall delete from its list of
approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in
connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 252-39. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Borough to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 252-40. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charge is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 252-41. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
C. Any vehicle removed and impounded during a snow emergency under
this section shall be removed to and impounded on Borough property.
D. The owner of any vehicle removed and impounded under this section
shall be fined $25, assessed a storage fee of $2 per day, and forced to
pay for the costs of prosecution and towing.
§ 252-37.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-41
1:536
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 252-42. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 252-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-42
1:537

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties; Repealer
§ 252-43. Violations and penalties; tagging for traffic and parking
violations. [Amended 10-4-2004 by Ord. No. 1187, approved
10-4-2004; 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1335]
§ 252-44. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
A. Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter governing motor
vehicles and traffic or parking within the Borough of Middletown shall,
where another penalty is not provided by the Vehicle Code,166 upon
conviction thereof before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $150 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, to be
imprisoned in the Dauphin County Prison for a period not exceeding 10
days.
B. Notice of violation may be left on the windshield of the vehicle by
cardboard tag, and the ticketing fines, payable at the local police office
in the Middletown Borough Hall, shall be $30 if paid within 48 hours
after tagging or $60 if paid before a summons is issued and more than
48 hours after tagging. After a summons is issued, the initial provisions
of this section on penalties shall govern.
A. All previous ordinances of the Borough of Middletown pertaining to the
regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
166. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 252-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-44
1:539

ARTICLE IX
Unreserved Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 1354]
§ 252-45. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this article to have the following meanings:
APPLICANT — A property owner (or the parent or guardian of the resident)
who files an application for the installation of an unreserved handicapped
parking space.
BLOCK — The section of a Borough street identified by the hundreds, for
example 0-99, 100-199, 200-299.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
RESIDENT — One who occupies real estate within a block of a Borough
street and such real estate is used as his/her principal residence.
UNRESERVED HP SPACE — A parking space dedicated for use by
handicapped persons or disabled veterans utilizing vehicles lawfully
bearing handicapped or disabled veteran registration plates or permanent
placards.
§ 252-46. Application process.
A. The application for the installation of an unreserved HP space shall be
made available to any resident who is an owner of property in the
Borough. Application fees shall be set by Borough resolution.
B. Application. The application will be designed and developed by the
Borough, but shall require, at a minimum, the identity of the applicant,
the address of the applicant, the type of disability per the eligibility
requirements and reasons defined by the Department, whether
handicapped accessible off-street parking is available immediately
adjacent to or on the applicant's property, the location of the current
unreserved HP spaces on the same block where the applicant resides,
proof of a valid unexpired handicapped or disabled veteran registration
plate or permanent placard issued by the Department, an appropriate
waiver of applicable privacy laws prepared by the Borough Solicitor,
and a signature section. The application shall also contain a clause
informing the applicant that the applicant is required to notify the
Borough immediately if and when the applicant moves from the address
set forth on the application or no longer has a disability or possesses a
valid handicapped registration plate or permanent placard. Upon the
receipt of any application from such handicapped or disabled individual
or such person's parent or guardian, the Borough may collect other
relevant information as the Borough deems necessary to process the
application.
§ 252-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-47
1:541
§ 252-47. Eligibility and determination.
A. In general. After acquiring a handicapped or disabled veteran's
registration plate or permanent placard from the Department, any
Borough property owner may file an application for the creation of an
unreserved HP space in front of the property where the resident
resides. The possession of a handicapped or disabled veteran's
registration plate or permanent placard does not guarantee that the
resident's application for an unreserved HP space will be granted.
(Disabled parking permits and/or temporary placards do not satisfy this
requirement.)
B. Criteria. In order to provide an adequate number of unreserved HP
spaces in a particular block and to preserve adequate parking spaces
for all Borough residents, before the Borough creates an unreserved HP
space, the Borough must determine that the limitations upon the
number and placement of unreserved HP spaces on a particular block
will not be exceeded if the requested unreserved HP space is created,
that the applicant has proven that there is no handicapped accessible
off-street parking available to the applicant that the applicant should
reasonably be able to use given applicant's disability, that the applicant
possesses a handicapped or disabled veteran's registration plate or
permanent placard, and there is sufficient length of on-street parking
available inside the frontage boundary of the applicant's property or
written approval to encroach on the frontage of the neighboring
property has been provided.
C. Final determination. After collecting all pertinent information, the
Borough will review and investigate all information related to the
application. The Borough may approve and authorize the creation of the
unreserved HP space and installation signage in accordance with
applicable state laws and regulations, as well as defining the duration of
its validity, if Borough Council determines the applicant has met the
requirements of this article. In the event Borough Council determines
the applicant has not met the requirements of this article, Borough
Council shall deny the application and inform the applicant in writing as
to the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. Borough Council's
decision shall be final.
D. Nonexclusive right. If an unreserved HP space is created under this
article, the unreserved HP space created may be used by any person
parking a vehicle lawfully bearing registration plates or a permanent
placard issued to handicapped persons or disabled veterans. This
article shall not be construed as granting the applicant the exclusive
right to park his/her vehicle in the unreserved HP space created
hereunder.
E. Other parking regulations. Nothing in this article shall exempt
individuals utilizing unreserved HP spaces from other parking
restrictions applicable to the space/block.
§ 252-47 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-48
1:542
§ 252-48. Limitation on number of unreserved handicapped parking
spaces.
Borough Council may not authorize unreserved HP space(s) in excess of the
limitations set forth below:
§ 252-49. Placement of signs.
A. Roadways. The maximum number of unreserved HP spaces is two per
one length of block, whether the street is one-way traffic or two-way
traffic on streets where parking is permitted.
B. Other parking restrictions. Borough Council may consider other
parking restrictions applicable to a particular block and other
information regarding the block including but not limited to the size of
the block, and may further restrict the number of unreserved HP spaces
to maintain an adequate number of unregulated parking spaces, as they
deem appropriate.
C. Existing unreserved HP spaces. Unreserved HP spaces in excess of the
limitations set forth in this section and existing on the effective date of
this ordinance shall be permitted to remain in place, subject to removal
after the annual reporting requirement set forth in § 252-50.
A. Generally. For a single application for an unreserved HP space, sign
placements will be positioned in front of the applicant's property. If the
applicant does not have adequate frontage, the applicant shall be
required to supply written approval to encroach on neighboring
property.
B. Authority to post. The Borough of Middletown Public Works Director
shall direct all postings, sign removals and replacements of unreserved
HP spaces in accordance with Department rules and regulations. The
Public Works Director will report the posting or removal of handicapped
parking signs and all actions taken upon applications for unreserved HP
spaces to the Borough Council at the next scheduled workshop
meeting.
C. Disputes regarding sign placement. The Code Enforcement Office shall
be responsible for investigating Borough and resident complaints
regarding the placement of handicapped parking signs. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall require all complaints be in writing and shall
conduct an investigation of the complaint within 90 calendar days.
Upon conducting an investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
report the complaint, its investigation, and the Code Enforcement
Officer's recommendation to Borough Council. Borough Council shall
resolve all complaints in a manner it deems just and appropriate,
including but not limited to the removal of the unreserved HP space.
The complainant, block residents, applicant and Borough, including the
Code Enforcement Officer, shall be entitled to present evidence to the
Borough Council. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply, but Borough
§ 252-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-49
1:543
§ 252-50. Renewal application and compliance.
§ 252-51. Existing handicapped parking spaces.
Handicapped parking spaces existing in the Borough on the effective date
of this article shall be permitted to remain in place subject to the annual
renewal and reporting requirements set forth herein and shall be added to
the Borough's list of HP spaces.
§ 252-52. False statements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully, with the intent
to deceive, make a false statement to any public official for purposes of
obtaining an unreserved HP space.
§ 252-53. Recordkeeping.
The Borough Manager or his or her designee shall create and maintain a
list of all unreserved HP spaces authorized throughout the Borough and
shall update said list as often as may be necessary to add newly authorized
spaces and to remove ineligible or unauthorized spaces.
Council may limit or prohibit irrelevant, repetitive and/or hearsay
testimony. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inform the complainant,
applicant, and interested parties of Borough Council's action upon the
complaint.
A. Annual renewal and reporting. After approval of the application, the
applicant shall submit an application annually along with a renewal fee
which shall be set by Borough resolution. The renewal application shall
require the applicant to verify the continuance of his/her disability. In
January of each year, the Borough Secretary shall mail (via regular firstclass
mail) each applicant (and applicants under prior rules and
regulations) the renewal application referenced herein. If the applicant
fails to submit the application for renewal by March 15 of that year or
the Borough Council determines the applicant is no longer eligible for
an unreserved HP space, the Borough Council shall inform the Director
of Public Works that the unreserved HP space should be removed. The
Borough Manager shall give written notice of the Borough Council
determination that the applicant is no longer eligible for an unreserved
HP space to the applicant within 30 days of the Borough's receipt of the
renewal application.
B. Registration plates and permanent placards. The applicant shall be
solely responsible for the cost of any and all state-regulated
applications, filings, and documentation required for a handicapped
and/or disabled veteran's registration plate or permanent placard. The
registration plate or permanent placard must be conspicuously
displayed while the vehicle is parked in a public unreserved HP space.
§ 252-49 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-54
1:544
§ 252-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this provision shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution.
Each day during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
This section does not limit or prohibit citation for violations of laws and
regulations enacted by the Department under the Vehicle Code.
§ 252-55. Repealer.
All prior ordinances or parts of ordinances or resolutions or policies that are
inconsistent herewith shall be and the same expressly are repealed.
§ 252-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-55
1:545
Chapter 256
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bills for Borough services — See Ch. 108.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 114.
Wells — See Ch. 257.
§ 252-55 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 252-55
1:546
ARTICLE I
Water Connections
[Adopted 1-7-1957 by Ord. No. 364, approved 1-7-1957]
§ 256-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-9-1963 by Ord. No. 454,
approved 12-9-1963]
The terms defined in this section shall, for all purposes of this article and all
ordinances subsequent hereto which do not specifically repeal this article,
have the meaning herein specified, unless the context clearly otherwise
requires:
ACT — The Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania known as
the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
together with all supplements and amendments thereto.167
APPLICATION FOR SERVICE — An application, in writing on a form to be
provided, to the Borough for water service.
AUTHORITY — The Middletown Borough Authority.
BILL — The amount charged to a consumer for quarterly or monthly service.
In the event of discontinuance of service during a billing period, the
consumer shall be required to pay a proportionate part of the charge for
said period's service.[Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987]
BOARD — The governing body of the Authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
acting through its properly authorized officers, agents or employees, each
acting within the scope of the particular duties assigned to him.
CONSUMER — The person, firm or corporation contracting for a supply
of water to a particular property, who shall only be the owner thereof, as
classified in § 256-10I hereinafter.
CONSUMER DEPOSIT — The amount of money required to be deposited
with the Borough before water service shall be granted the consumer, and
in no event shall it exceed the estimated gross bill for any single billing
period, plus one month, with a minimum amount of $5.
FIRE HYDRANT — A water outlet for public fire protection.
METER RATE — The rate charged per hundred gallons of water.[Amended
8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 1303, approved 8-18-2014]
METER RATE CONSUMER — A consumer who shall have a separate water
meter installed on his premises which shall register the amount of water
consumed therein.
167. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-1
1:547
SERVICE CONNECTION — The connection of the service line to and
including the curb box and cock, which service shall be the property of the
Borough.
SERVICE CONTRACT — The contract entered into between the Borough
and the consumer for water service through the consumer's service
facilities.
USE OF SERVICE — The use of water service by a consumer in accordance
with the class, scope and type of use and the purpose stated in his
application and service contract.
WATER METER — An instrument which measures, in gallons, the amount
of water consumed when placed upon the premises and which shall, at all
times, remain the property of the Borough.
§ 256-2. Application for service.
§ 256-3. Service connections; fee. [Last amended 7-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 1194, approved 7-11-2005]
A. Service connection will be made and water will be furnished upon
written application by the prospective consumer (or his properly
authorized agent), on a blank prepared by the Borough for this purpose,
and after the approval of such application by the Borough. The
application for service shall be general and shall clearly outline the
class, scope and type of use to be made of the service, as well as the
purpose for which it will be used, and each application shall state the
services.
B. The application and these rules and regulations constitute the contract
between the consumer and the Borough, and each consumer, by taking
of water, agrees to be bound thereby.
C. A new application must be made to and approved by the Borough upon
any change in identity of the contracting consumer at a property or in
the service as described in the application, and the Borough may, upon
five days' notice, discontinue the water supply until such new
application has been made and approved.
A. The Borough shall make all connections to its water mains and install
and maintain all service lines from the main to and including the curb
cock and box, which shall be placed from one to two feet inside the
curbline, all of which service lines shall be the property of the Borough,
shall be installed at the property owner's expense and shall be
accessible to the Borough and under Borough control. The cost of
installation from the curb cock and box shall be at the property owner's
expense. No connection to the waterlines of the Borough of Middletown
shall be made unless and until said property owner shall have made
application for said service to the Borough of Middletown and received
a permit therefor and shall have paid to the Borough of Middletown a
tapping or connection fee in an amount as set forth in a fee schedule
§ 256-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-3
1:548
established by a properly adopted resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Middletown.
B. Certain work required for water service shall be performed by a private
contractor, at the determination of the Borough, when conditions
require. Such work may include, but is not limited to, water service
connections under state-owned highways and roads, connections at a
depth greater than eight feet, connections that require bypass pumping
prior to connection, or any other situation where the Borough does not
have adequate manpower, time or equipment to accomplish such work.
C. The property owner shall, at the property owner's expense, dig and fill
the trench and furnish and install the service line from the curb stop to
the premises to be supplied and, in all respects, shall be responsible for
any and all injury or damage in consequence thereof and/or resulting
therefrom.
D. Scheduling shall be coordinated with the Borough before any service is
installed. The property owner shall provide to the Borough the street
and lot number or location where service is desired, the name of the
owner and tenant and the time when the trench will be ready for
making the connection.
E. The service line from the curb to the premises shall be kept in good
condition by the owner under penalty of discontinuance of service by
the Borough.
F. Under no circumstances shall any person not authorized by the
Borough turn the stop cock on or off in any public or private line.
G. Hereafter, in all future installations or reinstallations of service lines,
only one property shall be supplied through one service. When one pipe
supplies more than one metered customer, said customers shall have a
curb stop installed at the expense of the customer to provide for
separate shutoff. Any violation of the rules of the Borough by either the
property owner or his tenant, or any leakage in such joint lines, shall
cause the main stops to be shut off or, where a division of ownership of
such line occurs, the Borough may require a separate service line for
each customer, giving reasonable time for any innocent customer to
make such arrangements before discontinuance of service results.
H. Where capital extensions to the waterlines of the Borough are made
under the authority of this section, said capital extensions shall be
made by the Borough at the cost to the abutting property owner by a
front foot assessment to be established by the Borough Engineer after
the capital extension has been completed. When the Borough Engineer
has certified that the capital extensions have been completed by filing a
copy of said completion certificate with the Borough Secretary, which
certificate shall include all assessable costs and all assessable front
feet, Borough Council shall then determine the amount of assessable
front feet which shall be charged against the abutting property owner,
which sum shall not exceed the actual costs of erecting or extending the
§ 256-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-3
1:549
water mains, including engineering and legal fees, if any, and costs of
printing and advertising, and shall equitably assess the costs against
each and every property abutting the line of improvement, making
allowances for corner lots and lots of irregular shape where the
assessment for the full frontage would be unjust.
I. Any person or organization desiring to connect an extension to any
Borough water main shall submit a detailed plan of the proposed layout
and construction of the water main extension to the Borough Engineer
for approval. Said water main extension plan shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee, the amount of which shall be set forth in a fee
schedule established by a properly adopted resolution of the Council of
the Borough of Middletown.
J. Any person who shall make a connection to the water system of the
Borough of Middletown without having first secured a permit and paid
the connection fee or who shall close said excavation, trench, or ditch
before inspection of said connection shall be punishable as provided in
§ 256-15 of this article, and the connection made may be disconnected
by the proper Borough employee without any notification to the
offending property owner.
K. The property owner shall place a brass lever handle stop and waste
cock in the service pipe within the wall of the building, supplied and so
located as to drain all the pipes of the building as well as the meter, that
is easily accessible to the occupants for their protection, enabling them
to turn off the water supply in case of leaks and to drain the pipes to
prevent freezing.
L. Fire hydrants shall be installed, maintained and owned by the Borough.
M. Where two or more properties are served by one service pipe and are
owned by a single owner, each property shall install its own service pipe
upon any division of property ownership.
N. The Borough reserves the right to meter any fire hydrant or water line
when evidence indicates that water is being taken from the hydrant line
for purposes other than fire fighting or for purposes otherwise
expressly permitted by the Borough.
O. All leaks in service lines from the curb to and in and upon the premises
supplied shall be promptly repaired by the property owner. On failure to
make such repairs with reasonable dispatch, the Borough may turn off
the water, which shall not again be turned on until all proper and
necessary expenses incurred by the Borough in shutting off and turning
on the water are paid in full by the property owner, and proof of repair
is provided to the Borough.
P. The Borough shall in no event be responsible for maintenance of or for
damages done by water escaping from the service pipe or fixture on the
outlet side of the curb cock, and the property owner shall, at all times,
comply with the state and municipal regulations in reference thereto
§ 256-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-3
1:550
§ 256-4. Use of service.
§ 256-5. Meters.
and shall make any changes thereon required on account of change of
grade, relocation of mains or otherwise.
Q. With respect to water service connections and the Plumbing Code, the
code adopted in § 114-1 herein shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
A. The use of water service by a consumer shall be in accordance with the
class, scope and type of use and the purpose stated in his application
and service contract. A consumer shall not use or allow use by others of
water service through his service facilities for others or other purposes
than covered in his contract.
B. The various classes of services and rates are available to a consumer in
accordance with the obvious intent of and statements as to application
made under the different rates in the schedule of rates.168
C. Whenever the consumer desires to have his service contract terminated
or his water service discontinued, he shall notify the Borough to that
effect, in writing. The consumer will be responsible for the payment of
all service rendered by the Borough until such written notice is
received and, in the instance of meter rate service, until a reasonable
time from the receipt of such notice shall have elapsed for the Borough
to take the final reading of the meter or meters or until water service is
actually otherwise discontinued by the Borough.
A. Each metered rate consumer's service shall have a separate meter to
register the amount of water consumed, except as provided in § 256-10J
herein.
B. All industrial service will be supplied at meter rates only.
C. The Borough shall furnish, at the property owner's expense, one meter
for each service line, and the same shall remain the property of the
Borough and shall be accessible to and subject to its control. Said
meters, model and specifications to be approved by the Borough, shall
be supplied at the expense of the consumer, and at a location approved
by the Borough so as to control the entire water supply, and a proper
place and protection therefor shall be provided by the consumer. For all
new installations and reinstallations, shutoff valves shall be installed in
the water supply pipe within three feet upstream and three feet
downstream of the meter at the expense of the customer. [Amended
4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987; 3-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 983, approved 3-13-1989; 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173,
168. Editor's Note: Original Sections 5.01 and 5.02, concerning flat rate service, which followed
this section, were repealed 12-9-1963 by Ord. No. 454, approved 12-9-1963.
§ 256-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-5
1:551
approved 3-1-2004; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 1224, approved
6-4-2007]
D. In any case where it is not convenient to place the meter within the
building as provided in Subsection C, the meter may be placed outside
of the building in a Borough-approved vault provided with a suitable
cover and lock and key. All installation, reinstallation, repair and
replacement expenses and material costs shall be the responsibility of
the property owner, subject to Borough Approval for location and
design. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987;
3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved 3-1-2004]
E. In all cases where steam or hot-water pressure is used, a backflow
prevention valve, of model and specifications to be approved by the
Borough, must be placed, at the expense of the consumer, directly
ahead of the meter, before any outlets are taken off the service pipe, to
prevent injury to the meter. [Amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 1224,
approved 6-4-2007]
F. Meters will be maintained by the Borough as far as ordinary wear and
tear is concerned, but the consumer shall be responsible to the Borough
for any injury to or loss of any meter arising out of or caused by the
consumer's negligence or carelessness or that of his servants,
employees, members of his household or any person upon his premises
under or by his consent or sufferance. The consumer shall permit no
one who is not an agent of the Borough or otherwise lawfully authorized
so to do to remove, inspect or tamper with the Borough's meter or other
property of the Borough on his premises. Meters broken by freezing or
other causes set forth above shall be repaired by the Borough at the
consumer's expense.
G. No one who is not an agent of the Borough or otherwise lawfully
authorized to do so may and it shall be unlawful to tamper willfully and
intentionally with any water meter or with any utility facility of the
Borough of Middletown or with any property of the Borough of
Middletown on the premises of a consumer. This prohibition extends to
but is not limited to nor ejusdem generis with breaking a water meter
seal or connecting ahead of the meter. [Added 5-10-1982 by Ord. No.
818, approved 5-10-1982]
(1) Any person guilty of violating this subsection shall be punishable as
provided in § 256-15 of this chapter. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord.
No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
(2) For a second or any subsequent offense or instance where a
responsible representative of the Borough, such as the
Superintendent of the Water Department or his superior, finds that
a water meter seal has been broken or a connection has been made
ahead of the meter, upon 20 days' written notice (including the
telephone number and address where a named representative, for
this purpose, of the Borough may be contacted if a hearing is
§ 256-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-5
1:552
desired) to the consumer at the current address of that consumer
(appearing on the Borough Water Department records), the
Borough may shut off service. The penalties or sanctions under this
subsection may be pursued cumulatively or independently. Under
this Subsection G(2), the consumer may apply for restoration of
service, provided that the application is accompanied by an
adequate bond (minimum to be determined by the Borough
Manager) to secure compliance with applicable regulations and
ordinances, including this section.
H. The quantity of water recorded by the meter shall be conclusive on both
the consumer and the Borough, except where the meter has been found
to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In either case,
the meter will be promptly repaired by the Borough, and the quantity of
water consumed shall be estimated by the average registration of the
meter on previous corresponding periods. "Previous corresponding
periods" shall mean the same calendar periods in the two years
immediately prior to the disputed period, and, if the consumer has not
been metered for two years, it shall mean the two billing periods
immediately prior to the disputed period.
I. Meter tests.
(1) In case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter,
such meter shall be tested upon request of the consumer. In the
event that the meter so tested is found to have an error in
registration of 4% or more, the bills will be increased or decreased
accordingly as provided by the aforesaid rules.
(2) Each request for the test of a meter for accuracy shall be
accompanied by a deposit, the amount of which shall be set forth in
a fee schedule established by a properly adopted resolution of the
Council of the Borough of Middletown. [Amended 2-16-1981 by
Ord. No. 790, approved 2-16-1981; 3-1-2004 by Ord. No.
1173, approved 3-1-2004]
(3) If the meter so tested shall be found to have an error in registration
of less than 4%, the deposit shall be retained by the Borough as
compensation for such tests; if the error in registration is found to
be 4% or more, then the cost of the test shall be borne by the
Borough, and the amount of the deposit shall be returned to the
consumer.
J. The consumer shall at once notify the Borough of an injury to or any
cessation in registration of the meter as soon as it comes to his
knowledge. The Borough shall not be responsible for refunds or
adjustments for a period in excess of two calendar quarters
immediately preceding the time when a claim is made.
K. Damaged meters. [Added 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved
3-1-2004]
§ 256-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-5
1:553
§ 256-6. Bills and payments.
(1) Any customer whose meter suffers damage or loss arising out of
intentional, negligent, or careless acts or inactions of the customer
or the customer's agents, employees, tenants or any member of the
customer's household shall be responsible for the damage or loss to
the meter and shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee schedule
established by a properly adopted resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Middletown.
(2) Damage or loss shall include theft, freezing, water damage, injury
to the meter, or any other failure.
L. Each meter rate consumer is subject to a minimum charge. [Added
3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved 3-1-2004]
A. Fire protection bills. [Amended 12-9-1963 by Ord. No. 454,
approved 12-9-1963]
(1) Bills for private fire protection are due and payable quarterly at the
Middletown Borough Office on the 10th of the month following the
date of billing.
(2) Bills for public fire protection are due and payable monthly at the
Middletown Borough Office on the 10th of the month following the
date of billing.
B. Charges for building and construction service are due and payable upon
presentation.
C. (Reserved)169
D. (Reserved)170
E. Bills for services, other than for water supply services, are due and
payable upon presentation.
F. All bills will be made out in the name of the owner or owners of the
premises, who will be held responsible for their payment. [Amended
4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
G. A penalty of 10% will be added to all bills for water service, except bills
covering service rendered to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
department or institution thereof or to municipalities or school
districts, if not paid by the due date. In case of bills rendered to the
commonwealth or any department or institution thereof or to
municipalities or school districts, a period of 30 days shall be allowed
during which bills are payable without penalty. Consumers whose bills
169. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding quarterly billing for water consumption,
was repealed 3-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1080. See now § 256-12.
170. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding quarterly billing for water consumption,
was repealed 3-4-1996 by Ord. No. 1080. See now § 256-12.
§ 256-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-6
1:554
§ 256-7. Deposits.
in excess of $50 are arrears 30 days or more shall be notified by mail,
and, if payment is not made as prescribed by the Council, the service
shall be terminated. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved
4-6-1987; 7-1-1996 by Ord. No. 1085, approved 7-1-1996]
H. Any payment made which does not total the full amount of money owed
by a consumer will be clearly understood to apply on account and will
not be accepted as covering the most recent billing.
I. Whenever the consumer desires to have his service contract terminated
or his water service discontinued, he shall notify the Borough to that
effect, in writing. The consumer will be responsible for the payment of
all service rendered by the Borough until such written notice is
received and, in the instance of metered service, until a reasonable time
from receipt of such notice shall have elapsed for the Borough to take
the final reading of the meter or meters or until water service is actually
otherwise discontinued by the Borough.
J. The presentation or nonpresentation of a bill shall not be held to be a
waiver of any of the above rules.
A. Deposits may be required, at the option of the Borough, of consumers
taking service for a period of less than 30 days, in the amount equal to
the estimated gross bill for such temporary period. At the option of the
Borough, deposits may be required from all other consumers, provided
that in no instance will deposits be required in excess of the estimated
gross bill for any single billing period, plus one month (the maximum
period not to exceed four months in the case of quarterly billings or two
months in the case of monthly billings), with a minimum deposit in all
cases of $5.
B. Deposits shall be returned to the depositor when he shall have paid
undisputed bills for service over a period of 12 consecutive months,
beginning at any time subsequent to the making of the deposit, and any
consumer having secured the return of a deposit will not be required to
make a new deposit unless the service has been discontinued and the
consumer's credit standing impaired through the failure to comply with
the rules and regulations stated in this article.
C. The payment of any undisputed bills, within the meaning of this article,
shall be payment of the bill, with or without discount or penalty, prior to
the time that the notice for discontinuance of service for nonpayment of
a bill could be sent under this article, or the payment of any contested
bill, payment of which is withheld beyond the period herein mentioned
if the dispute is terminated substantially in favor of the consumer and if
payment is made by the consumer within 10 days thereafter.
D. Interest on deposits will be paid at the rate of 6% per annum without
deduction for any taxes thereon. Upon deposits held for more than one
§ 256-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-7
1:555
§ 256-8. Conditions under which water may be turned off.
year, the Borough will pay to the depositor, at the end of each calendar
year, the interest accrued thereon.
E. Any consumer having a deposit shall pay bills for water service as
rendered in accordance with the rules of the Borough, and the deposit
shall not be considered as payment on account of a bill during the time
the consumer has received the water service.
A. The Borough reserves the right, at all times, after due notice, to shut off
or discontinue water service for the following reasons:
(1) For nonpayment of water bills or neglect or refusal to comply with
the water rules and regulations of the Borough.
(2) For misrepresentation in application as to property or fixtures to be
supplied or for the use to be made of the water supply.
(3) For the use of water for any property or purpose other than that
described in the application.
(4) For the waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures or otherwise.
(5) In the event of vacancy of the premises.
(6) For violation of any rules of the Borough.
(7) For cross-connection with the Middletown water system of any
private well or water supply, and the making of such crossconnection
or the continuance thereof is hereby prohibited.
[Added 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 868, approved 11-14-1983]
B. Consumer liable for expense of turning off and restoring service. [Last
amended 3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved 3-1-2004]
(1) In the event that the water service is shut off or discontinued for
any of the reasons set forth in § 256-8A above, except delinquency,
and the customer wishes to obtain reconnection of service, the
customer shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee schedule
established by a properly adopted resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Middletown.
(2) In the event that water service is temporarily shut off or
discontinued for the performance of routine maintenance, repairs,
replacement of the customer's portion of the service line or lateral,
and the customer desires to obtain reconnection of service, the
customer shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee schedule
established by a properly adopted resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Middletown.
§ 256-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-8
1:556
§ 256-9. Use of fire hydrants. [Amended 5-10-1982 by Ord. No. 819,
approved 5-10-1982; 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987;
3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved 3-1-2004]
Water from fire hydrants or other fire protection systems shall be used
only in case of fires, except that water from fire hydrants may be used, in
reasonable amounts and at such times as the Borough Manager may permit,
for the purpose of testing the hydrants and firefighting apparatus of the
Borough of Middletown, such tests to be conducted only by the properly
authorized agents or employees of the Borough and only after the consent
of the Borough Manager or designee has been obtained. All other uses of
fire hydrants or other fire protection systems require the approval of the
Borough Manager.
§ 256-10. Use restrictions and regulations; meter reading.
(3) In the event that the water service is shut off or discontinued for
delinquency, and the customer desires to obtain reconnection of
service, the customer shall make the required delinquent payment,
and the customer shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee
schedule established by a properly adopted resolution of the
Council of the Borough of Middletown.
(4) In the event that the water service is shut off or discontinued by the
Borough due to water leakage which has not been repaired within
five days, and the customer desires to obtain reconnection of
service, the customer shall provide proof of repair to the Borough,
and the customer shall be charged a fee as set forth in a fee
schedule established by a properly adopted resolution of the
Council of the Borough of Middletown.
C. The Borough shall have the right to cut off or discontinue water service
without notice in case of breakdown or for other unavoidable causes
beyond the control of the Borough.
D. As the necessity may arise, in case of a breakdown, emergency or other
unavoidable cause, the Borough shall have the right to temporarily cut
off the water supply in order to make necessary repairs, connections,
etc., but the Borough will use all reasonable and practicable measures
to notify the consumer in advance of such discontinuance of service. In
such case, the Borough shall not be liable for any damage or
inconvenience suffered by the consumer, nor in any case for any claim
against it at any time for interruption in service lessening of supply,
inadequate pressure, poor quality of water or any cause beyond its
control. The Borough shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply
of water, at all times, in its reservoir to provide for fire or any other
emergencies.
A. The Borough reserves the right to restrict the supply of water in case of
scarcity or whenever the public welfare may require it.
§ 256-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-10
1:557
B. All waste of water is prohibited. A consumer shall keep his faucets,
valves, hydrants, service line and hose in good order and condition at
his own expense. Consumers are not permitted to allow water to run to
waste to prevent freezing. House piping should be properly protected.
C. The consumer shall notify the Borough in writing, whenever he desires
water service to be temporarily discontinued, and all charges will cease
in accordance with the provisions of § 256-6I. No refund or allowance
will be made for unoccupied property when written notice has not been
given. No refund will be allowed for property unoccupied for a period of
less than three months' duration. The rule immediately above stated
applies to vacancies of a property also, and, upon failure to properly
notify the Borough, the consumer will be responsible for any damage
arising to the company's property from such failure.
D. Only the authorized agents of the Borough shall have the right to turn
on water service into any premises, except that such service may be
turned on temporarily by a plumber for testing purposes, and said
plumber shall shut off such water service after his temporary use of it.
Only authorized agents of the Borough shall have the right to open or
close any of the Borough's valves in any public or private line.
E. The authorized agents of the Borough shall have the right of access, at
all reasonable hours, to the premises supplied with water for the
purpose of reading meters, examining pipes and fixtures, observing the
manner of using pipes and fixtures, observing the manner of using
water and for any other purpose which is proper and necessary in the
conduct of the water business and will carry with them proper
credentials denoting their employment by the Borough.
(1) Alternative means to obtain meter reading. The Borough is
authorized to undertake reasonable alternative measures to obtain
a meter reading. When Borough personnel are unable to obtain
access to obtain the actual meter reading, the Borough may
provide preaddressed postcards upon which the consumer may
note the reading. Telephone reporting of the reading may be made
when prior arrangement satisfactory to the Borough has been
made by the consumer. [Added 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 867,
approved 10-10-1983]
(2) Estimated bills. The Borough may estimate the bill of any consumer
if Borough personnel are unable to gain access to obtain an actual
meter reading. While it is not necessary that such estimated bills be
preceded by attempted action under Subsection E(1) and § 256-14
empowers the Borough Manager to make exceptions, the Borough
may choose to be guided by notations or reports of the meter
reading received from the consumer before invoking this
traditional and useful practice of estimating the bill. [Added
10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 867, approved 10-10-1983]
§ 256-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-10
1:558
(3) Remote readers or discontinuance of service. If or when the
consumer does not provide access to read the meter as required by
Subsection E, the Borough is also empowered to require that the
consumer pay the Borough to put in a remote meter (on a
reimbursable basis). For neglect or refusal to comply with any of
the foregoing (or future) amendments to the water rules and
regulations of the Borough, § 256-8 of this article shall apply, and
water service may be discontinued. [Added 10-10-1983 by Ord.
No. 867, approved 10-10-1983]
F. The Borough will not be liable for any claims or damage arising from a
shortage of water, the breakdown of machinery or other facilities or any
other cause beyond its control.
G. No agent or employee of the Borough shall have the right or authority
to bind it by any promise, agreement or representation contrary to the
letter or intent of this article.
H. The Borough reserves the right to alter or amend this article in the
manner provided by law.
I. Each of the following classes of premises or occupancies shall
constitute a separate consumer for which separate application for
service must be made.
(1) A building under one roof and occupied as one residence or
business.
(2) A combination of buildings in one enclosure and occupied by one
family.
(3) One side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall.
(4) Each side or each part of a house occupied by more than one family
or business, even though common.
(5) Each apartment, office or suite of offices located in a building
having several such apartments, offices or suites of offices and
using in common one or more means of entrance.
(6) Each house trailer, whether or not the same is permanently fixed to
a foundation or remains movable, but to which service is rendered.
[Added 5-19-1960 by Ord. No. 396, approved 5-19-1960]
J. Each consumer will be supplied through a separate service line and, if
on a meter basis, through a separate meter, except in cases noted in
Subsection I(4), (5) and (6), as above defined, in which case each family,
office, suite of offices, business and trailer shall be considered a
separate consumer, even though supplied through a common service
line or meter. [Amended 5-19-1960 by Ord. No. 396, approved
5-19-1960]
§ 256-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-11
1:559
§ 256-11. Water conservation. [Added 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 898,
approved 9-9-1985]
A. No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any
residential, commercial industrial, agricultural, recreational,
governmental or public building or structure of any kind which is
constructed or remodeled and in which plumbing, water piping or
water fixtures are to be installed, extended or altered in any way and
for which construction a permit is required to be obtained from the
Borough of Middletown (or would be required but for an exemption
from a permit requirement for public or governmental agencies) unless
the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other waterusing
fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards of
Subsection A(3) of this section. The provisions of this section shall apply
to any such building or structure for which such a building permit is
issued, or would otherwise be required to be issued for such an
exemption, on or after the ninth day of September 1985.
(1) Customers shall be encouraged not to permit any water furnished
by the Borough of Middletown to run to waste in any gutter or
other impervious surface.
(2) Each resident or property owner of the Borough of Middletown is
urged to install fixtures which will reduce the quantity of water
required to flush toilets and to reduce the flow rates of showers and
faucets.
(3) Requirements and standards.
(a) Water closets operated by flush tanks. The water consumption
of water closets operated by flush tanks shall not exceed an
average of 3.5 gallons per flush over a range of test pressures
from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch gauge or a maximum of
4.0 gallons per flush cycle at any one test pressure. The fixture
shall perform in accordance with the flushing test
requirements cited in the ANSI 112.19.2 Vitreous China
Plumbing Fixtures Standard.
(b) Water closets and urinals operated by flushometers.
[1] Water closet water consumption shall not exceed an
average of 3.0 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test
pressures from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch gauge or a
maximum of 3.5 gallons per flush cycle at any one test
pressure. The flushometer shall be adjusted according to
manufacturer's specifications. The fixture shall perform in
accordance with the flushing test requirements cited in
the ANSI 112.19.2 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures
Standard.
[2] Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an average of
1.0 gallon per flush cycle over a range of test pressures
§ 256-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-11
1:560
from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch gauge or a maximum
of 1.5 gallons per flush cycle at any one test pressure. The
flushometer shall be adjusted according to manufacturer's
specifications. The fixture shall perform in accordance
with the flushing test requirements cited in the ANSI
112.9.2 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures Standard.
(c) Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed
2.75 gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures
from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch gauge. The fixture shall
perform in accordance with the test requirements cited in the
ANSI 112.18.1. Finished Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture
Fittings Standard.
(d) Sink faucets.
[1] Kitchen sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 2.75
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures
from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch gauge. The fixture
shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
cited in the ANSI 112.18.1 Finished Rough Brass Plumbing
Fixture Fittings Standard.
[2] Residential lavatory sink faucet discharge rates shall not
exceed 2.75 gallons of water per minute over a range of
test pressures from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch
gauge. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the
test requirements cited in the ANSI 112.18.1 Finished
Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings Standard.
[3] Nonresidential lavatory faucets shall be either self-closing
or metering faucets as described below:
[a] Self-closing faucets shall not exceed an average
discharge rate of 0.5 gallon per minute between the
pressures of 20 and 80 pounds per square inch gauge
when tested in accordance with the discharge test
procedure cited in ANSI A112.18.1, Finished and
Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings.
[b] Metering faucets shall be field adjustable and set so
that the discharge quantity shall not exceed 0.5 gallon
of water per cycle.
(e) Blowout toilets and urinals. Replacements of blowout toilet and
urinal fixtures with like-type fixtures may be granted by local
officials, upon request, where adequate justification of special
need is provided.
(f) Pressure-reducing valve. Where the service water pressure to
a building is expected to exceed 60 pounds per square inch, a
water-pressure-reducing valve with strainer shall be installed
§ 256-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-11
1:561
just downstream of the buildings's main valve so as to be
accessible. The valve shall provide for pressure adjustment
within the range of 50 to 60 pounds per square inch. The valve
shall conform to the requirements of product standard ASSE
1003. Exemptions to this subsection are service lines to sill
cocks, outside hydrants and main supply risers to buildings
where pressure from the mains does not exceed 60 pounds per
square inch at the fixture branches or at individual fixtures.
(4) Any person(s) may apply to the Borough of Middletown for an
exception to the terms of this section, which exception may be
granted, in the discretion of the Council, upon proof that some
other device, system or procedure will save as much or more water
as those set forth herein or that those set forth herein cannot be
complied with without undue hardship.
(5) The Council may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from
the standards and restrictions herein.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or apply water received
from the Borough of Middletown contrary to or in violation of the
restriction herein, and, upon conviction thereof, such person shall
be punished as provided in § 256-15 of this article. [Amended
4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 943, approved 4-6-1987]
B. The following water conservation stages shall be in effect at the
following times. When Stage 2 or Stage 3 water rationing is in effect, no
person, firm, corporation or any other entity shall use any water in
violation of any provision of this subsection. [Added 8-4-1986 by Ord.
No. 918]
(1) Stage 1 voluntary conservation. Voluntary water conservation shall
be in effect whenever the Borough Manager or the Borough
Council declares that the water supply or the capacity of the water
system to deliver water is approaching levels at which water
rationing will be required to preserve the ability of the Borough to
deliver a necessary amount of water to each water user. Procedure
for Stage 1 will be as follows:
(a) The Borough Manager or the Borough Council will make public
announcements in the news media that Stage 1 voluntary
water conservation is in effect. The announcements will
include a description of the provisions in effect.
(b) Persons will be urged to conserve water in every way possible,
in their homes and in their businesses.
(c) People will be urged to avoid sprinkling their lawns and avoid
watering gardens, shrubs or trees with a hose, unless the lawn,
garden, shrubs or plants need the water to avoid damage and
at any rate not more often than every second day for not more
than four hours a day.
§ 256-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-11
1:562
(2) Stage 2 water rationing. Stage 2 will be in effect when the Borough
Manager or the Borough Council declare that Stage 1 will be or has
been ineffective in guaranteeing that the Borough will have the
ability to deliver a necessary amount of water to each water user.
Procedure for Stage 2 will be as follows:
(a) The Borough Manager or the Borough Council will make public
announcements through the news media concerning Stage 2
water rationing whenever Stage 2 water rationing is in effect.
The announcement will include a description of the
restrictions.
(b) The following will be in effect:
[1] No water shall be used for the watering of lawns except:
[a] Water may be used at the minimum rate necessary to
establish and maintain newly seeded and sodded grass
areas when applied between the hours of 5:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m. by means of a bucket, can or handheld
hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle.
[b] Water may be used at the minimum rate necessary to
establish and maintain newly seeded or sodded
nonresidential grass areas exceeding 10,000 square
feet when applied between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m., by any means designed and operated to
assure effective conservation of the water and
approved by the Borough Manager.
[2] No fresh water shall be used for watering of outdoor
gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs and other
outdoor plants, by means other than a bucket, pail or
handheld hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle;
such applications, however, must be made between the
hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. However, fresh water may
be applied by means of a handheld container or handheld
hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle at the
minimum rate necessary to establish and maintain newly
planted gardens, trees, shrubs or other outdoor plants.
Sources of water, other than fresh water, should be used
where available.
[3] No water shall be used for washing paved surfaces such as
streets, roads, sidewalks, driveways, garages, parking
areas, tennis courts and patios, except:
[a] Water may be used for prewashing in preparation of
asphalt street or driveway recoating and sealing.
[b] Water may be used at the minimum rate necessary for
sanitation.
§ 256-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-11
1:563
[4] No water shall be used for washing or cleaning of mobile
equipment, including automobiles, trucks, trailers and
boats, except:
[a] Water may be used by commercial car washes
equipped with facilities which recycle water or with
timed water-dispensing equipment which restricts
flow to three gallons per minute.
[b] Water may be used for cleaning of construction,
emergency, public transportation or government
vehicles where necessary to preserve the proper
functioning of the vehicle.
[5] No water shall be used to fill and top off domestic
swimming pools.
(3) Stage 3 water rationing. Stage 3 water rationing will be in effect
whenever restrictions beyond Stage 2 water rationing are
necessary so that no water customer inside the Borough limits will
be left without water. The Borough Manager shall impose Stage 3
water rationing when in his or her opinion such restrictions are
required under the terms of this subsection, provided that the
Borough Council will consider the action of the Borough Manager
at the next meeting at which the matter may be considered, and the
Borough Council may continue the Stage 3 water rationing.
(a) The following restrictions will be in effect:
[1] The Borough Manager will make a public announcement
through the news media that Stage 3 water rationing is in
effect. The announcement will include a description of the
provisions in effect.
[2] No water will be used for sprinkling lawns, and no water
will be used from a hose to water any garden, shrubs or
trees. These restrictions will not apply to any person, firm
or corporation engaged in the business of growing or
selling plants of any kind.
[3] No water shall be used for the washing of paved surfaces
such as streets, roads, sidewalks, driveways, garages,
parking areas, tennis courts and patios.
[4] No water shall be used for washing and cleaning of mobile
equipment, including automobiles, trucks, trailers and
boats, except water may be used by commercial car
washes equipped with facilities which recycle water or
with timed water-dispensing equipment which restricts
flow to three gallons per minute.
§ 256-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-11
1:564
§ 256-12. Meter rates. [Last amended 8-18-2014 by Ord. No. 1303,
approved 8-18-2014]
[5] Water may be used for cleaning of construction,
emergency, public transportation or government vehicles
where necessary to preserve the proper functioning of the
vehicle.
[6] No water shall be used to fill and top off domestic
swimming pools.
(b) It is the policy of the Borough to keep Stage 3 in effect for no
longer than absolutely necessary. The Borough Manager and
the Borough Council shall take steps to lift the Stage 3
restrictions as soon as lifting the restrictions will not result in
any water users within the Borough limits being unable to get
water.
(4) Awards. When Stage 1 water conservation is in effect, and while
any stage of water rationing is in effect, the Borough Manager will
offer at least one award each month. The award will be a citation or
other appropriate recognition, to be given to an individual of any
age who produces a useful suggestion for saving water. The award
may be for discovering a substantial water leak, for suggesting a
way to do things successfully with less water, or for any idea that
offers hope of reducing water consumption.
(5) Responsibility. No person shall be convicted of violating this
subsection unless such person in fact turned on water, directed the
turning on of water or kept water turned on after learning it was
turned on in violation of this subsection or failed to turn off
automatic devices capable of turning on water in violation of this
subsection. It will not be necessary, however, to present a witness
who saw the accused turning on the water, if the circumstances
indicated the accused did turn on the water.
(6) Reports and review of rationing. The Borough Manager will make
reports to the Borough Council at least once a week while rationing
is in effect. The Borough Council will review the reports and
consider any changes that may be desirable in the regulation set
out in this subsection.
(7) Explanations. The Borough Manager will from time to time send,
along with monthly water bills, an explanation of the regulations
set out in this subsection.
(8) Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any
provision of this subsection shall be fined a sum of not more than
$250 or, in default of payment of said fine or costs, shall undergo
imprisonment for a period not in excess of 10 days.
A. Uniform volumetric charge.
§ 256-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-12
1:565
§ 256-12.1. Miscellaneous water system fees and charges. [Added
3-1-2004 by Ord. No. 1173, approved 3-1-2004]
The Borough Council shall establish a fee schedule setting miscellaneous
water system fees and charges by a properly approved resolution of the
Borough Council.
§ 256-12.2. Meter replacement arrearage rates. [Added 5-2-2005 by
Ord. No. 1193]
(1) All users shall pay a uniform volumetric charge, as follows: $0.730
per 100 gallons per month; $0.500 per 100 gallons per month for
wholesale purchasers.
(2) Borough of Royalton. The Borough of Royalton shall be billed for
water use pursuant to an intermunicipal agreement between the
parties or, in the absence of an intermunicipal agreement, at the
wholesale rate specified above.
(3) All water usage shall be billed in arrears.
B. Customer charge: $3.25 per month per service location to be included
in the billing rate.
C. Variable service/meter charge. In addition to the uniform volumetric
charge and customer charge set forth above, all customers shall pay a
variable service/meter charge, determined as follows:
Meter Size
(inches) Minimum Charge
5/8 $12.60
3/4 $13
1 $13.80
1.25 $14.80
1.5 $15.40
2 $16.20
2.5 $18
3 $20
4 $24
6 $32
8 $36.80
D. Lower Swatara Township. Those customers who shall be in Lower
Swatara Township, but maintain a service connection to the Borough of
Middletown for the supply of water service shall be subject to the same
fees and charges as those connections within the Borough.
§ 256-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-12.2
1:566
§ 256-13. Fire protection rates. [Last amended 3-1-2004 by Ord. No.
1173, approved 3-1-2004]
The Borough Council shall establish a fee schedule setting fire protection
rates by a properly approved resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 256-14. Exceptions and regulations. [Amended 12-9-1963 by Ord.
No. 454, approved 12-9-1963]
The Borough Manager shall have the right to interpret and make exceptions
to the rules and regulations set forth herein, but final authority shall rest
with the Borough Council.
§ 256-15. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
943, approved 4-6-1987; amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 972,
approved 7-11-1988]
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any
provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
A. In cases where the Borough is replacing a majority of the water meters
within the service area (a "replacement project"), the below water rates
(the "discrepancy rate") shall apply to any volume of water that is
discovered to have not been billed during the term of the old/previous
meter (the "discrepancy amount").
(1) The minimum billed quantity shall be 1,000 gallons, and use shall
be calculated in one-thousand-gallon quantities, or any part
thereof.
(2) For discrepancy amounts between 1,000 gallons and 4,000 gallons,
the discrepancy rate is $8.57 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) For discrepancy amounts for quantities between 4,000 gallons up
to 1,000,000 gallons, the discrepancy rate is $0.0000857 per 1,000
gallons, for that part.
(4) For discrepancy amounts in excess of 1,000,000 gallons, the
discrepancy rate is $0.001 per 1,000 gallons.
B. The discrepancy rates in § 256-12.2A shall apply only to those amounts
that went unbilled and were discovered during a replacement project.
The discrepancy rates shall not apply to billing and usage discrepancies
discovered at any other time.
C. Any customer that may have previously paid a discrepancy amount
invoice calculated at any rate other than the discrepancy rate shall be
entitled to a refund, which shall be applied against the existing account
as a credit. Credit calculated hereunder shall apply to any discrepancy
amount discovered from October 18, 2004, through the end of the
replacement project.
§ 256-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-15
1:567
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
30 days.
§ 256-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-15
1:568
ARTICLE II
Tapping Fees
[Adopted 12-3-2001 by Ord. No. 1146, approved 12-3-2001]
§ 256-16. Purpose.
Middletown Borough Council has determined, based upon a study and
report prepared by its consulting engineer, that a substantial expenditure
must be made for capital additions and improvements to the existing water
system and appurtenant facilities operated by Middletown Borough in order
to provide service for future users of the water system, and has further
determined that the cost of construction and financing of such capital
additions and improvements would create an unreasonable and inequitable
economic burden upon the Borough and the existing users of the water
system. It is, therefore, deemed to be in the public interest of the Borough,
the existing users of the water system, and future users, that all improved
properties hereafter connected to the water system pay a tapping fee
designed and calculated to create a capital reserve fund to provide the cost
of construction and financing of such capital additions and improvements.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the imposition and collection of
such tapping fees.
§ 256-17. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
prescribed to them the meanings hereafter set forth:
APARTMENT OR OFFICE USE — A building which is intended to be used
for continuous or periodic habitation by human beings and containing two
or more family dwelling units; or which contains business or professional
offices and one or more family dwelling units; or which contains business,
professional or any other similar type of office or offices.
AUTHORITY — Middletown Borough Municipal Authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL USE — A property which is intended to be used for the
purpose of carrying on a trade, business or profession, or for social,
religious, educational, charitable or public uses.
DOMESTIC USE — A property which is intended to be used for continuous
or periodic habitation by human beings in a single family unit.
EDU — Equivalent domestic unit, which is equivalent to the flow of 250
gallons per day.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within Middletown Borough
upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and which
requires water service.
INDUSTRIAL USE — A property located within Middletown Borough upon
which is intended to be used in whole or in part for the manufacture,
§ 256-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-17
1:569
fabrication, processing, cleaning, laundry, conversion or assembly of any
product, commodity or article.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, government entity,
and other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include the
plural where indicated by context.
SCHEDULE OF FEES — The schedule of connection fees, customer
facilities fees and tapping fees to be charged to sewer and water customers
as established by the Borough Council, in accordance with the provisions of
Act 203 of 1990.
WATER SYSTEM — The complete water distribution system, including
related and necessary facilities in addition to distribution facilities, for
rendering water service in the Borough, together with any future additions,
alterations, improvements, or extensions thereto.
§ 256-18. Application to connect.
No person shall connect any improved property with any part of the water
system owned by the Authority and leased to the Borough without first
making application, securing a permit therefor in writing from this Borough,
making payment of the connection fee, customer facilities fee, and tapping
fee as set forth in the schedule of fees. Such application shall be made on a
form to be provided by the Borough and shall be obtained from the office of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 256-19. Imposition of fees.
A. A tapping fee is hereby imposed against any improved property and
against the owner of such improved property whenever the owner
hereafter shall connect any such improved property with a water main
constituting a portion of the water system owned by the Authority and
leased to the Borough, in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees
for each EDU required, or the equivalent flow required by, regardless of
whether the water mains or extensions thereto are installed by the
owner, developer or by this Borough. In the case of residential uses
having multiple units or uses therein, a separate tapping fee shall be
paid for each dwelling unit or apartment. In all other types of uses, a
separate tapping fee shall be paid for each EDU or the equivalent flow
required by such use, based upon the total estimated average flow
needed by such improved property. However, where the actual average
daily flow needed by such property during any quarterly billing period
during the first year after substantial occupancy exceeds the estimated
flow, the owner of such improved property shall be required to pay the
additional tapping fees as determined from the actual flow records.
§ 256-17 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-19
1:570
§ 256-20. Due date and collection.
Any fee imposed hereunder shall be due and payable at the time application
is made by the owner of any improved property for a permit to connect such
improved property with the water system.
§ 256-21. Enforcement.
Any fee imposed by this article shall be a lien on the improved property
connected to and served by the water system where such fees or charges
are not paid as provided herein. Said lien shall be filed in the office of the
Prothonotary of Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collecting of municipal claims.
(1) In those cases where an improved property is already connected to
the water system, and where there is an expansion of, addition to or
a change in the use of such improved property which results in an
increase in the volume of water required by such property, an
additional tapping fee shall be paid for each additional EDU or the
equivalent flow required as a result of such expansion, addition or
change in use, based upon the additional estimated average daily
flow of water to such improved property. If, during any quarterly
billing period during the first year after substantial occupancy, the
average daily flow exceeds said estimated average daily flow, the
owner of such improved property shall be required to pay the
additional tapping fees as determined from the actual flow records.
In the case of domestic uses and apartment or office uses, an
additional tapping fee shall be paid for each additional dwelling
unit or apartment or each office or suite of offices added as a result
of an expansion of, addition to, or a change in the use of such
improved property.
(2) The Borough Council shall establish a fee schedule for water
tapping fees by a properly approved resolution of the Borough
Council.
B. A water connection fee is hereby imposed against any improved
property and against the owner of such improved property whenever
the owner hereafter shall connect any such improved property with a
water main constituting a portion of the water system owned by the
Authority and leased to the Borough. The Borough Council shall
establish a fee schedule for water connection fees by a properly
approved resolution of the Borough Council.
C. A water customer facilities fee is hereby imposed against any improved
property and against the owner of such improved property whenever
the owner hereafter shall connect any such improved property with a
water main constituting a portion of the water system owned by the
Authority and leased to the Borough. The Borough Council shall
establish a fee schedule for water customer facilities fees by a properly
approved resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 256-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-21
1:571
In addition, the payment of said tapping fees imposed hereunder may be
enforced by this Borough in any manner appropriate under existing laws at
the time they become due and payable.
§ 256-22. Segregation of funds.
All revenues received by this Borough from the tapping fees imposed by this
article shall be segregated by accounting practices from other revenues of
the Borough received in connection with the operation of the water system,
and shall be credited to a capital reserve account. Said revenues shall be
used for the purpose of construction and financing of such capital additions
and improvements to the water system as may be required from time to
time.
§ 256-21 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 256-22
1:572
Chapter 257
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 66.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 224.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Water — See Ch. 256.
§ 256-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-22
1:573

ARTICLE I
Connection to Borough Water Supply
[Adopted 12-6-1993 as Ord. No. 1050, approved 12-6-1993]
§ 257-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of the terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT — The Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania known
as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," approved May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.,171 together with all supplements and amendments
thereto.
APPLICATION FOR SERVICE — An application, in writing on a form to be
provided, to the Borough for water service.
AUTHORITY — Middletown Borough Authority.
BILL — The amount charged to a consumer for quarterly or monthly service.
In the event of discontinuance of service during a billing period, the
consumer shall be required to pay a proportionate part of the charge for
said period's service.
BOARD — The governing body of the Authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
acting through its properly authorized officers, agents or employees, each
acting within the scope of the particular duties assigned to him.
BUILDING MAIN — The extension from the water system of any structure
to the lateral of a main.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONSUMER — The person, firm or corporation contracting for a supply
of water to a particular property, who shall only be the owner thereof, as
classified in Chapter 256, Water, § 256-10I.
FIRE HYDRANT — A water outlet for public fire protection.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals.
LATERAL — That part of the water system extending from a main to the
curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the property line or, if no such
lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of, or place
in, a main which is provided for connection of any building main.
MAIN — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the water system used or
usable for water distribution purposes.
171. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-1
1:575
METER RATE CONSUMER — A consumer who shall have a separate water
meter installed on his premises which shall register the amount of water
consumed therein.
METER RATES — The rate charged per thousand gallons of water,
depending upon the size of the meter installed in the consumer's premises.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority or other group or entity.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The connection of the service line to the curb
box and cock, which service connection shall be the property of the
Borough.
SERVICE CONTRACT — The contract entered into between the Borough
and the consumer for water service through the consumer's service facility.
USE OF SERVICE — The use of water service by a consumer in accordance
with the class, scope and type of use and the purpose stated in this
application and service contract.
WATER METER — An instrument which measures, in gallons, the amount
of water consumed when placed upon the premises and which shall, at all
times, remain the property of the Borough.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for supply,
transmission and distribution of water owned by the Authority or leased by
the Borough to the Authority.
§ 257-2. Use of public water system required.
A. The owner of any improved property abutting upon any street in which
there is a main constituting part of the water system shall connect such
improved property with such main and shall use such water system, in
such manner as the authority may require, within 90 days after notice
to such owner from this Borough to make such connection; subject,
however, to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established
herein or otherwise shall be established by this Borough, from time to
time.
B. The notice by this Borough to make a connection to a main, referred to
in § 257-2A, shall consist of a copy of this article, including any
amendments and/or supplements in effect at the time, or a summary
thereof, and a written or printed document requiring the connection in
accordance with the provisions of this article, and specifying that such
connection shall be made within 90 days after the date of such notice is
given or served. Such notice may be given or served at any time after
the appropriate main or lateral is in place that can deliver water to the
particular improved property. Such notice shall be given to or served
upon the owner by personal service or by certified mail to his last
known address or by such other means as shall be permitted by law.
§ 257-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 257-3
1:576
§ 257-3. Limitations upon construction and use of private wells.
A. No private well shall be constructed within the Borough after the
effective date of this article except in accordance with such regulations
as the Borough may adopt.
B. All private wells in service as of the effective date of this article must be
removed from service and capped at such time as the well owner is
connected to the water system. The well owner's duty to remove his
well from service and to cap his well is contingent upon the Authority's
agreement to reimburse the well owner for the cost of capping the well
and for the cost of constructing a service line on the well owner's
property to connect to the public water system. Said duty is also
contingent upon the authority's waiving of the customary tap-on or
connection fee.
C. Notwithstanding § 257-3B, a private well in service on the effective date
of this article which is connected to an outside faucet may remain in
service subject to the following conditions:
(1) The owner, at his own expense, severs the well and the outside
faucet from his household system. The authority and the Borough
retain the right to inspect the owner's water system to ensure that
the owner's private well system is not cross-connected with the
public water system.
(2) The owner posts a sign, to be provided by the Authority, in a
conspicuous location near the faucet so that anyone using the well
is certain to see it. The sign shall contain a warning that water from
the well may be contaminated, and that it should not be used for
drinking or cooking.
(3) The owner signs a form releasing the Authority, the Borough and
the employees and representatives of the Borough and the
Authority from any liability for injuries suffered by anyone as a
result of drinking or otherwise consuming water from the private
well.
(4) The owner provides access to the outside faucet to Authority and
Borough employees and representatives for purposes of taking
water samples.
(5) Upon the transfer of title to the property upon which the private
well is located, the outside faucet must be disconnected from the
private well, and the private well must be capped. This duty to cap
the well is contingent upon the Authority's agreement to reimburse
the well owner for the cost of capping the well.
D. The following private wells and activities shall be exempted from
§ 257-3B; provided, however, that such exemptions are conditioned
upon these private wells not interfering with the public water supply.
The exemptions set out in this subsection are subject to such
§ 257-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-3
1:577
§ 257-4. Application for service.
§ 257-5. Violations and penalties.
regulations to protect public safety as the Borough may adopt. The
Borough reserves the right to inspect and regulate the water usage
permitted under this subsection and to order the placing of signs to
protect against human consumption of the water.
(1) Private wells constructed and in use as of the effective date of this
article and utilized solely for the production of water supply for
commercial swimming pools and facilities.
(2) Private wells constructed and in use as of the effective date of this
article and utilized solely for the production of water supply for the
operation of air conditioning equipment of commercial and
nonprofit fraternal organizations.
(3) Private wells owned and operated by the Middletown Area School
District constructed and in use as of the effective date of this article
and utilized solely for the production of water for the maintenance,
upkeep and irrigation of athletic fields and school grounds.
(4) Such other private wells as the Borough Council, in its discretion,
may determine to be exempt. In making such a determination, the
Borough Council shall consider public health and welfare, the
policies of this article and other relevant factors.
E. The use within the Borough of water produced from private wells
located outside the Borough and connected to residences or other
facilities located in the Borough shall be prohibited.
F. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any private well which
services residences or other properties within the Borough to which
public water supply is not available.
G. Notice of any amendment or elimination of this article must be
provided, in writing, to the Department of Environmental Protection
within 30 days of the effective date of the amendment or repeal.
[Added 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 1327, approved 7-19-2016]
A. Service connection will be made and water will be furnished upon
written application by the prospective consumer (or his properly
authorized agent), on a blank prepared by the Borough for this purpose,
and after the approval of such application by the Borough. The
application for service shall be general and shall clearly outline the
class, scope and type of use to be made of the service, as well as the
purpose for which it will be used.
B. The application and these rules and regulations constitute the contract
between the consumer and the Borough, and each consumer, by taking
of water, agrees to be bound thereby.
§ 257-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 257-5
1:578
§ 257-6. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately.
§ 257-7. Severability.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this article
shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this article, it being
the intent of this Borough that such remainder shall be and shall remain in
full force and effect.
§ 257-8. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
this Borough.
§ 257-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances and all resolutions or parts of
resolutions that are inconsistent with this article shall be and the same
expressly are repealed.
A. Any person who shall violate any portion of this article shall be liable,
upon summary conviction for a first offense and upon summary
conviction for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $600,
together with costs of prosecution in each case. Each day that a
violation shall continue shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
B. Fines and costs imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by
applicable law and shall be payable to this Borough.
§ 257-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-9
1:579
Chapter 260
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 58.
Adult bookstores — See Ch. 93.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 114.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 236.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 238.
§ 257-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 257-9
1:580
ARTICLE I
Authority, Title, Purpose, and Interpretation
§ 260-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers contained
in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
(the "MPC").
§ 260-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "the Zoning Ordinance
of the Borough of Middletown."
§ 260-3. Purposes.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, the provision of adequate
light and air, and other public requirements.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding, blight, loss of
health, life or property from fire, flood or other dangers.
C. To adopt a Zoning Map dividing the Borough of Middletown into zoning
districts with varying regulations.
D. To permit, prohibit, regulate and determine the uses of land,
watercourses and other bodies of water, the size, height, bulk, location,
erection, construction, repair, expansion, razing, removal and use of
buildings and structures, as well as yards and other open areas to be
left unoccupied.
E. To establish the maximum density and intensity of uses.
F. To provide for the protection of natural and historic features and
resources.
G. To protect the integrity of existing residential neighborhoods.
H. To adequately regulate existing industry in the Borough so that it may
remain and its noise, odors, or other unwanted features can be
minimized.
I. To provide diverse housing opportunities, including housing that is
affordable.
J. To encourage adaptive reuse and infill development.
K. To maintain a high standard of air and water quality and the protection
of natural resources, including stream valleys, floodplains, and
riverbanks, and to improve the appearance of the Borough through
appropriate sign regulation, landscaping, and design controls.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:581
§ 260-4. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, its provisions shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for promotion of health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the Borough of Middletown. Any use permitted subject
to the regulations prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall conform
with all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and
with all other pertinent regulations of this and other related ordinances.
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul, supersede,
or cancel any easements, covenants, restrictions or reservations contained
in deeds or other agreements, but if this chapter imposes more stringent
restrictions upon the use of buildings, structures and land than are
elsewhere established, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Wherever
and whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted laws, rules, regulations or
ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards
shall govern. In interpreting the language of this chapter to determine the
extent of the restriction upon the use of property, the language shall be
interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the adopted
language, in favor of the property owner and against any implied extension
of the restriction.
§ 260-5. Applicability.
L. To act as an overall plan for the orderly growth and development of the
Borough of Middletown and, as such, seek to implement the
Middletown Borough Comprehensive Plan.
A. Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this
chapter shall only be carried out in conformity with this chapter:
(1) Use, occupation, erection, construction, reconstruction, movement,
alteration, razing, demolition, removal, placement of extension
(vertical or horizontal) of a structure, building or sign, unless relief
is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure,
building or area of land.
(3) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
(4) Creation of a new use.
B. This chapter shall not require any change to any building, structure or
use legally existing at the effective date of this chapter, nor to any
building, structure or use planned and construction started in
compliance with existing laws prior to the effective date of this chapter
and completed within one year after the effective date of this chapter.
C. This chapter shall not apply to an existing or proposed building or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if
upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility
§ 260-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-5
1:582
§ 260-6. Municipality liability.
The granting of a zoning permit for the erection and/or use of a structure,
building or lot shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty
of any kind or nature by the Borough of Middletown, or an official or
employee thereof, of the safety of any structure, building, use or other
proposed plan from cause whatsoever, and shall create no liability upon or
a course of action against such public official or employee for any damage
that may be pursuant thereto.
§ 260-7. Disclaimer.
It is recognized that the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394) known
as the "Clean Streams Law," the Act of May 31, 1945 (P.L. 1198, No
418) known as the "Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act,"
the Act of April 27, 1966 (First Special Session, P.L. 31, No. 1) known
as the "Bituminous Mine Subsidence and Land Conservation Act," the Act
of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318) known as the "Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act," the Act of December 19, 1984 (P.L. 1140, No. 223)
known as the "Noncoal Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act,"
the Act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43) known as the "Agricultural Area
Security Law," the Act of June 10, 1982 (P.L. 454, No. 133) entitled "An
act protecting agricultural operations from nuisance suits and ordinances
under certain circumstances," and the Act of May 20, 1993 (P.L. 12, No. 6)
known as the "Nutrient Management Act,"172 preempt zoning ordinances.
Therefore, suggestions, recommendations, options or directives contained
herein are intended to be implemented only to the extent that they are
consistent with and do not exceed the requirements of those Acts. Nothing
contrary to those Acts shall be mandated by this chapter.
§ 260-8. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that if a court of competent
jurisdiction declares any provisions of this chapter to be invalid or
ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited
to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid
or ineffective, and all other provisions of this chapter shall continue to be
separately and fully effective.
Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary
for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the
responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure
that both the corporation and the Borough of Middletown have notice
of the hearing and are granted as opportunity to appear, present
witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties, and
otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings.
172. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., 52 P.S. § 1396.1 et seq., 52 P.S. § 1406.1 et seq.,
52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq., 52 P.S. § 3301 et seq., 3 P.S. § 901 et seq., 3 P.S. § 951 et seq., and 3
Pa.C.S.A. § 501 et seq., respectively.
§ 260-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:583
§ 260-9. Repealer.
The preexisting Borough of Middletown zoning ordinance, as amended, is
hereby expressly repealed, provided further that nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any permit issued or approval
granted or any cause or causes of action arising prior to the enactment of
this chapter. All ordinances or parts of ordinances and all resolutions or
parts of resolutions which are inconsistent herewith by virtue of references
or incorporation of requirements contained in the preexisting zoning
ordinance, as amended, shall, as nearly as possible, be construed to
reference this chapter.
§ 260-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.173
173. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 260-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-10
1:584
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 260-11. Interpretation.
The following words are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation of
this chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties
by appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this chapter,
have the meaning herein indicated.
§ 260-12. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of a nonconforming use of a building or
premises for a period of one year or more. Subsequent use of such building
or premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular includes the plural.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership,
an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
D. The terms "shall and will," "will" and "must" are always mandatory.
E. The words "should" or "may" are permissive.
F. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words, "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied."
G. The word "erected" shall be inclusive of the words "constructed, altered
or moved."
H. The masculine includes the feminine.
I. The words "include" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specified examples, but are intended to extend the meaning to all other
instances of like kind or character.
J. Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given in
this article. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or
term not a part of this listing, or any of the definitions found in the
various chapters of the codified ordinances of the Borough of
Middletown, but vital to the interpretation of this chapter, shall be
construed to have its legal definition, or in absence of a legal definition,
its meaning as defined in the most recent edition of Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary shall apply.
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:585
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER — An accredited medical
school within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that operates or partners
with an acute care hospital licensed within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE —
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building.
ACCESS ROADWAY — An improved passageway, other than a public street,
as proposed and approved in a land development plan for residential,
commercial, industrial or mobile home park development in which a
common ownership entity is accorded legal rights and responsibilities for
the provision and maintenance of such passageways and other facilities
serving the development in common, which provides the primary access
to one or more groups of dwelling units or one or more multioccupant
buildings.
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — A business or club which engages in one
or more of the following areas of sales, services or entertainment:
PERMANENT — A building or structure intended to be used
permanently having footers or pressure treated wood base and an
approved anchoring system detached from the principal building or
use, located on the same lot, for purposes customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal building or use.
A.
TEMPORARY — A structure intended for use during a short period of
time not to exceed six months without footers, but having an approved
anchoring system detached from the principal building or use located
on the same lot for purposes customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal building or use. Fully enclosed structure must be made
permanent.
B.
Access roadways shall have cartways not less than 24 feet in width,
constructed in accordance with Borough specifications for minor
streets, including necessary and adequate drainage facilities.
A.
B. Access roadways may also include circulation walkways.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any establishment or place:
In which 20% or more of its stock-in-trade, occupied sale and
display area or gross sales amount consist of the following:
Books, magazines or other periodicals, films or other forms
of audio or visual representation which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depiction, description or
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:586
display of sexual activities or conduct or uncovered male or
female genital areas; or
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designated
primarily for use in connection with sexual activities or
conduct; or
(b)
To which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slugoperated
or electronically or mechanically controlled still or
motion-picture machines, projectors or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images, with or without sound,
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual
activities or conduct or uncovered male or female genital areas.
(2)
ADULT THEATER/CABARET — Any theater, auditorium, concert hall or
other place of assembly:
Presenting any form of audio and/or visual material in which a
substantial portion of the total presentation time measured over
any consecutive thirty-day period is or will be devoted to the
showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by
emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual activities or
uncovered male or female torsos or genital areas; or
(1)
Featuring live performances on a regular basis which are
distinguished or characterized by emphasis on depiction,
description or display of sexual activities or by exposure of
uncovered male or female torsos or genital areas for observation
by patrons.
(2)
B.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR/ADULT MASSAGE STUDIO — Any
establishment or business in which any person or association engages
in, carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on the practice
of massage. Massage refers to any method of pressure on or friction
against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating
or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with hands or
with the aid of mechanical or electrical apparatus, with or without
such supplementing aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments or other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice. Excluded from the
definition of an adult massage parlor/studio is the practice of massage
by licensed hospitals, licensed nursing homes, medical clinics and the
offices and quarters of licensed health profession practitioners or a
certified massage practitioner. Other excluded facilities include an
athletic club, health club, school, gym or similar establishment where
massage is offered as an incidental and accessory medical or
therapeutic massage practitioner service.
C.
OTHER ADULT-ORIENTED RETAIL, COMMERCIAL SERVICES OR
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Any other business or club
which primarily offers its patrons or members retail goods, commercial
services or entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on
D.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:587
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS — Shall be deemed to include those
agricultural activities involving the use of land and buildings for nurseries,
greenhouses or tilling of the soil.
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, primarily for
service access to the back or side of properties and not intended for general
traffic circulation.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building, structure or sign, any change,
renovation or rearrangement in the total floor area, or an enlargement,
whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving
from one location or position to another.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — See "structural alteration."
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A commercial establishment which provides, as
a principal use, amusement devices and/or games of skill or chance (e.g.,
pinball machines, video games, skee-ball, electronic or water firing ranges
and other similar devices). This definition does not include the use of two or
less such devices as an accessory use.
ANIMAL HOSPITALS — Any establishment offering veterinary services.
Animal hospitals can treat all types of animals and can include outdoor and
overnight boarding of animals.
APARTMENT — A dwelling in an apartment house or student housing
building.
APARTMENT, CONVERSION — See "conversion apartment."
APARTMENT HOUSE — A residential building containing three or more
dwelling units, with a common access or independent outside access.
AREA, BUILDING — See "building area."
AREA, LOT — See "lot area."
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing. Within a dwelling unit, an attic shall not be
counted as floor area unless it is constructed as or modified into a habitable
room by the inclusion of dormer windows, an average ceiling height of five
feet or more, and a permanent stationary interior access stairway to a lower
building story.
AUTOMOBILE SALES — Any building or land devoted to the retail sales
of passenger vehicles, including accessory service and repair facilities if
conducted within a wholly enclosed building.
matter or activities relating to depicting, describing or displaying
sexual activity or conduct or uncovered male or female torsos or genital
areas. For the purpose of this section, businesses whose employees
entertain or serve the general public, e.g., dancers, waiters and
waitresses, with uncovered torsos shall be considered as adult-oriented
businesses.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:588
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE GARAGE — The retail repair, servicing,
maintenance and reconstruction of passenger vehicles, but not including
car washes per se.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle
fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, including any retail sales of
motor vehicle accessories, which may not include major repairing, body and
fender work, painting, vehicular sales, nor rental or automatic car washes.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having 1/2 or more of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATION, COMMERCIAL — The
provision of overnight sleeping accommodations and a next-morning meal
for transient persons, when more than three bedrooms for such purposes
are provided, in return for direct or indirect compensation for the services
rendered, whether or not the premises also contain the regular dwelling of
the owner. Bedrooms are deemed to have the capacity of accommodating
no more than two persons. Premises operated as herein described shall be
regulated as a hotel or motel.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATION, RESIDENTIAL — The
provision of overnight sleeping accommodations and a next-morning meal
for transient persons, where not more than three bedrooms for such
purposes are provided in a private, owner-occupied dwelling, whether
compensation for services rendered is direct or indirect. Bedrooms are
deemed to have the capacity of accommodating no more than two persons.
Premises operated as herein described shall be deemed to be, and shall be
regulated as, residential tourist homes.
BILLBOARD — A sign upon which advertising matter of any character is
printed, posted, or lettered, whether freestanding or attached to a surface
of a building or other structure. A billboard is used to advertise products,
services or businesses at a location other than the premises on which the
sign is placed.
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Middletown.
BOARDING-, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE — An owner-occupied
private dwelling in which rooms are offered for rent to at least three but no
more than 10 persons, whether or not table-board is furnished to lodgers,
and in which no transients are accommodated and no public restaurant is
maintained.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended or usable for the shelter of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, awnings, terraces, and steps.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING AREA — The building area, as defined above,
which is occupied by a principal building or buildings.
A.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:589
BUILDING HEIGHT — A building's vertical measurement from the mean
level of the ground abutting the building to the highest point of a flat or
multilevel roof or for a gable, gambrel or hip roof, to the mean height
between the eaves and the ridge. Floodplain Overlay, Floodplain
Management and Airport Overlay regulations shall govern where
applicable.
BUILDING LENGTH — The horizontal measurement of any building wall.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line set so as
to provide the required yard.
CANOPY, STAND-ALONE — A temporary accessory structure having a
metal frame with canvas, cloth metal or plastic covering designed to store
vehicles, nonmotorized equipment or materials. Fully enclosed canopy shall
be a permanent accessory structure.
CAREGIVER — The individual designated by a patient to deliver medical
marijuana.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
CARPORT — A roofed structure, open on at least three sides, for the
temporary storage of one or more vehicles and attached to a main or
accessory building.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, usually paved, that is
intended for vehicular traffic.
CELLAR — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling
height of less than 6 1/2 feet. Within a dwelling unit, a cellar shall not be
counted as floor area, nor shall it be considered in determining the number
of stories of a building.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbarium, crematoria, mausoleums, and mortuaries
when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within the boundaries
thereof.
CENTER LINE — The center of the surveyed street, road, land, alley or alley
right-of-way or, where not surveyed, the center of the traveled cartway.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A statement signed by a duly authorized
Borough officer setting forth that a building, structure or use legally
complies with the zoning and other applicable codes and regulations and
that the same may be used for the purposes stated therein.
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE — The acquisition, possession, use or
transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or the acquisition,
possession, delivery, transportation or administration of medical marijuana
by a caregiver for use as part of the treatment of the patient's serious
medical condition, as authorized by certification by the
commonwealth.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved
2-21-2017]
ACCESSORY BUILDING AREA — The building area, as defined above,
which is occupied by accessory building or structures.
B.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:590
CHANGE OF USE — An alteration of a building, structure or land by
change of use, theretofore existing, to a new group which imposes other
special provisions of law governing building construction, exits or zoning
regulations.
CHURCH, PLACES OF WORSHIP AND RELATED USES — A building,
structure, or group of buildings or structures, including accessory uses,
designed or intended for public worship. This definition shall include
rectories, convents, and church-related educational and/or day-care
facilities.
CLINICAL REGISTRANT — An entity that:[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY — An activity operated as a
business, open to the public, for the purpose of public recreation or
entertainment, including but not limited to bowling alleys, swimming pools,
health clubs, miniature golf courses, museums, etc. This does not include
adult-related uses or amusement arcades, as defined herein.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS — An educational facility not operated by a
public agency. The range of curriculums can include all levels of academic
instruction, business and technical programs and artistic, dance, batontwirling,
and musical training. Private educational institutions are principal
uses that are neither home occupations nor day-care operations. These uses
shall not include vocational and/or mechanical trade schools as defined
in this chapter. Nursery schools shall be considered private educational
institutions if they are operated as a business.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may not be appropriate to a particular
zoning district as a whole but which may be suitable in certain localities
within the district only when specific conditions and criteria prescribed
for such uses have been complied with. Conditional uses are reviewed by
the Borough Council after recommendations by the Planning Committee, in
accordance with § 260-234 of this chapter.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of property ownership providing for individual
ownership of a specific dwelling unit, or other space not necessarily on
ground level, together with an undivided interest in the land or other parts
of the structure in common with other owners.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail sales business which specializes in
providing household products and foods.
A. Holds a permit, both as a grower/processor and a dispensary; and
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research
center under which the academic clinical research center or its affiliate
provides advice to the entity regarding, among other areas, patient
health and safety, medical applications and dispensing and
management of controlled substances.
B.
Convenience stores may also provide for any or all of the following as
an accessory use:
A.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:591
CONVERSION APARTMENT — An existing single-family detached, singlefamily
semidetached, two-family detached or two-family semidetached
dwelling used as or converted into no more than four dwelling units, each
containing no more than one family living independent of each other.
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such
building.
COVERAGE AREA, RATIO AND REGULATIONS —
The rental of videotapes, DVDs and Blu-ray Discs™, provided that
an adult bookstore is specifically prohibited;
(1)
The preparation and sales of delicatessen sandwiches and foods,
provided that no patron seating is provided; and
(2)
The use of no more than two amusement devices (e.g., pinball
machines, video games, and other similar devices).
(3)
Convenience stores shall not include the dispensing of gasoline or other
vehicle fuels, unless the appropriate approvals for an automobile filling
station, as defined herein, have been obtained.
B.
INNER COURT — A court that does not extend to a street, alley, yard or
outer court.
A.
OUTER COURT — A court which extends to a street, alley, yard or other
court.
B.
COVERAGE — The land area occupied by impervious surfaces
expressed in square feet.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The total land area occupied by buildings
or structures, principal and accessory.
(1)
PRINCIPAL COVERAGE — The land area occupied by principal
buildings or structures.
(2)
ACCESSORY COVERAGE — The land area occupied by accessory
buildings or structures.
(3)
AUXILIARY COVERAGE — The land area occupied by impervious
surfaces other than buildings or structures.
(4)
TOTAL COVERAGE — The total land area occupied by buildings,
structures and auxiliary facilities.
(5)
A.
COVERAGE RATIO — The ratio of coverage on a lot, obtained by
dividing the coverage by the lot area, usually expressed in percent.
BUILDING COVERAGE RATIO — The ratio of total building
coverage on a lot, including all principal and accessory buildings or
structures.
(1)
B.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:592
DAY CARE — The offering of care or supervision over minors or special
needs adults in lieu of care or supervision by family members in accordance
with Article XVIII. This definition does not include the offering of overnight
accommodations.
DENSITY — A term used to express the allowable number of dwelling units
per acre of land.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change in improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DISPENSARY — A person, as defined in this section, which holds a permit
from the Pennsylvania Department of Health to dispense medical
marijuana.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
DISTRICT or ZONE — A portion of the territory of the Borough within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations
thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DOMESTIC PETS — The noncommercial keeping of no more than four
adult nonfarm animals that are locally available for purchase as pets, as an
accessory use to a primary residential use.
DRIVEWAY AND APRON — A paved cartway designed and constructed to
provide vehicular movement between a public road and a tract of land
serving as a vehicle entrance or egress to dwelling units or open land. Apron
portion is measured between the curb and sidewalk.
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal
by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any other means and for
PRINCIPAL COVERAGE RATIO — The ratio of principal building/
structure coverage on a lot.
(2)
ACCESSORY COVERAGE RATIO — The ratio of accessory building/
structure coverage on a lot.
(3)
AUXILIARY COVERAGE RATIO — The ratio of auxiliary coverage
on a lot. Porous pavement shall be governed by Chapter 238.
(4)
(5) TOTAL COVERAGE RATIO — The ratio of total coverage on a lot.
COVERAGE REGULATIONS — The maximum ratios of coverage
permitted, as specified in the respective zoning district regulations.
C.
DENSITY, NET — The number of dwelling units in relation to the land
area actually in use or proposed to be used for residential purposes,
exclusive of public rights-of-way for utilities and streets, floodplains,
steep slopes, etc.
A.
DENSITY, GROSS — The number of dwelling units in relation to the
area of land of a parcel in use or proposed to be used for residential
purposes, exclusive of exterior public rights-of-way.
B.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:593
whatever purposes, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed and used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including those listed below, but not
including hospitals, hotels, institutional houses, tourist courts, and the like,
offering overnight accommodations for guests or patients. All dwellings
must be permanently affixed to a completely enclosed foundation
constructed of currently accepted materials that shall be an entire
perimeter wall and extend from below the frost line to the first floor of
the building. Such foundation shall be constructed to provide sufficient
structural integrity to prevent the building from heaving, shifting, or
settling unevenly, due to frost action. In addition, all dwellings shall be
properly connected to approved and permanently designed sewer, water,
electrical and other utility systems.
DWELLING UNIT — A portion of a building comprised of one or more
rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having a kitchen with
fixed cooking facilities, which is arranged for occupancy by one family
when in a dwelling or apartment house and is arranged for occupancy by
up to four unrelated people when in a student housing building meeting
the definition of "student housing" as described in this section. As defined
above, a dwelling unit may comprise either the entirety or a portion of a
dwelling.
EASEMENT — The authorization of a property owner of a right-of-way
granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land, and within which
the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structure but shall
have the right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent
with the rights of the grantee.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building having only one
dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent outside access and open
space or yards on all sides.
A.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling having
only one dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent outside access,
one side yard and not more than one party wall in common with an
adjoining dwelling.
B.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSES) — A
building containing three to eight dwelling units, having not more than
two party walls in common with adjoining units, and having individual
outside access.
C.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling with one dwelling
unit arranged over the other, and having two side yards each having an
independent outside access.
D.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling with one
dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one side yard and one
party wall in common with an adjoining dwelling each having
independent outside access.
E.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:594
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES — Electric
public utility transmission distribution facilities, including substations.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying one dwelling unit and
maintaining one common household, provided that no more than two
persons are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. Foster children shall
be considered as adopted for the purpose of this definition.
FENCE — Any structure erected for the purpose of screening or enclosing
one property from another, either to assure privacy or to protect the
property enclosed.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A bank, savings and loan association, credit
union, finance or loan company, etc.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD-FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain adjacent to but outside the
floodway.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream
or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation. For the
purpose of this chapter, a "floodplain" shall be capable of accommodating a
flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude.
FLOODWAY — The area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge
floodwaters; an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the floor areas of a building as
measured to the surfaces of interior walls.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms
used for habitation, such as living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens or
bedrooms, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, attached
garages, service rooms or closets, nor unheated areas such as enclosed
porches, nor rooms without at least one window or skylight opening onto an
outside yard or court.
FLOOR AREA OF BUILDING — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same
lot, excluding cellar and basement floor areas not devoted to residential
use, but including the areas of roofed porches and roofed terraces. All
dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of floor area of a building to its lot area.
When a floor area ratio of 0.4 is specified, the floor area of a building
constructed on a lot of 10,000 square feet is limited to a maximum of 4,000
square feet, the number of stories being optional; the building area may be
4,000 square feet for one story, 2,000 square feet for two stories, and so
forth.
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The characteristics of the medical
marijuana recommended or limited for a particular patient, including the
method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variety and
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:595
quantity or percentage of medical marijuana or particular active
ingredient.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
FRATERNAL CLUBS AND LODGES — An organization catering exclusively
to members and their guests, or premises or buildings for social,
recreational and administrative purposes which are not conducted for
profit, provided that there are not conducted any vending stands,
merchandising or commercial activities except as required for the
membership of such club. Clubs shall include but not be limited to service
and political organizations, labor unions, as well as social and athletic clubs.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal building
used for the storage of not more than three automobiles owned and used
by the owners or tenants of the premises. Not more than one commercial
vehicle or truck may be stored in a private garage.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any enclosed or covered space, other than a private
garage, which is used for storage, repair, rental, servicing or supplying of
gasoline or oil to motor vehicles.
GARDEN APARTMENTS — A type of apartment house, not exceeding three
stories in height, containing three or more separate dwelling units, which
have common hallways and entrances on a lot which is held in single and
separate ownership having yards in common, but which may also have
other joint facilities and services. The term "garden apartment" shall not be
construed to include townhouses.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling operated by a reasonably responsible
individual, family, or organization with a program to provide a supportive
living arrangement for individuals where special care is needed by the
individual served due to age, emotional, mental, or physical handicap.
This definition shall expressly include facilities for the supervised care of
developmentally disabled persons subject to protection under the Federal
Fair Housing Act,174 as amended. Group homes must be licensed where
required by any appropriate government agencies, and a copy of any such
licenses must be delivered to the Borough prior to beginning the use. A
group home typically involves an individual residing on the premises for
more than 30 days at a time.
GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, as defined in this section, which holds
a permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Health to grow and process
medical marijuana.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved
2-21-2017]
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial
or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment
plant, or air pollution facility and other discarded material, including solid,
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from municipal,
commercial, industrial, institutional, mining, for agricultural operations,
174. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:596
and from community activities, or any combination of the above, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may:
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Those substances or chemicals that are
physical hazards as defined by the International Fire Code, whether the
materials are in usable or waste condition.
HEALTH AND RECREATION CLUB — A commercial business that offers
active recreational and/or fitness activities. Such activities are provided
only to club members and their guests. Such facilities do not include golf
courses.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See "building height."
HEIGHT, STRUCTURE — A structure's vertical measurement from the mean
level of the ground abutting the structure to the highest point of the
structure.
HOME IMPROVEMENT STORE — A facility for the retail sale of a
combination of products used in the construction, repair, and improvement
of homes, including but not limited to lumber, masonry products, exterior
siding, roofing, plumbing fixtures, pipes, electrical supplies, floor coverings,
paints and wall coverings, windows and glass, landscaping materials,
hardware, tools, and other accessories. Home improvement stores shall
always involve outdoor storage of materials; any facilities that sell the
above-described products that do not have outdoor storage can be
considered the general retail sale of goods.
HOME OCCUPATION — A use customarily conducted within a dwelling
and carried on by the residents therein, provided that the use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes,
the exterior appearance of the structure or premises is constructed and
maintained as a residential dwelling and no goods are publicly displayed on
the premises other than signs as provided herein. "Home occupation" shall
include no-impact home based business. Extension of work-related activities
through telework are exempt.
HOSPITAL — A place for the diagnosis, treatment, or other care of humans
and having facilities for inpatient care.
HOTEL — A building used as the more or less temporary abiding place of
10 or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged, with or without
meals, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room
or suite. A hotel may include restaurants, newsstands and other accessory
services primarily for serving its occupants and only incidentally the public.
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or
A.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, exposed of,
or otherwise managed.
B.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:597
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — Those housing units designed for and
intended for occupancy exclusively by the elderly. Such units shall include
those projects developed under applicable federal and/or state housing
assistance programs. Such housing units shall contain appropriate safety
features pertinent to the needs of their residents and ancillary recreational
and other community facilities as an integral part of their development
concept. The developer of such housing units in the Borough of Middletown
must guarantee that said units would be occupied solely by elderly
residents. Furthermore, "elderly housing" shall be defined as consisting of
the following living arrangement types:
IDENTIFICATION CARD — A document issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health that permits access to medical marijuana.[Added
2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — The horizontal area of buildings, driveways,
parking spaces, patios, sidewalks, streets, structures, swimming pools,
walkways and all man-made constructions which water will not readily
penetrate, and which thereby prevent absorption of rain or snowmelt,
increasing drainage runoff and leading to soil erosion, stream
sedimentation and flooding. Other surfaces may be designated by the
Borough Planning Committee, upon recommendation by the Borough
Engineer, as impervious within the meaning of this definition.
IMPROVEMENT — Any type of structure, excavation or pavement.
JUNK — Includes scrap metals and their alloys and bones, rags, paper,
used cloth, used rubber, used rope, used tinfoil, used bottles, old or used
machinery, used lumber, used boxes or crates, used pipe or pipe fittings,
used tires and any vehicle currently unlicensed or uninspected or obsolete
as to make it unusable in its existing condition, but subject to being
dismantled.
MULTIFAMILY INDEPENDENT ELDERLY HOUSING — A multiplefamily
dwelling designed exclusively for elderly residents living in
separate dwelling units. Such residents typically do not require regular
assistance or supervision in performing daily tasks.
A.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — Any premises in which food, shelter, and
personal assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding
24 hours for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator,
who do not require the services in or of a licensed long-term care
facility but who do require assistance or supervision in such matters
as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a
residence in the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for
self-administration. Sometimes known as "assisted living."
B.
NURSING HOME — A licensed long-term care establishment providing
professional nursing, health care, dietary and other similar personal
services to convalescents, nonambulatory and semiambulatory or aged
persons, requiring constant care on a long-term basis.
C.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:598
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage outside a completely enclosed building of used and discarded
materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal, building
materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof, with
or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale, or other use or
disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of one or more
unlicensed, wrecked, or disabled vehicles, or the major part thereof, shall
be deemed to constitute a junkyard. (A disabled vehicle is a vehicle intended
to be self-propelled that shall not be operable under its own power for any
reason or a vehicle that does not have a valid current registration plate or
that has a certificate of inspection which is more than 60 days beyond the
expiration date.)
KENNEL — Any lot on which three or more animals (except relating to a
farm) are kept, boarded, raised, bred, treated, or trained for a fee, including
but not limited to dog or cat kennels.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purposes of this chapter.
LANDSCAPING — The planting or arranging of natural scenery, including
but not limited to grass and other plantings, such as trees and shrubs, to
provide a visual barrier and reduce the flow of dirt, fumes and noise.
LAUNDERETTE — A business premises equipped with individual clothes
washing and/or drying machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive
of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an apartment house.
LODGING HOUSE — See "boarding-, lodging or rooming house."
LOT — A parcel of land separately described by a metes and bounds
description which is recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Dauphin County by deed description or is described by an approved
subdivision plan recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin
County.
A. LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting two or
more intersecting streets and which has an interior angle of less than
135° at the intersection of the two street lines. Corner lots shall have
two front yards, one side yard and one rear yard.
B.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot, other than a corner lot, the sides of which do
not abut a street.
C.
D. LOT LINE — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
E.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:599
MANUFACTURE — A function involving either the processing or production
of materials, goods or products.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME — A transportable, single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly
contained in one unit or in two units designed to be joined into one integral
unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at
a site complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be
without a permanent foundation.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME — Any structure intended for or
capable of permanent human habitation, with or without wheels, and
capable of being transported or towed from one place to the next, in one or
more pieces, by whatsoever name or title it is colloquially or commercially
known, but excluding transport trucks or vans equipped with sleeping space
for a driver or drivers, and travel trailers. Mobile homes placed in parks
shall meet the requirements for mobile home parks listed in § 260-198 of
this chapter. Mobile homes placed on individual lots shall be considered
"dwellings" and be bound by the requirements there imposed. For the
purposes of § 260-136 of this chapter, any travel trailer, as defined herein,
that is contained on the same parcel for more than 180 days in any calendar
year shall be considered a mobile home.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile
home park improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home,
which is leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home
erected on the lot.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of
mobile homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home
lots.
MAXIMUM LOT COVER — See "building coverage."
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16.175[Added
2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY VEHICLE OFFICE — Any facility used to
house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds to one or
more marijuana growers/processors and/or dispensaries.[Added 2-7-2017
by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance measured between side
property lines. On corner lots, lot width shall be measured between
the right-of-way line for the nonaddress street and the directly opposite
property line.
F.
175. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1023.101 et seq.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:600
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION OR FACILITY — A dispensary or
grower/processor of marijuana for medical purposes.[Added 2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC — Any building or group of buildings
occupied by three or more medical practitioners and related services for the
purpose of providing health services to people on an outpatient basis.
MINI WAREHOUSE — A building and/or series of buildings divided into
separate storage units for personal property and/or property associated
with some business or other organization. These units shall be used solely
for dead storage, and no processing, manufacturing, sales, research and
development testing, service and repair, or other nonstorage activities shall
be permitted.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as separate sleeping quarters primarily for transient
automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking
facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as "tourist
courts," "tourist cabins," "motor lodges" and similar terms.
NO-IMPACT BASED BUSINESS — See "home occupation."
NONCONFORMING — A building, lot, structure or use of land which does
not conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located and which
was lawfully existing prior to the enactment of this chapter or the prior
zoning ordinance.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located by reasons
of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in this chapter, or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such
ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming
signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter, or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
NURSING, REST OR RETIREMENT HOMES — Facilities designed for the
housing, boarding, and dining associated with some level of nursing care.
OFFICE — A place where the primary use is conducting the affairs of
a business, profession, service, or government, including administration,
recordkeeping, clerical work, and similar business functions. An office shall
not involve manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing, assembling,
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:601
cleaning, testing, repair, or storage of materials, goods or products or the
sale or delivery of any materials, goods, or products which are physically
located on the premises. Office supplies used in the office may be stored as
an incidental use.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year); for the purposes of
this chapter, the regulatory flood.
OPEN SPACE — The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
the building.
PARKING COMPOUND — Primary businesses where passenger vehicles
may be stored for short-term, daily, or overnight off-street parking, and
connected to a street by an access drive.
PARKING LOT — An accessory use in which required and, possibly,
additional parking spaces are provided subject to the requirements listed in
Article XVI of this chapter.
PARKING SPACE — The space within a building or on a lot or parking lot for
the parking or storage of one licensed vehicle having access to a driveway,
alley or street.
PARKS, PUBLIC AND/OR NONPROFIT — Those facilities designed and used
for recreation purposes by the general public that are owned and operated
by a government or governmental agency/authority or are operated on a
nonprofit basis. This definition is meant to include the widest range of
recreational activities, excluding adult entertainment uses, and amusement
arcades.
PARTY WALL — A wall used or adapted for joint services between two
buildings or dwelling units.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — A cabinet-level state agency
responsible for planning and coordinating health resources, and licensure
of medical facilities within and throughout the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporations,
partnership or any similar entity.[Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336,
approved 2-21-2017]
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled by
a landowner to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk
or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one residential district created, from time to
time, under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMITTEE — The Planning Committee of the Borough of
Middletown.
PLAT — A map, plan or layout showing the subdivision of land and
indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:602
PORCH — A roofed or unroofed structure projecting from a building,
separated from the building by the walls of the building and having no
enclosing features except roof supports, railings and screen wire.
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building constructed
thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING or PRINCIPAL USE — The basic purpose for which
a building or land area is occupied, such as a dwelling or the conduct
of commercial, manufacturing, institutional or governmental activities, as
distinguished from accessory or incidental uses, such as a detached private
garage or storage building, or other facilities which may be necessary but
are incidental to the basic or primary occupancy or use.
PRIVATE ROAD — A legally established right-of-way, other than a street or
alley, which provides access to a lot or lots.
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — The providing of services to clients by
a person having special training and qualifications, licensed or registered
to practice by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as applicable, such as
an architect, attorney, dentist, physician, engineer, realtor, accountant or
the like. For the purposes of this chapter, "professional occupation" shall
not include activities of a commercial, mechanical or agricultural nature,
whether or not licensing or registration by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania is involved, such as barbershops, beauty shops, contractors'
offices, greenhouses or plant nurseries, hospital or nursing facilities, or the
like.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated, or controlled by a governmental agency
(federal, state, or local, including a corporation created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions, and the Board
of Education).
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action on zoning-related matters.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701
et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of Middletown.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication
shall not be more than 30 days, and the second publication shall not
be less than seven days, from the date of the hearing. Public notice for
rezoning, special exception, conditional use and/or variance requests shall
also include the posting of a sign at conspicuous locations along the
perimeter of the subject property; these sign(s) shall be posted at least one
week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the nature, date, time and location
of the hearing.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:603
PUBLIC SEWER — A municipal sanitary sewer or a comparable common
or package sanitary facility approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. Such systems are capable of
serving multiple users.
PUBLIC USES — Includes public and semipublic uses of a welfare and
educational nature, such as schools, parks, fire stations, municipal buildings
and garages, etc.
PUBLIC WATER — A municipal water supply system or a comparable
common water facility approved and permitted by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. Such systems are capable of
serving multiple users.
REGISTRY — The registry established by the Pennsylvania Department of
Health for all medical marijuana organizations and practitioners.[Added
2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
REGULATORY FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as
the basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and
other chapters and ordinances have been prepared; for the purposes of this
chapter, the one-hundred-year flood.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION — See "conversion apartment."
RESTAURANT — An establishment that serves prepared food, beverages
or desserts, primarily on nondisposable tableware, where the customer is
normally served by a restaurant employee at their table, booth or counter,
at which said items are consumed, but can provide for incidental carry-out
service so long as the area used for carry-out service does not exceed 5% of
the total patron seating area nor 80 square feet, whichever is less. Caterers
shall be included in this definition.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment that serves prepared
food generally packaged in paper wrappers and/or disposable plates and
containers and in which the food or beverages are not typically delivered
to the customer's table by an employee of the restaurant. Such restaurant
shall also include the ordering from and delivery of food directly from the
restaurant to the customer in his or her car.
RETAIL STORE/SALES — Retail stores are those businesses whose primary
activities involve the display and retail sales of goods and products. This
term shall not include adult-related facilities as defined herein.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A corridor of publicly owned land for purposes of
maintaining primary vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting properties,
including, but not limited to, roads, streets, highways and sidewalks.
Abutting property owners are prohibited from encroaching across the rightof-
way line. (See also "street line.")
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), a stream, brook, etc.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:604
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boarding-, lodging or rooming house."
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device incorporating a reflective surface
which is solid, open mesh or bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow
dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit
and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or
orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited
to what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth stations," "TVROs," and
"satellite microwave antennas."
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial uses planned and designed
for the site on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with shared off-street
parking provided on the property as an integral part of the unit.
SIGN — A device for visual communication that is used to bring the subject
to the attention of the public, but not including lettering or symbols that
are an integral part of another structure, or flags or other insignia of any
government, fraternal, or similar organization. See § 260-175 for additional
sign type definitions.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including,
but not limited to, solid and liquid waste materials resulting from municipal,
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities. Such wastes
shall not include biological excrement nor hazardous waste materials as
defined in 40 CFR 261 (1985), or as amended.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use that is generally compatible with a
particular zone once specified criteria have been met. Special exception
uses are listed by zone and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with § 260-233 of this chapter.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next to it or, if there is no floor above it,
then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane,
viaduct and any other dedicated and adopted public right-of-way used or
intended to be used by vehicular traffic and/or pedestrians.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary
of a public street, alley or street right-of-way or between a lot and a private
road.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change to a structure or an addition to
any structure, but not including normal maintenance or minor repairs or
improvements.
STRUCTURE — Any construction of materials having a vertical height from
the surrounding land or water surface in excess of one foot, including
but not limited to buildings, flagpoles, light standards, platforms, signs or
signposts, stadiums, storage bins and towers.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:605
STRUCTURE —
STUDENT HOUSING — A building containing three or more apartments,
each containing up to four persons (who may be unrelated) and who are
attending undergraduate or graduate programs offered by colleges or
universities or are on semester break or summer break from studies at
colleges or universities, or any combination of such persons. The residents
of a student home share living expenses and may live and cook as a
single housekeeping unit. This definition does not include group homes or
boarding-, lodging or rooming houses. This definition shall include, but not
be limited to, institutionally owned dormitories for students enrolled in an
institution of higher education, with common access or independent outside
access.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the fair market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, substantial
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
SWIMMING POOL — Any pool not located within a completely enclosed
building and containing, or normally capable of containing, water to a depth
at any point greater than 24 inches. Farm ponds and/or lakes are not
included, provided that swimming was not the primary purpose for their
construction.
TAVERN — An establishment which serves primarily alcoholic beverages for
mostly on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board. Taverns may also serve food.
Any man-made object, including buildings, having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure associated with an
accessory use (e.g., swimming pools, patios, antennas, tennis
courts, garages, utility shed, etc.).
(1)
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL — A structure associated with a primary
use.
(2)
A.
Structures shall not include such things as fences, sandboxes,
decorative fountains, swing sets, birdhouses, birdfeeders, mailboxes,
and any other similar nonpermanent improvements.
B.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:606
TELECOMMUTING or TELEWORK — A work arrangement in which
employees enjoy flexibility in working location and hours. In other words,
daily commute to a central place of work is replaced by telecommunication
links. Many work from home, while others, occasionally also referred to as
"nomad workers" or "web commuters" utilize mobile telecommunications
technology to work from coffee shops or other locations. "Telework" is a
broader term, referring to substituting telecommunications for any form
of work-related travel, thereby eliminating the distance restrictions of
telecommuting.
TELEPHONE CENTRAL OFFICE — A building and its equipment erected
and used for the purpose of facilitating transmission and exchange of
telephone and radio messages between subscribers and other business of
the telephone company, provided that, in a residential district, a telephone
central office shall not include public business facilities, storage of
materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a commercial basis.
TOURIST HOME, COMMERCIAL — A dwelling in which more than three
bedrooms are provided for overnight accommodation of transient persons in
return for compensation, whether or not the premises are owner-occupied.
Premises operated as herein described shall be deemed to be, and shall be
regulated as, hotels and motels.
TOURIST HOME, RESIDENTIAL — An owner-occupied dwelling in which
no more than three bedrooms are provided for overnight accommodation of
transient persons in return for compensation.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling, single-family attached."
TRAILER COACH — See "manufactured (mobile) home."
TRAVEL TRAILER — A portable structure primarily designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel purposes. In
addition to the above, any of the following attributes are characteristic of a
travel trailer:
The unit is of such size or weight as not to require a special highway
movement permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
when self-propelled or when hauled by a standard motor vehicle on a
highway;
A.
B. The unit is mounted or designed to be mounted on wheels;
The unit is designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to, the bed and/or
chassis of a truck;
C.
The unit contains, or was designed to contain, temporary storage of
water and sewage; and
D.
The unit contains some identification by the manufacturer as a travel
trailer.
E.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:607
USABLE OPEN SPACE — An unenclosed portion of the ground of a lot
which is not devoted to driveways or parking spaces and which is available
and accessible to all occupants of the building or buildings on said lot for
purposes of active or passive outdoor recreation.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The
term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
VARIANCE — A modification of any provision of this chapter granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board subject to findings specified by the Act.
VEHICLE — An assembly of parts having a wheel or wheels, or revolving
track or tracks, which enable the assembly to be more readily moved over
the land or other surfaces, used or intended for use in transporting persons,
other living things, materials of any kind or other assemblies.
CABIN TRAILER — A roadable trailer having a fixed cabin, containing
sleeping or toilet or cooking facilities or any combination thereof.
A.
CARGO TRAILER — A roadable trailer, whether or not provided with
sides or roof, used to transport materials of any kind.
B.
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE — A vehicle designed for earthmoving or
specially fitted for the transport of liquid, solid or semisolid
construction materials or having accessory machinery used in
construction, such as air compressors, electric generators, materials
for heating or cooling or lift equipment for persons for materials.
C.
EQUIPMENT TRAILER — A roadable trailer designed for the transport
of a particular kind or kinds of equipment, such as boats, construction
or excavating machines or industrial machines.
D.
FARM TRAILER — A trailer used on a farm property, whereon salable
crops, livestock or dairy items are produced.
E.
FARM VEHICLE — A powered vehicle used on a farm property, whereon
salable crops, livestock or dairy items are produced.
F.
GROUNDS VEHICLE — A vehicle designed or used for lawn care,
gardening or other groundskeeping on residential, institutional,
commercial or industrial properties.
G.
HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle having any
business identification or advertising or any passenger vehicle seating
more than six persons or any cargo vehicle having a deadweight
capacity exceeding one ton.
H.
INDUSTRIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle designed for use in an industrial
plant or grounds, for materials conveyance or having accessory
machinery such as air compressors, electric generators, materials for
heating or cooling of lift equipment for persons or materials.
I.
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:608
INSPECTED MOTOR VEHICLE — A licensed motor vehicle which has a
currently valid state inspection status, indicating that it has been found
in a state of repair rendering it safe for operation on the public streets,
under the motor vehicle laws of Pennsylvania or another state.
J.
LICENSED TRAILER — A roadable trailer which has a currently valid
license for use on the public streets, under the motor vehicle laws of
Pennsylvania or another state.
K.
LIGHT COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle on which is
displayed any business identification or any advertising and which
would otherwise be classifiable as a personal auto or personal truck.
L.
MOTOR BIKE or MOTORCYCLE — A motor vehicle having two or three
wheels.
M.
MOTOR BUS — An inspected motor vehicle designed or fitted for
carrying passengers, having a total seating capacity of more than six
persons.
N.
MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle which contains sleeping, toilet and
cooking facilities.
O.
MOTOR TRUCK — An inspected motor vehicle designed for carrying
cargo in an open or enclosed body, usually with seating capacity for two
persons, and having a deadweight cargo capacity of one ton or more.
P.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A powered vehicle, or one designed to be
powered, which may be title-registered under the motor vehicle laws of
Pennsylvania or another state.
Q.
PERSONAL AUTO — An inspected motor vehicle designed for carrying
passengers, including passenger automobiles, passenger vans, station
wagons and vans, having a capacity not exceeding 12 persons, nor 1 1/
4 tons.
R.
PERSONAL TRUCK — An inspected motor vehicle designed for
carrying cargo in an open or closed body, usually with seating capacity
for two persons, and having a deadweight cargo capacity not exceeding
one ton.
S.
POWERED VEHICLE — A vehicle having an engine or motor which is
coupled to the wheels or tracks so as to propel the vehicle.
T.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A powered vehicle designed or used for
recreation purposes, generally not classified as a motor vehicle, such as
terrain vehicles or snowmobiles.
U.
RESTORATION VEHICLE — A titled motor vehicle, usually not
currently licensed, usually in or having been in a deteriorated
condition, which is being, or is intended to be, reconditioned inside and
out, in appearance and mechanically, to good operating condition.
V.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:609
VETERINARIAN'S OFFICE — A building used primarily for the treatment,
by a veterinarian, of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and
birds or fowl. No outdoor boarding of animals is permitted.
VOCATIONAL-MECHANICAL TRADE SCHOOL — An educational use that
offers training of the following occupations:
RESTORED VEHICLE — A restoration vehicle on which the
reconditioning has been largely completed, which is now a titled motor
vehicle, and which is in a condition to be a licensed and inspected motor
vehicle.
W.
ROADABLE TRAILER — A trailer which may be licensed for use on the
public streets, under the motor vehicle laws of Pennsylvania or another
state.
X.
TENT TRAILER — A roadable trailer containing sleeping, toilet or
cooking facilities, or any combination thereof, and a collapsible tent-like
enclosure.
Y.
TITLED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle for which an ownership
title is filed under the motor vehicle laws of Pennsylvania or another
state.
Z.
TRAILER — A vehicle designed and arranged to be pulled or towed by
a powered vehicle.
AA.
UNPOWERED VEHICLE — A vehicle having no engine or motor for
propulsion, which is propelled by pushing or towing.
BB.
UTILITY TRAILER — A trailer, other than a roadable trailer, which is
designed or intended for use only on private property.
CC.
VEHICLE PARKING — The short-term storage of an inspected motor
vehicle or licensed trailer, during periods when not in use, said periods
usually measurable in minutes, hours or days.
DD.
VEHICLE STORAGE — The long-term storage of any vehicle not in
regular use, with periods usually measurable in weeks, months or
years.
EE.
A. Truck driving;
B. Engine repairs;
C. Building construction and general contracting;
D. Woodworking;
E. Masonry;
F. Plumbing;
G. Electrical contracting; and
§ 260-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-12
1:610
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run,
creek, channel, swale, pond, lake or other body of surface water carrying or
holding surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WECS UNIT — Shall include blades, hubs to which blades are attached, and
any device, such as a tower, used to support the hub and/or rotary blades,
etc.
WHOLESALE — Any distribution procedure involving persons who, in the
normal course of business, do not engage in sales to the general public.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — Any device which
converts wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
WINDOW — An opening to the outside, other than a door, which provides
all or part of the required natural light or natural ventilation, or both, to an
interior space.
YARD — An area between the permitted structures and the property lines.
ZONING — The designation of specified districts within the Borough,
reserving them for certain uses, together with limitations on lot size,
heights of structures and other stipulated requirements.
ZONING OFFICER — The duly constituted municipal official designated to
administer and enforce this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
H. Other similar trades.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and
extending the entire length of the street line. In the case of a corner
lot, the yards extending along all streets are front yards, one of which is
primary and the other secondary. In the case of a lot other than a corner
lot that fronts on more than one street, the yards extending along all
streets are front yards.
A.
YARD, REAR — The area contained between the rear property line and
the principal structure. On reverse frontage lots, the rear yard shall be
considered that area between the principal structure and the property
line directly opposite the street of address.
B.
YARD, SIDE — The area(s) between a principal structure and any side
lot line(s). On corner lots, the side yard shall be considered those areas
between the principal structure and the property lines directly opposite
the streets.
C.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:611

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 260-13. Classes of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Middletown is hereby
divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Residential District, Single-Family, Low Density
R-1A Residential District, Single-Family, Medium Density
R-C Residential District, Cluster Overlay
R-2 Residential District, Multifamily
R-3 Residential District, Planned Development
C-1 Commercial District, Shopping
C-2 Commercial District, General
M-1 Manufacturing District, Limited
C-D Conservation District
F-P Flood Damage Prevention Overlay District
A-Z Airport Zoning Overlay District
§ 260-14. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of the districts are established as shown on the
attached Zoning Map of the Borough of Middletown, dated August 25, 2011,
and as subsequently revised. The Zoning Map and all notations, references
and other data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into
this chapter as if all were fully described herein.
§ 260-15. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where any question or uncertainty exists or may develop with respect to
the boundaries of any district as indicated on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets, highways, railroad lines or streams,
such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to center lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries
shall be construed as being parallel thereto and, if indicated, at such
distances therefrom on the Zoning Map.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-15
1:613
§ 260-16. Determination of boundaries.
In the case of any uncertainty as to zoning district boundaries on the Zoning
Map, the Zoning Officer shall determine the zoning district boundaries;
however, the Zoning Officer's determination may be appealed to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 260-17. Boundary descriptions.
The legal descriptions of the various districts contained in this chapter are
hereby made a part of this chapter.176
§ 260-18. Application of regulations.
Except as provided herein, no building or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered
unless in conformance with the regulations specified for the zoning district
in which it is located; with the exception of existing nonconformities as of
the effective date of this chapter, which may be altered in compliance with
Article XIX of this chapter.
D. Where district boundaries divide a lot, the locations of such boundaries
are deemed to be lines which connect two identification points.
E. For unsubdivided land or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot,
the location of the zoning district boundary, unless dimensions are
indicated, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the
Zoning Map.
176. Editor's Note: The legal descriptions and amendments thereto are on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary.
§ 260-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-18
1:614
ARTICLE IV
R-1 Residential District, Single-Family, Low Density
§ 260-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the basic regulations governing
the use of land and the size of lots, yards and buildings within the district.
For certain specific uses or exceptional situations, these basic regulations
are supplemented by Article XV and by other provisions of this chapter.
§ 260-20. Permitted uses.
In the R-1 District, the following uses shall be permitted by right:
§ 260-21. Special exception uses.
In the R-1 District, the following uses are permitted by special exception:
§ 260-22. Height restrictions.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
C. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses
in accordance with Article XV and Article XVIII.
D. Home occupations in accordance with § 260-196A.
E. Cemeteries.
A. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and convents.
B. Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of higher
education.
C. Municipal buildings, public libraries and museums in accordance with
§ 260-156.
D. Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
E. Residential cluster development limited to single-family detached
dwellings only as per § 260-39A.
A. The height of a principal building shall be not greater than 35 feet. The
height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story.
B. As a special exception, the height of spires, belfries, cupolas, or domes
not used for human occupancy, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water
tanks, bulkheads, utility poles or towers, silos and ornamental or
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be greater than 35 feet.
§ 260-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-23
1:615
§ 260-23. Area regulations.
The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 7,500 square feet.
§ 260-24. Yards.
Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth or
width herein specified:
§ 260-25. Lot width.
The lot width shall be not less than 75 feet on an interior lot and 90 feet on
a corner lot.
§ 260-26. Lot coverage.
§ 260-27. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI
herein.
A. Front yard depth: 30 feet.
B. Side yard, interior lot, width: 12 feet each.
C. Side yard, corner lot, width: 30 feet for the yard abutting the street.
D. Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
A. The building coverage ratio shall not exceed 40%.
B. The total coverage ratio shall not exceed 50%.
§ 260-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-27
1:616
ARTICLE V
R-1A Residential District, Single-Family, Medium Density
§ 260-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the basic regulations governing
the use of land and the size of lots, yards and buildings within the district.
For certain specific uses or exceptional situations, these basic regulations
are supplemented by Article XII and by other provisions of this chapter.
§ 260-29. Permitted uses.
In the R-1A District, the following uses shall be permitted by right:
§ 260-30. Special exception uses.
In the R-1A District, the following uses are permitted by special exception:
§ 260-31. Height restrictions.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses).
D. Two-family detached dwellings.
E. Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
F. Home occupations in accordance with § 260-196A.
G. Cemeteries.
H. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses
in accordance with Article XV and Article XVIII.
A. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and convents.
B. Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of higher
education.
C. Municipal buildings, public libraries and museums in accordance with
§ 260-156.
D. Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
A. The height of a principal building shall be not greater than 35 feet. The
height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story.
B. As a special exception, the height of spires, belfries, cupolas, or domes
not used for human occupancy, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water
§ 260-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:617
§ 260-32. Area regulations.
For each type of dwelling, the lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less
than indicated below:
§ 260-33. Lot width.
For each type of dwelling, the lot width shall be not less than indicated
below:
§ 260-34. Yards.
Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth or
width herein specified:
tanks, bulkheads, utility poles or towers, silos and ornamental or
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be greater than 35 feet.
A. Single-family detached dwelling: 6,000 square feet.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling: 4,000 square feet.
C. Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse): on an interior lot, 1,800
square feet; on any exterior lot, 2,800 square feet.
D. Two-family detached dwelling: 3,000 square feet.
A. Single-family detached dwelling: 60 feet on an interior lot and 80 feet
on a corner lot.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling: 40 feet on an interior lot and 60
feet on a corner lot.
C. Single-family attached dwelling: 18 feet on an interior lot, 28 feet on an
exterior lot and 38 feet on a corner lot.
D. Two-family detached dwelling: 60 feet on an interior lot and 80 feet on a
corner lot.
E. Two-family semidetached dwelling: 40 feet on an interior lot and 60 feet
on a corner lot.
A. Front yard depth: 20 feet, to be measured from the property line,
except where 50% or more of the improved lots on such block frontage
on one side of a street currently have front yards of less depth than is
currently required for that district, and where the clear majority of such
lots are already developed, then the building line of the majority of the
buildings on that side of the block may be used, provided that the
setback to the primary structure or garage where the off-street parking
is provided on the driveway is a minimum of 25 feet.
B. Side yard, interior lot, width: 10 feet each.
C. Side yard, corner lot, width: 20 feet.
§ 260-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-34
1:618
§ 260-35. Lot coverage.
§ 260-36. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI
herein.
D. Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
A. The building coverage ratio shall not exceed 40%.
B. The total coverage ratio shall not exceed 50%.
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-36
1:619

ARTICLE VI
R-C Residential District, Cluster Overlay
§ 260-37. Purpose; intent.
§ 260-38. Designation of district.
R-C Residential District, Cluster, zones are not preestablished or
designated. In accordance with the provisions of this article and other
applicable requirements, an R-C Zone may be proposed and approved to
replace existing R-1 Residential District, Single-Family, or R-1A Residential
District, Single-Family, zones.
§ 260-39. Permitted uses.
In the R-C District, the following uses are permitted by right:
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for an optional form of
residential development allowing greater flexibility and variety of
dwelling types and locations while maintaining a maximum dwelling
unit density not exceeding that which would otherwise be permitted.
B. It is intended that R-C Cluster developments:
(1) Improve living environments.
(2) Reduce residential development, maintenance and service costs.
(3) Encourage attractive, compatible originality and variety in
dwelling structures, placement and individual and overall site
design.
(4) Provide open spaces developable for appropriate active and passive
recreation and leisure uses.
(5) Conserve and preserve in natural conditions the largest practicable
proportion of lands heavily wooded or sloped, functioning as
drainageways or waterways and retaining, for the benefit of
development residents and the general populace, aesthetic and
scenic vistas.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Two-family detached dwellings.
D. Two-family semidetached dwellings.
E. Single-family attached dwellings.
F. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
dwelling uses in accordance with Article XV and Article XVIII.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:621
§ 260-40. Permitted dwelling density.
§ 260-41. Dwelling types.
The following types of dwellings, and no other, shall be permitted in cluster
developments:
G. Home occupations, in accordance with the provisions of § 260-196A.
H. Signs erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVII for residential districts.
I. Electric, telephone, sanitary sewer, stormwater management and water
supply facilities, as required to serve the development.
J. Development of community civic center facilities.
K. Development of active and passive recreation and leisure facilities.
L. Natural open space.
A. For land zoned R-C in place of R-1, the maximum dwelling unit density
shall be four units per gross acre.
B. For land zoned R-C in place of R-1A, the maximum dwelling unit density
shall be eight units per gross acre.
C. "Gross acreage" includes the total land area of a tract proposed for R-C
zoning prior to development.
A. The following types, as defined in Article II, under "dwelling."
(1) Single-family detached, individual.
(2) Single-family semidetached.
(3) Single-family attached.
(4) Two-family detached.
(5) Two-family semidetached.
B. The following types, as variations of the basic types indicated above,
and as herein further described:
(1) Lot line house: a single-family detached dwelling with one side
located on the side lot line of the private lot. Windows are
prohibited on the lot line side of the dwelling. The lot adjoining the
lot line side must provide an easement for maintenance of the
dwelling.
(2) Multiplex dwelling: a single-family attached dwelling with
variations permitted in the individual and grouped structures.
Units may be one or two stories or combinations thereof.
Attachment of units may be horizontal or vertical: common walls
§ 260-39 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-41
1:622
§ 260-42. Mix of dwelling types.
may be side to side, rear to rear or side to rear and may include
all or only part of the wall of either attached structure; attachment
may be by ceiling-floor structure. Each dwelling unit shall have
independent outside access.
A. Each cluster development shall contain at least three types of
dwellings.
(1) At least 20% of the dwellings shall be single-family detached.
(2) No other type (single-family semidetached, single-family attached,
or two-family) shall exceed 40% of the total units.
B. For cluster developments for which final plans are to be submitted for
approval of portions or sections of the development, the overall
preliminary plan submission shall include a final section and phasing
plan.
(1) The phasing plan shall be subject to specific recommendation by
the Borough Planning Committee and specific approval by the
Borough Council.
(2) The phasing plan shall clearly delineate, by metes and bounds, the
proposed final sections.
(3) The phasing plan, in addition to being superimposed on the
diagrammatic layout of the development, shall include a tabular
presentation of the following data for each section and for the
section-by-section cumulative totals:
(a) Numbers and types of dwellings.
(b) Percent of each dwelling type of total dwellings.
(c) Gross land area in acres.
(d) Dwelling units per gross acre.
(e) Land area in public streets.
(f) Land area in access roadways.
(g) Land area in common lands.
(h) Land area in individual lots.
(i) Land area in cluster group or condominium section lots.
(j) Impervious coverage, in area and percent, computed in
accordance with § 260-52.
(k) Time schedule for development.
§ 260-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:623
§ 260-43. Height and story regulations.
§ 260-44. Condominium cluster groups and sections.
§ 260-45. Dwelling lots.
Every dwelling structure shall be located on a land area delineated on the
development plans by metes and bounds to provide that such area can be
made private to the dwelling or dwellings thereon.
(4) Final section plans shall be in accordance with the approved
phasing plan. No change shall be permitted unless a complete,
revised phasing plan is proposed and approved in accordance with
Subsection B(1) above.
A. The height of a building shall be measured in accordance with the
definition of "building height" in Article II.
B. No dwelling shall be less than one story in height.
C. No dwelling structure shall contain more than two stories of dwelling or
living space.
D. No dwelling structure shall exceed 35 feet in height.
E. No accessory structure shall exceed 16 feet in height.
A. Dwellings of any type (detached, semidetached or attached) may be
grouped together either as contiguous, attached structures or detached
with minimal spacing between structures, in any combination.
B. No more than 12 units may be included in any one clustered group of
dwellings.
C. No cluster group shall have more than six units which are attached or
closely adjacent having the same frontal orientation. Adjacent frontal
orientations shall have an included angle of not more than 150°.
D. No more than two contiguous units shall have the same frontal
alignment. Offsets of frontal alignments shall be at least three feet.
E. No more than four cluster groups may be included in one condominium
section. Spacing between cluster groups in a condominium section shall
be in accordance with § 260-47.
A. Lots for individual structures shall have an area not less than that
indicated in § 260-46. The frontal orientation of each lot shall be
indicated on the development plans.
B. Lots for condominium dwellings may be delineated for each cluster
group or for each condominium section.
§ 260-42 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-45
1:624
§ 260-46. Minimum lot areas.
Dwelling lots required by this section shall contain minimum land areas as
follows, in square feet per dwelling unit:
Dwelling Type Individual Condominium
Single-family detached 5,000 3,000
Single-family
semidetached
4,000 2,500
Two-family detached 2,500 1,500
Two-family semidetached 2,500 1,500
Single-family attached:
Any 1 unit 2,000 1,500
Average for attached
group
2,500 2,000
§ 260-47. Building spacing and yards.
The actual yard dimensions of open areas between buildings and the
defined dwelling lot lines shall be as proposed in the development plan and
as approved by the Borough Council. The following spacing of buildings
shall be provided, evidenced by appropriate dimensional information in the
development plan:
(1) However delineated, the total lot area shall be not less than the
sum of the areas indicated in § 260-46 for all the dwellings included
thereon.
(2) The front of each dwelling unit shall be indicated on the
development plans.
A. No dwelling structure shall be less than 30 feet from any property line
of the overall development tract.
B. No dwelling structure shall be less than 30 feet from the right-of-way of
any public street.
C. No dwelling structure shall be less than 30 feet from a defined access
roadway. This spacing may be reduced to 20 feet where the structure
wall is that of an attached garage or one having no door or window
openings.
D. No dwelling structure shall be less than 10 feet from the perimeter of
any multiple-space parking compound. For parking compounds having
walkways along the parking spaces, the compound perimeter shall be at
the dwelling side of the walkway.
E. Where dwelling structures on individual lots or dwelling clusters on
condominium lots are not separated from other dwellings or dwelling
§ 260-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-47
1:625
§ 260-48. Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
§ 260-49. Off-street parking.
A cluster development shall be provided with off-street parking facilities in
accordance with these provisions. These facilities shall be clearly shown on
all development plans, with driveways, turning areas and parking spaces
fully dimensioned.
clusters by public streets, access roadways or parking compounds, the
following minimum spacing shall be provided:
Arrangement of Structures
Distance
(feet)
Front to front 60
Front to rear 60
Front to side 40
Rear to rear 60
Side to side 30
A. Accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
B. Accessory buildings or structures, including detached private garages,
shall not be located in front of any dwelling.
C. An accessory building or structure shall be not less than 10 feet from
any other building or structure.
D. An accessory building, structure or use shall be not less than 20 feet
from any street, access roadway, multiple-space parking compound or
property line of the overall development tract.
E. An accessory building or structure shall be not less than five feet from
an individual or condominium lot line.
F. Accessory buildings may contain home workshop areas, workshop
areas associated with maintenance activities for the development and
sanitary facilities incidental to the workshop uses. Any other dwelling
or habitable spaces or facilities are prohibited.
A. Parking spaces and driveways shall be in accordance with Article XVI.
B. Number of spaces.
(1) Not less than two spaces shall be provided for use by the resident
occupants of each dwelling unit.
§ 260-47 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-49
1:626
§ 260-50. Walkway system.
§ 260-51. Utility services.
Cluster development proposals and development plans shall include
detailed information on utility services in compliance with Borough
standards and specifications, as herein required:
(2) Not less than one space for every four dwelling units shall be
provided for use by visitors.
(3) Additional spaces shall be provided as required to accommodate
development management and maintenance personnel and
vehicles.
C. Location of spaces.
(1) No parking space shall access directly to any public street nor to
the cartway of any access roadway.
(2) Parking facilities may be included on individual lots.
(3) Parking facilities may be provided in multiple-space parking
compounds.
(4) Parking spaces intended for use by resident occupants of a
dwelling unit shall be not more than 150 feet from the dwelling.
(5) Visitor parking spaces shall be provided among those intended for
use by resident occupants.
D. Turnaround areas. All parking facilities shall include sufficient
turnaround areas to permit vehicles entering a public street or private
access roadway by forward movement.
E. Walkways shall be provided in accordance with § 260-50.
A. Standard sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all public
streets.
B. Individual or cluster lots located along access roadways shall be
interconnected by a system of circulation walkways, which shall also
connect to the public street sidewalks. These circulation walkways may
be independent of or may be parallel to and included in the access
roadways.
C. Entrance walkways shall connect building entrances to a public street
sidewalk, a circulation walkway or to an off-street parking facility.
D. Multiple-space parking compounds shall include circulation walkways
generally and appropriately along their perimeters. The circulation
walkways shall extend to the entrance walkways of the dwellings
served by the parking compound.
§ 260-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-51
1:627
§ 260-52. Impervious coverage limitation.
The total impervious coverage in a cluster development shall not exceed
30% of the land area, as herein provided.
A. Development plans shall show the locations and easements for
distribution systems for cable communications, electric power, and gas
and telephone services.
B. Development plans shall describe the proposed solid waste collection
arrangements and shall describe and show the location of all solid
waste storage facilities in the development. A storage facility shall be
provided on each lot. For lots containing more than one dwelling, a
common facility may be provided.
C. A cluster development shall not be approved unless the sanitary sewer
system is to be connected to the public sewer system. The development
plan shall show the locations of the sewer collection lines and
manholes, connection thereof to the public system, all related
easements and pipe sizes and shall include the collection system
profiles.
D. A cluster development shall not be approved unless the water supply
distribution system is supplied from the public water system or from an
equivalent system.
(1) The water supply system shall provide minimum water flows and
fire hydrant locations acceptable to the Middletown Fire
Department.
(2) The locations of the water mains and fire hydrants and connection
to the public system shall be shown on the development plan,
including related easements and pipe sizes.
(3) If an alternative, equivalent supply system is proposed, the
development plan shall include detailed information on water
sources, locations, water flow rates, storage and pressure
capacities and related information on construction and
maintenance of the system.
A. The maximum area permitted to be covered shall be computed as
follows:
(1) The total land area of the cluster development tract shall be
reduced:
(a) By the land area to be included within public street rights-ofway.
(b) By the land area to be utilized for access roadways.
(c) By the land area to be utilized for circulation walkways
associated with access roadways.
§ 260-51 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-52
1:628
§ 260-53. Buffer areas.
Cluster developments shall be provided with buffer areas along all tract
property lines. To the extent feasible, all existing natural buffer areas
shall be retained. Along all other property lines, a buffer area shall be
constructed. The cluster development plan shall include a buffer area plan.
§ 260-54. Common lands and open space.
All land areas in a cluster development which are not included in individual
or condominium lots or in public streets or access roadways shall be
included in designated common land areas.
(2) Impervious coverage shall not exceed 30% of the result of the
above subtractions.
B. The limitation described above shall be observed for the cluster
development as a whole, not for individual or condominium lot areas,
and shall also be observed for any portion or section of a cluster
development proposed for final approval.
C. The site data summation on all preliminary and final development plans
shall include the land areas and percentages for total land area, land
area of public streets, land area for access roadways, land area for
circulation walkways, net land area, land area for dwelling structures,
including patios or other covered areas, land area for accessory
buildings and structures, land area for off-street parking, land area for
entrance walkways, land areas covered for recreation, community
center or maintenance facilities, and any other covered areas.
A. The buffer area plan shall designate and describe all natural areas to be
retained.
B. The buffer area plan shall designate all constructed buffer areas and
shall include a construction and planting scheme.
(1) Constructed buffers shall, as a minimum, be provided with at least
two staggered rows of evergreen trees at least six feet in height,
spaced not more than 10 feet apart. Additional plant materials and
earthen mounding are encouraged to soften the linear appearance
of the tree rows.
(2) The buffer area plan shall show the locations, sizes and species of
plantings and the elevational treatment.
A. The development plan shall describe each common land area by metes
and bounds and show its size.
B. The site data summation on all preliminary and final plans shall show
the total area of all included common lands and percentage thereof of
the total land area.
§ 260-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-54
1:629
§ 260-55. Signs.
The types, sizes and placement of signs in a cluster development shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVII of this chapter as applicable
to residential districts.
§ 260-56. Fences and walls.
Except as otherwise specified for particular dwelling types in the sections
above, fences or walls in a cluster development shall be in accordance with
the provisions of § 260-153.
§ 260-57. Procedures for designation of district.
Proposals to replace an existing R-1 or R-1A Residential District designation
with an R-C designation shall be made and considered for approval in
accordance with the provisions herein, in accordance with other applicable
provisions of this chapter and pursuant to the provisions for a change
or amendment of zoning regulations of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.177
C. Common land areas may contain community center facilities,
development maintenance facilities, active and passive recreation areas
and storm drainage facilities.
D. All common land areas shall have direct access on a public street or
access roadway.
E. Larger common land areas should have multiple access points related
to size, location and usability.
F. The provision of nature trails in land areas so suited is encouraged.
G. The cluster development maintenance program shall include specific
provisions for the care and maintenance of all common land areas and
all facilities developed thereon.
H. Land covenant or deed restriction provisions, to establish the common
land areas and limitations of use thereof in perpetuity, shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Borough. These provisions
shall describe the rights and responsibilities of all dwelling unit
occupancies, both on individual and condominium lots.
A. Consideration of changing the designation of a land area may be
initiated by the Middletown Borough Planning Committee or by the
Middletown Borough Council.
(1) Prior to proceeding in accordance with § 260-232 of this chapter, a
clear description of the land area to be considered shall be
prepared.
177. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-54 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-57
1:630
(a) For the purposes of public notice display, the area shall be
clearly delineated on a copy of the Borough Zoning Map.
(b) For the purposes of public notice publication, a description
utilizing commonly identifiable boundaries, such as streets and
alleys, to the extent practical, shall be prepared.
(2) For the purposes of public notice publications, a statement of the
reasons for considering the application of the R-C District to the
land area shall be prepared.
(a) The statement shall indicate how the permission for cluster
development is in harmony with the general purposes, goals,
objectives and standards of the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
(b) The statement shall describe the particular reasons for
permitting cluster development, such as special housing
objectives or physical features of the land area particularly
appropriate for such development.
(c) The amount of development to be expected under the cluster
permission shall be compared with the amount which could be
expected under standard development regulations.
(d) The availability of adequate public sanitary sewer and water
supply shall be described, and the effect of development traffic
on the streets providing access shall be indicated.
B. Consideration of changing the designation of a land area may be
requested by a landowner or by a developer having the permission of
the landowner. Such requests shall be submitted and processed by the
Borough, as provided herein.
(1) The procedural steps shall be those described in Article XX of this
chapter.
(2) Submission of the request shall include the payment to the Borough
in accordance with the schedule of fees and a written agreement to
pay any excess of costs exceeding that amount.
(a) The costs involved shall be those directly associated with
processing the request, such as public notice advertising,
reproduction, mailing and stenographic services.
(b) Any excess fees paid over actual costs incurred shall be
refunded to the applicant.
(3) The submission shall include a concept plan for the development,
which provides the following information:
(a) A location plan showing the land area and surrounding areas of
the Borough, including identification of all streets and alleys,
and the existing zoning districts.
§ 260-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-57
1:631
§ 260-58. Development plan requirements.
Applications for approval of development of land zoned R-C Residential
District, Cluster, shall be submitted and processed as provided herein.
(b) A property plan plotting the tract boundaries by metes and
bounds, showing all included, adjacent or associated streets or
alleys, locating and describing all other easements, providing
topographic contour information and all other salient physical
features, indicating the existing uses of all adjacent lands and
showing the location of the existing sanitary sewer and water
supply systems to which the development would be connected.
(c) A development concept plan which provides the following
information:
[1] Proposed types and mix of dwellings;
[2] Expected locations of all residential structures;
[3] Proposed nondwelling buildings and facilities, locations
and uses;
[4] Public streets to be constructed;
[5] Access roadways to be provided;
[6] Off-street parking facilities;
[7] Stormwater drainage facilities;
[8] Walkway system;
[9] Buffer areas, natural and constructed;
[10] Total tract area, total dwelling units and density; and
[11] Expected coverage, related to § 260-52.
(d) A report addressing the following:
[1] The capacity of the sanitary sewer system to handle the
flow from the development at the point at which it would
be connected;
[2] The capacity of the public water supply system to supply
the necessary domestic and firefighting water flow at the
point at which it would be connected and any additional
facility which would be required, or a description of an
alternative system to be constructed, having adequate
capacities; and
[3] The effect of development traffic on the public streets
which provide access to the development tract.
§ 260-57 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-58
1:632
§ 260-59. Walkway specifications.
A. Where the R-C District was established by Borough initiative, a concept
plan in accordance with § 260-57 shall be submitted for review and
approval by the Borough Planning Committee and the Borough Council.
B. Following approval of a concept plan as required in Subsection A
immediately above or approval of an R-C District upon a landowner/
developer request submitted and processed in accordance with
§ 260-57B, a preliminary and final plat(s), supporting plans and
documents shall be submitted for approval in accordance with Chapter
238, Subdivision of Land.
(1) In addition to the requirements of Chapter 238, Subdivision of
Land, the preliminary plat shall fully detail compliance with all
standards and provisions in this article.
A. A circulation walkway is an improved pedestrian passageway proposed
and approved in a land development plan to provide for general
pedestrian circulation in a development where access roadways are
approved or as may otherwise be required for approval of the
development. Circulation walkways shall have a minimum width of four
feet and shall be either concrete or bituminous construction as follows:
(1) Concrete construction.
(a) Provide concrete with a minimum twenty-eight-day strength
(f'c) of 3,000 pounds per square inch and with air-entraining
admixture. Provide 3.5% minimum to 7.5% maximum of
entrained air.
(b) Form the foundation at a depth of four inches below the
finished grade of the walkway. Thoroughly compact the
foundation to a firm even surface.
(c) Place concrete four inches deep. Provide a broom finish,
finished transversely for the full width of the walkway. Form
outside edges and joints with a one-fourth-inch-radius edging
tool. Form transverse dummy joints at five-foot intervals
approximately 1/8 inch wide and at least one inch deep.
(d) Place one-half-inch premolded expansion joint material for the
full depth of the walkway at thirty-foot maximum intervals.
(e) Cure the concrete by either wet curing for seven days or
through the use of a liquid chemical curing compound.
(2) Bituminous construction.
(a) Install a base course of four inches minimum compacted depth
on a compacted subgrade. Provide No. 2A coarse aggregate in
accordance with PennDOT Specification Pub. 408, Section 703,
as last amended.
§ 260-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-59
1:633
(b) Provide a bituminous binder course of two inches minimum
compacted depth in accordance with PennDOT Specification
Pub. 408, Section 408, as latest amended.
(c) Provide a bituminous wearing course of one inch minimum
compacted depth in accordance with PennDOT Specification
Pub. 408, Section 420, as latest amended.
(d) Construct the bituminous course in accordance with PennDOT
Specification Pub. 408, Section 401.3, as latest amended.
B. An "entrance walkway" is an improved pedestrian passageway
connecting a building entrance to a public street sidewalk, to a
circulation walkway or to other areas.
§ 260-59 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-59
1:634
ARTICLE VII
R-2 Residential District, Multifamily
§ 260-60. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the basic regulations governing
the use of land and the size of lots, yards and buildings within the district,
to allow for the orderly development and/or redevelopment of a variety
of housing types, municipal and other uses. For certain specific uses or
exceptional situations, these basic regulations are supplemented by other
provisions of this chapter.
§ 260-61. Permitted uses.
In the R-2 District, the following uses are permitted by right:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses).
D. Two-family detached dwellings.
E. Two-family semidetached dwellings.
F. Student housing, in accordance with § 260-202.
G. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and convents.
H. Home occupation, in accordance with § 260-196A.
I. Municipal buildings, public libraries and museums, in accordance with
§ 260-156.
J. Professional offices.
K. Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
L. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses
in accordance with Article XV and Article XVIII.
M. Academic clinical research centers. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
N. Medical marijuana growers/processors. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
O. Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
P. Medical marijuana dispensaries. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336,
approved 2-21-2017]
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-62
1:635
§ 260-62. Special exception uses.
The following uses are permitted as a special exception when authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board:
§ 260-63. Height restrictions.
The height of a principal building shall be not greater than 35 feet. The
height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story. The height of a
professional office building shall be not less than one story.
§ 260-64. Area regulations.
A. Apartment houses, in accordance with § 260-186A.
B. Boarding-, lodging and rooming houses, in accordance with § 260-190.
C. Residential bed-and-breakfast accommodations and residential tourist
homes, in accordance with § 260-189.
D. Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of higher
education.
E. Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
F. Funeral homes.
G. Fraternal clubs and lodges.
H. Group homes (see definition).178
I. Manufactured home parks, per § 260-198.
J. ECHO housing per the criteria in § 260-194.
A. For each type of dwelling, the lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less
than indicated below:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling: 4,000 square feet.
(3) Single-family attached dwelling: on an interior lot, 1,800 square
feet; on any exterior lot, 2,800 square feet.
(4) Two-family detached dwelling: 3,000 square feet.
(5) Two-family semidetached dwelling: 2,000 square feet.
(6) Apartment dwelling: see § 260-186.
(7) Student housing: 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
178. Editor's Note: See definition in § 260-12.
§ 260-62 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-64
1:636
§ 260-65. Lot width.
For each type of dwelling, the lot width shall be not less than indicated
below:
§ 260-66. Yards.
Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth or
width herein specified:
§ 260-67. Lot coverage.
B. The lot area for all professional office buildings shall be not less than
6,000 square feet.
C. The lot area for all other uses shall be not more than 6,000 square feet.
A. Single-family detached dwelling: 60 feet.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling: 40 feet.
C. Single-family attached dwelling: 18 feet on an interior lot, 28 feet on an
exterior lot.
D. Two-family detached dwelling: 60 feet.
E. Two-family semidetached dwelling: 40 feet. Required 40 feet minimum
lot width must apply to the two units that are stacked on one side of the
party wall. The other two units in the building will require an additional
40 feet of lot width.
F. Apartment dwelling: see § 260-186.
G. Student housing: 100 feet.
H. All other purposes: 80 feet.
A. Front yard depth: 10 feet, to be measured from the property line,
except where 50% or more of the improved lots on such block frontage
on one side of a street currently have front yards of less depth than is
currently required for that district, and where the clear majority of such
lots are already developed, then the building line of the majority of the
buildings on that side of the block may be used.
B. Side yard, interior lot, width: 10 feet each.
C. Side yard, corner lot, abutting the street shall have a minimum width
equal to the minimum front yard depth, provided that the setback to the
primary structure or garage, where off-street parking is provided on the
driveway is a minimum of 25 feet for the yard abutting the street.
D. Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
A. The building coverage ratio shall not exceed 40%.
§ 260-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-67
1:637
§ 260-68. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with Article XVI herein.
§ 260-69. Coverage increase by special exception.
As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may grant an increase in
the coverage ratios in accordance with the provisions herein.
B. The total coverage ratio shall not exceed 50%.
A. The building coverage ratio may be increased, not to exceed a total of
45%.
B. The total coverage ratio may be increased, not to exceed a total of 60%.
C. Copies of an application for special exception and all required
additional information shall be submitted to the Borough Planning
Committee for review and recommendation prior to the hearing by the
Zoning Hearing Board, per Article XX.
(1) Submission to the Planning Committee shall be not less than 14
days prior to its regular meeting.
(2) The Planning Committee shall refer the application plan to the
Borough Engineer for general review, and comprehensive review of
the drainage plan.
D. An application shall be filed per Article XX.
E. The added coverage shall not adversely impact the reasonable use and
enjoyment of adjacent properties.
F. The appearance, bulk and use of the added coverage shall be
comparable with the permitted uses and practices in the area in which
located.
G. The lot shall have not less than the minimum frontage required for each
principal use located on a minor or larger street.
H. All principal buildings shall be served by public sewer and water supply.
§ 260-67 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-69
1:638
ARTICLE VIII
R-3 Residential District, Planned Development
§ 260-70. Purpose.
This article is intended to encourage, in districts where permitted, the
design of well-planned large-scale primarily residential developments which
may contain a variety of types and designs of residential structures,
resulting in a neighborhood pattern that will create a community
relationship between residents, providing within the neighborhood the
accommodations for a variety of social, recreational and community
activities and necessities for their everyday needs.
§ 260-71. Permitted uses.
In the R-3 District, the following uses are permitted:
§ 260-72. Planned development area requirements.
A. Permitted residential uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses).
(4) Two-family detached dwellings.
(5) Two-family semidetached dwellings.
(6) Apartment houses, § 260-186.
(7) A retirement village, which will include a nursing home and a
variety of residential living units for the elderly.
(8) Home occupations, § 260-196.
(9) Boarding-, lodging or rooming houses, § 260-190.
(10) Student housing, § 260-202.
(11) Academic clinical research centers. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(12) Medical marijuana growers/processors. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(13) Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices. [Added 2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(14) Medical marijuana dispensaries. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
B. Permitted commercial uses: all those uses set forth in § 260-72J.
§ 260-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-72
1:639
A. The plans must be reviewed and recommendations made by the
Planning Committee.
B. Minimum plot. The minimum plot for planned development shall be not
less than 25 acres.
C. Plans. The developer shall submit for review by the Planning Committee
a plan showing the size, location, height and use of all structures, the
location and width of all streets and parking areas and areas to be set
aside for parks and recreation, the location, size and type of planting for
buffer yards and the location and type of utilities to be provided.
D. Density.
(1) Maximum density for single-family detached structures shall not
exceed six dwelling units per net residential acre. Net residential
acreage shall not include areas for recreation, circulation, service
and slope and stream protection.
(2) Maximum density for structures designed for two families shall not
exceed eight dwelling units per net residential acre.
(3) Maximum density for multiple-dwelling structures not exceeding
three stories shall not exceed 25 families per net residential acre.
(4) Maximum dwelling units per townhouse structure shall not exceed
six.
(5) Maximum dwelling units per garden apartment structure two
stories in height shall not exceed 24.
(6) Maximum dwelling units per garden apartment structure three
stories in height shall not exceed 36.
(7) In the case of high-rise elevator apartments, the maximum density
shall not exceed 75 families per net residential acre. Structures
shall not exceed 12 stories.
(8) The maximum length of a single structure shall not exceed 340
feet.
E. Overall maximum density. The maximum gross density for the total
acreage within the planned development program of a specific
developer shall not exceed 20 dwelling units per gross acre.
F. Setbacks. All dwelling units shall be set back from public right-of-way
lines not less than 30 feet and from all adjacent property lines not less
than 50 feet.
G. Interior yards. Interior yards and/or structural spacing shall be
provided in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 260-72 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-72
1:640
Required Interior Yards and Spacing
(feet)
Number of Dwelling Units Per Structure
Arrangement of
Structures 1 2 12 18 Over 18*
Front to front 110 110 110 110 110
Front to side 50 50 50 50 50
Front to rear 100 100 100 100 100
Side to rear 30 30 30 35 40
Side to side 15 30 30 35 40
Rear to rear 100 100 100 100 100
* Add four feet for each story by which the structure exceeds five
stories.
H. Lawns and planting. The exterior yard shall be maintained with lawns
and planting.
I. Recreation areas. Areas for recreation shall be provided at accessible
and strategic locations throughout the development area. The open
space and recreation areas shall be provided in accordance with the
following schedule:
Population
Size
(acres)
2,000 3.25
3,000 4.00
4,000 5.00
5,000 6.00
J. Development commercial center.
(1) The purpose and intent of the development commercial center is to
provide and require a unified and organized arrangement of
buildings, service and parking areas, together with adequate
circulation and open space, all planned and designed, as an
integrated unit, in a manner so as to provide and constitute an
efficient, safe, convenient and attractive shopping area to serve the
planned development requirements and needs as well as those of
adjacent areas. In the development commercial center, no land
shall be used and no building erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed for other than one or more of the following
uses:
(a) Retail stores and shops.
§ 260-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-72
1:641
(b) Restaurants, delicatessens and cocktail lounges.
(c) Pharmacies or drugstores; stationery, book, tobacco and news
media surveyors.
(d) Self-service laundry and dry cleaning and pickup stations.
(e) Barbershops and beauty shops.
(f) Automotive service stations.
(g) Business and professional offices.
(h) Banks and financial institutions.
(i) Garden centers and flower shops.
(j) Hotels and motels.
(2) No commercial enterprises shall be permitted to operate except in
the area designated for commercial uses.
K. Conditions and restrictions on commercial centers.
(1) The permitted uses designed to serve the neighborhood or
development may be constructed, provided that:
(a) They shall be so located as to minimize traffic problems and be
served by main access roads and not primarily residential
streets.
(b) There shall be no outside storage or display of material,
equipment or merchandise.
(2) The area for commercial use shall not exceed the following:
Number of Acres Percentage of Tract
25 to 75 10%
75 to 150 8%
150 to 250 7%
250 or more 6%
(a) The permitted commercial structures or uses shall not be
constructed in advance of the residential structures and shall
at no time be in excess of the percentage requirements as set
forth above.
(b) The permissible lot coverage of commercial buildings in the
development commercial center areas shall not exceed 25%.
(c) The required parking spaces shall be situated on the same lot
within not more than 200 feet.
§ 260-72 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-72
1:642
(d) Buffer yards. Where a commercial area adjoins a residential
area, in adjacent land around the perimeter of the development
a buffer yard shall be required in addition to the above yard
requirements. The buffer yard shall be of a dimension not less
than the minimum side yard required for the residential use
and shall be covered with ground cover and plantings as
outlined in the general regulations.
(e) Screen plantings. Screen plantings shall be required where a
commercial use adjoins a residential use in the planned
development or in land areas adjacent to the development.
(f) Signs. Signs may be erected and maintained only when in
compliance with the provisions of Article XVII.
L. General regulations. Any development plan shall comply with the
parking, loading and unloading, highway access and any other
applicable general regulations of the Borough.
M. Utilities. A development shall be served by a public sewage system and
treatment facility and a public water supply. All plans shall be subject to
review and approval by the Borough and the Pennsylvania Department
of Health.
N. Special exceptions. The requirements concerning density, setbacks,
interior yards and recreation areas set forth in this section shall be
subject to special exceptions in a nonprofit retirement village providing
housing and a nursing home for the elderly.
O. Medical and dental clinics. The uses permitted in residential planned
development districts shall also include medical clinics and dental
clinics.
§ 260-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-72
1:643

ARTICLE IX
C-1 Commercial District, Shopping
§ 260-73. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the retail sales of goods, services
and food to meet the needs of the surrounding neighborhood in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of Middletown. A related
objective is to permit a wide range of business types that normally require
highway frontage while also protecting the safe usage of streets and roads
as thoroughfares.
§ 260-74. Permitted uses.
A. In the C-1 District, the following uses shall be permitted by right:
(1) All residential uses permitted in any residential district with the
exception of conversion apartments, provided that the residential
use shall be permitted only when accessory and is located above
one or more of the following permitted uses:
(2) Amusement enterprises, including theaters, billiard or pool parlors,
bowling alleys or similar uses or places of assembly.
(3) Animal hospital, veterinary office or kennel, dog day care or similar
in accordance with § 260-185.
(4) Automobile service stations in accordance with § 260-188.
(5) Automobile sales, provided they are located on Main Street.
(6) Automobile service garage in accordance with § 260-187.
(7) Banks and business, fiduciary and professional offices.
(8) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(9) Business identification signs, when erected and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVII appearing herein
entitled "Signs."
(10) Church, places of worship and related uses.
(11) Clubs and lodges.
(12) Commercial child day-care facilities in accordance with § 260-192.
(13) Commercial recreation facility, including health and recreation
clubs.
(14) Conference center.
(15) Crafts or artisan's studio.
(16) Department stores.
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-74
1:645
§ 260-75. Special exception uses.
(17) Home improvement store in accordance with § 260-195.
(18) Hotels, motels, and commercial tourist homes.
(19) Housing for the elderly in accordance with § 260-197.
(20) Launderettes and dry cleaning establishments.
(21) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories, including hospitals,
emergency medical treatment centers or similar.
(22) Mini warehouse.
(23) Municipal buildings and uses, § 260-155.
(24) Parking structures.
(25) Personal service shops.
(26) Private schools conducted for gain or profit, including instructional
studios, trade schools.
(27) Public utility transmission and distribution facilities, including
substations, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
(28)Railway or bus passenger stations, telegraph offices and express
offices.
(29) Restaurants, tearooms, cafes, taverns and other places serving
food or beverages.
(30) Stores for the retailing of food, drugs, confectionery, hardware,
bakery products, clothing, household appliances, flowers or
houseplants, including convenience stores, garden centers,
shopping centers.
(31) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
(32) Academic clinical research centers. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(33) Medical marijuana growers/processors. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(34) Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices. [Added 2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(35) Medical marijuana dispensaries. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
A. Communication antennas, towers, equipment, transmitting and
receiving facilities, § 260-193.
§ 260-74 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-76
1:646
§ 260-76. Height restrictions.
The height of a principal building shall be not greater than 35 feet, except
that the height of a hotel shall not exceed 50 feet.
§ 260-77. Area regulations.
The following minimum lot areas shall apply to uses in the C-1 District:
§ 260-78. Yards.
§ 260-79. Lot coverage.
§ 260-80. Additional regulations.
A. Individual retail uses: 10,000 square feet.
B. Shopping centers: two acres.
C. Housing for the elderly: two acres.
D. Hotels and motels: two acres.
E. All other permitted uses: two acres.
A. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard: 10 feet.
(2) Two side yards, 10 feet in width, each side of a principal building,
provided that any lot adjoining a residential district shall have a
side yard of a width not less than the minimum width required in
the adjoining residential district. In the case of a series of abutting
structures abutting and paralleling a public right-of-way, an open
and unobstructed passage for vehicles and pedestrians of at least
20 feet in width shall be provided at grade level at intervals of not
more than 400 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
B. As a special exception, front, side and rear yards may be modified.
A. The building coverage ratio shall not exceed 60%, unless otherwise
regulated under Article XVIII.
B. The total coverage ratio shall not exceed 80%, unless otherwise
regulated under Article XVIII.
C. All areas of the lot not covered by buildings or other impervious
surfaces shall be prepared and maintained as green space, containing
grass or other ground cover and appropriate shrubbery or similar
plantings. This requirement shall be met for all new development and at
the time of any substantial improvement or redevelopment.
§ 260-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-80
1:647
§ 260-81. Off-street parking.
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
A. Where a development on a single lot contains multiple buildings, the
building to building separation shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
B. Landscaping of commercial parking lots per Article XVI.
C. Applications shall be accordance with § 260-205.
§ 260-80 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-81
1:648
ARTICLE X
C-2 Commercial District, General
§ 260-82. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the retail sales of goods, services
and food to meet the needs of the surrounding neighborhood in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of Middletown. A related
objective is to permit a wide range of business types and residential uses
that are compatible with the urban character.
§ 260-83. Permitted uses.
A. In the C-2 District, the following uses shall be permitted by right:
(1) Amusement enterprises, including theaters, billiard or pool parlors,
bowling alleys or similar uses or places of assembly.
(2) Automobile sales, provided they are located on Main Street.
(3) Banks and business, fiduciary and professional offices.
(4) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(5) Bed-and-breakfast accommodations in accordance with § 260-189.
(6) Churches, places of worship and related uses.
(7) Clubs and lodges.
(8) Commercial child day-care facilities in accordance with § 260-192.
(9) Crafts or artisan's studio.
(10) Department stores.
(11) Emergency medical treatment centers or similar.
(12) Health and recreation club.
(13) Launderettes and dry cleaning establishments.
(14) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(15) Mortuary and undertaking establishments.
(16) Municipal buildings and uses.
(17) Office.
(18) Parking structure.
(19) Personal service shops.
(20) Private schools conducted for gain or profit, including instructional
studios, trade schools or similar.
§ 260-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-83
1:649
§ 260-84. Special exception uses.
The following uses are permitted when as a special exception use:
§ 260-85. Height restrictions.
The height of a principal building shall be not greater than 35 feet, except
that the height of apartment housing for the elderly shall not exceed 90 feet
and the height of a hotel shall not exceed 50 feet.
§ 260-86. Area regulations.
The minimum lot area for all uses in the C-2 District is 2,000 square feet.
(21)Railway or bus passenger stations, telegraph offices and express
offices.
(22) Restaurants, tearooms, cafes, taverns and other places serving
food or beverages, excluding drive-throughs.
(23) Stores for the retailing of food, drugs, confectionery, hardware,
bakery products, clothing, household appliances, flowers or
houseplants, including convenience stores.
(24) Veterinary office.
(25) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
(26) Hotels.
(27) Academic clinical research centers. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(28) Medical marijuana growers/processors. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(29) Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices. [Added 2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(30) Medical marijuana dispensaries. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
A. Communication antennas, towers, equipment, transmitting and
receiving facilities in accordance with § 260-193.
B. Residential hotels.
C. Motels.
D. Commercial tourist homes.
§ 260-83 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-87
1:650
§ 260-87. Yards.
Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth or
width indicated below:
§ 260-88. Lot coverage.
§ 260-89. Additional regulations.
A. Front yard: not required.
B. Two side yards, 10 feet in width, each side of a principal building,
provided that any lot adjoining a residential district shall have a side
yard of a width not less than the minimum width required in the
adjoining residential district. No side yards shall be required where two
commercial uses abut side to side and a written agreement between the
adjoining property owners is provided. However, in no case shall party
walls be permitted between properties of separate ownership. In the
case of a series of abutting structures abutting and paralleling a public
right-of-way, an open and unobstructed passage for vehicles and
pedestrians of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided at grade level
at intervals of not more than 400 feet.
C. Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
A. The building coverage ratio shall not exceed 60%.
B. The total coverage ratio shall not exceed 90%.
C. A minimum of 10% of the lot shall be prepared and maintained as green
space, containing grass or other ground cover and appropriate
shrubbery or similar plantings. This requirement shall be met for all
new development and at the time of any substantial improvement or
redevelopment.
A. Where a development on a single lot contains multiple buildings, the
building to building separation shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
B. No parking shall be allowed between the building and the street line.
Parking shall be placed to the rear of buildings and accessed off an
alley, existing curb cut or a side street.
C. Off-street parking facilities may be provided within 600 feet of the
periphery of the designated commercial district.
D. Off-street parking facilities are subject to the following provisions:
(1) Off-street parking spaces may be grouped in facilities serving more
than one lot or establishment.
(2) Parking garages may be above or below ground. Aboveground
garages shall be in the rear yard and architecturally compatible
§ 260-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-89
1:651
§ 260-90. Off-street parking.
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI,
except that for apartment housing for the elderly, the total number of
parking spaces shall be not less than 1/5 times the number of apartments in
the building, plus one space for each person employed therein.
with other improvements developed on the site and immediate
area.
E. Applications shall comply with § 260-205.
§ 260-89 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-90
1:652
ARTICLE XI
M-1 Manufacturing District, Limited
§ 260-91. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish and preserve areas for limited
manufacturing and related uses of such a nature that do not create serious
problems of compatibility with other land uses and to make provisions for
certain kinds of manufacturing uses which are most appropriate located
as neighbors of manufacturing uses or which are necessary to serve the
immediate needs of people in these areas.
§ 260-92. Permitted uses.
A. In the M-1 District, the following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Airports and airport-related services.
(2) Automobile service stations, automobile sales, trailer coach sales,
service garages, auto sales lots, automobile assembling, auto body
shops, painting, upholstery reconditioning, vehicle repair or
overhauling, tire retreading or recapping, welding shops and the
like.
(3) Blacksmith and machine shops.
(4) Bottling works and bookbinding.
(5) Building materials storage, lumberyards and lumber mills.
(6) Business identification signs, when erected and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVII appearing herein
entitled "Signs."
(7) Carpenter, cabinetmaking, furniture repair and upholstery,
electrician, metalworking, tinsmith, plumbing, gas, steam or hotwater
fitting shops.
(8) Contractors' equipment, sales, service and storage.
(9) Distribution plants, parcel delivery and service industries.
(10) Electrical, optical and textile manufacturing.
(11) Freight and trucking terminals.
(12) Hospitals.
(13)Kennels.
(14) Laboratories and lithographing.
(15) Laundries, cleaning, dyeing and carpet and rug cleaning.
§ 260-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-92
1:653
(16) Manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of such
products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs,
pharmaceuticals and food products, except fish and meat products,
sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and the rendering or refining of fat and
oils.
(17) Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials:
bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, film, fur, glass,
hair, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or
stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarns and paint not
employing a boiling process.
(18) Manufacturing of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products using only clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
(19) Mini warehouse.
(20) Municipal buildings, municipal uses and state and federal
government uses.
(21) Office.
(22) Parking structures.
(23) Printing and newspaper publishing.
(24) Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks,
day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and
swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing areas.
(25) Public utility transmission and distribution facilities, including
substations, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
(26)Railway or bus passenger stations and telegraph or express offices.
(27) Wholesale businesses, warehouses and cold storage plants;
however, no warehouse and no wholesale business shall be
permitted to store, handle or receive any hazardous materials or
hazardous chemicals, including but not limited to corrosive liquids,
flammable solids, oxidizing materials, poisonous gas and
radioactive material [except manufactured articles such as
instruments or electronic apparatus whose gamma radiation is less
than 10 milliroentgen in 24 hours, highly toxic material or unstable
(reactive) chemicals], and any existing business constituting a
nonconforming use shall be permitted to expand in area no more
than 25% at such location as it is found to be lawfully in existence.
(28) All uses similar to the above and not otherwise prohibited by law.
(29) Academic clinical research centers. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
§ 260-92 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-92
1:654
§ 260-93. Special exception uses.
(30) Medical marijuana growers/processors. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(31) Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices. [Added 2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(32) Medical marijuana dispensaries. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1336, approved 2-21-2017]
A. In the M-1 District, the following uses are permitted by special
exception:
(1) Adult-oriented business, as defined in Article II herein in
accordance with Subsection B.
(2) Other uses which, in the opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board, are
of the same general character as uses set forth in Article XI,
§ 260-92, and which will not be detrimental to the intended purpose
of this chapter.
(3) Wind energy facility in accordance with § 260-203.
(4) Communication antennas, towers etc., in accordance with
§ 260-193.
B. A special exception shall be approved for an adult-oriented business
only if the following conditions are met:
(1) The property shall not be located within 300 feet of a residential
district, as measured from lot line to residential district boundary,
or within 100 feet of any property containing a dwelling, as
measured from lot line to lot line.
(2) The property shall not be located within 300 feet of the lot or
property line of any religious structure, school, day-care facility,
library or public park, as measured from lot line to lot line.
(3) The property shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another adultoriented
business, as measured from lot line to lot line.
(4) There shall be no display of adult-oriented materials that can be
seen from the exterior of the building.
(5) The Zoning Hearing Board shall review and approve all exterior
signs for compatibility with adjacent uses.
(6) No adult-oriented business or activity may change to another type
of adult-oriented business or activity except upon application to
and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board of such change as a
special exception.
§ 260-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-93
1:655
§ 260-94. Use limitations.
The uses permitted in §§ 260-92 and 260-93 are permitted only on the
condition that they are not obnoxious or offensive by reason of the emission
of odor, dust, smoke, noise, gas, vibration, illumination, refuse matter or
water-carried waste.
§ 260-95. Height restrictions.
The height of a principal building shall be not greater than 35 feet.
§ 260-96. Yards.
§ 260-97. Lot coverage.
§ 260-98. Off-street parking.
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
(7) No unlawful sexual activity or conduct shall be performed or
permitted.
(8) No person under 18 years of age will be permitted to enter the
business.
A. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the depth
or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet.
(2) Two side yards, 10 feet in width, each side of a principal building,
provided that any lot adjoining a residential district shall have a
side yard of a width not less than the minimum width required in
the adjoining residential district. No side yard shall be required
where two or more manufacturing uses abut side to side and a
written agreement between the adjoining property owners is
provided. However, in no case shall party walls be permitted
between properties of separate ownership.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
B. As a special exception, front, side and rear yards may be modified by
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The building coverage ratio shall not exceed 60%.
B. The total coverage ratio shall not exceed 90%.
C. A minimum of 10% of the lot shall be prepared and maintained as green
space, containing grass or other ground cover and appropriate
shrubbery or similar plantings. This requirement shall be met for all
new development and at the time of any substantial improvement or
redevelopment.
§ 260-93 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-98
1:656
ARTICLE XII
C-D Conservation District
§ 260-99. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to control activities, development and uses
in conservation district areas subject to flooding in order to prevent the
loss of property and life, the creation of health and safety hazards and the
disruption of commerce and governmental services by:
§ 260-100. New construction, permitted uses and special exception
uses.
A. Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or in
combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
B. Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from
locating within areas subject to flooding.
C. Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
A. In the Conservation District, no new construction shall be permitted,
including fences, with the exception of two-wire fences, except where
the effect of such construction on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements which have been approved by all
appropriate local and/or state authorities.
B. Permitted uses. In the Conservation District, the following uses and
activities are permitted, provided that they do not require structures,
fill or storage of materials and equipment:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks,
day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and
swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing areas.
(3) Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas
and pervious parking areas.
(4) Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas,
impervious parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, etc.
C. Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and activities
are permitted by special exception, provided that they are in
compliance with the provisions of the Conservation District and are not
prohibited by any other ordinance.
§ 260-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-100
1:657
§ 260-101. Restrictions.
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development
adversely affect the capacity of the channels of floodways of any
watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system. In
a case where the watercourse of a riverine environment is altered or
relocated, adjacent communities, the state Flood Coordinator and the
Federal Insurance Administrator shall be notified.
(1) Structures accessory to the uses and activities in Subsection B
above.
(2) Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
(3) Utilities and public facilities and improvements, such as railroads,
streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines, water and sewage
treatment plants and other similar or related uses.
(4) Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks, wharves,
piers, etc.
(5) Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals and similar activities.
(6) Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not
buoyant, flammable or explosive and are not subject to major
damage by flooding, and provided that such materials and
equipment are firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement
and/or can be readily removed from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
(7) Other similar uses and activities.
§ 260-100 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-101
1:658
ARTICLE XIII
Flood Damage Prevention
§ 260-102. Intent.
The intent of this article is to:
§ 260-103. Applicability.
§ 260-104. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 260-105. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 260-106. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Middletown unless a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 260-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-106
1:659
§ 260-107. Designation of Zoning Officer as Floodplain
Administrator.
The Zoning Officer within the Department of Building and Zoning is hereby
appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein
as the Floodplain Ordinance Administrator.
§ 260-108. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Middletown.
§ 260-109. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Middletown or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-5317, as amended), the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended), the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended),179 and the United
States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall
be issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
179. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 260-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-109
1:660
§ 260-110. Application procedures and requirements.
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of Title
34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions
thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Middletown. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
§ 260-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-110
1:661
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information, plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
§ 260-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-110
1:662
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under Title 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 158-19B)
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 158-25F, Storage, and § 158-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 158-25F and 158-26, which
are intended to be used, reduced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the propose structure to prevent leaks or spills of
the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 158-26
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(5) Applications for permits shall all be accompanied by a fee, payable
to the municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
§ 260-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-110
1:663
§ 260-111. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the Dauphin County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 260-112. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 260-113. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 260-114. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit the date of its
issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 260-115. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180
days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufacture home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator and
the Borough's fee schedule.
§ 260-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-115
1:664
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause
for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
§ 260-116. Enforcement.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to Borough of Middletown of not less than $25 nor more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 260-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-117
1:665
§ 260-117. Appeals.
§ 260-118. Identification of floodplain areas.
§ 260-119. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time
and place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.180
A. The identified floodplain area is an overlay zoning district and shall be
any areas of Borough of Middletown classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated August 2,
2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Borough of Middletown and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
C. Supplemental floodplain areas, which are areas not identified in the FIS
but where Borough of Middletown has determined the area to merit
additional regulation under this article. These areas are identified on
the Borough of Middletown supplemental floodplain identification map.
A. Floodway area.
(1) Description. The area identified as floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
180. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 260-117 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-119
1:666
studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
B. Special floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse.
(b) In special floodplain areas without a designated floodway, no
new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the BFE by more than
one foot.
C. Approximate floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which are
subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse.
(b) When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE,
as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using
a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which
is nearest the construction site in question. In lieu of the above,
the municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
§ 260-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-119
1:667
§ 260-120. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council, with recommendations by the Planning Commission and Borough
Engineer, where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 260-121. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 260-122. General technical provisions.
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Middletown.
D. Supplemental floodplain area (SA).
(1) Description. Areas not identified in the FIS but where Borough of
Middletown has determined the area to merit additional regulation
under this chapter.
(2) Special requirements. No new construction or development shall
be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
§ 260-119 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-122
1:668
§ 260-123. Special requirements in identified floodplain areas.
(3) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the Borough of
Middletown to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) as soon as
practicable but within six months of any new construction,
development, or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The
situations when a LOMR or a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) are required are:
(1) Any development occurring in Zone A which will cause a rise of
more than one foot in the base flood elevation (as determined using
methodology in § 158-19C(2)(b); or
(2) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, new construction or development
is prohibited with the following exceptions, provided the use does not
require structures other than as indicated or fill other than as indicated:
(1) Accessory uses such as sheds or pavilions. Such uses are limited to
600 square feet of floor area. The total amount of floor area per lot
for accessory uses is limited to 600 square feet regardless of the
number of such accessory structures.
(2) Plowing, seeding, harvesting, pasture, plant nurseries,
horticulture, forestry, aquaculture and other normal farming
operations.
(3) Vehicle access uses, including driveways, roads, streets, bridges
and culverts. Impacts to the floodplain are limited to the least
amount needed to construct the use and provide safety and
structural integrity.
(4) Public and private recreational uses such as parks, camps, picnic
areas, swimming areas, boat launches, wildlife areas and
preserves, hunting and fishing, game farms, trails for hiking, horse
riding, athletic fields and other recreational activities.
(5) Accessory residential uses such as yards, gardens and play areas.
(6) Projects conducted with the objective of improvement,
stabilization, restoration, or enhancement of the stream bank,
stream channel, floodplain or aquatic habitat. Such projects must
§ 260-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-123
1:669
§ 260-124. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
receive appropriate permits and approvals from DEP prior to
starting the project.
(7) Utility lines and pipes.
(8) Similar uses determined to be acceptable by the Borough Council,
provided the use does not require structures other than as
indicated above or fill other than the minimal amount needed for
the use.
B. Preexisting lots or parcels. Where a lot or parcel that has been legally
created and recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter is
located entirely or partially within any identified floodplain area, the
following conditions apply:
(1) If the lot or parcel is located entirely within any identified
floodplain area, development may be allowed by variance. Such
development shall be in full compliance with all other requirements
of this chapter.
(2) If the lot or parcel is located partially within any identified
floodplain area, development shall be confined to the area outside
of the floodplain area to the maximum extent practical. If the area
outside of the floodplain area is insufficient for the proposed use,
development within the floodplain may be allowed by variance.
Such development shall be in full compliance with all other
requirements of this chapter.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 158-19C(2)(b) of
this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended, shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the regulatory flood
§ 260-123 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-124
1:670
elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation in
accordance with § 158-19C(2)(b) of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended, shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 260-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-124
1:671
§ 260-125. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
§ 260-124 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-125
1:672
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Zoning Officer.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
(6) Be limited to only the amount needed for the intended use.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damage, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code, shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 158-26, Development which may endanger human life,
§ 260-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-125
1:673
shall be stored 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
§ 260-125 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-125
1:674
§ 260-126. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall be located at or above the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this article:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof, Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof, Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act181
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances, or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises, or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be
subject to the provisions of this section in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
181. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 260-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-126
1:675
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall
be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood elevation.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood Proofing Regulations" (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
D. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
§ 260-126 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-127
1:676
§ 260-127. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least five
lots or at least two acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 260-128. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 260-129. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
A. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within approximate floodplain or special floodplain area, manufactured
homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the unit(s)'s proposed installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
§ 260-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-129
1:677
§ 260-130. Activities requiring special permits.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,182 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the Zoning Hearing Board:
§ 260-131. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 158-28.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request, including a completed permit application form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
182. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 260-129 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-131
1:678
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation elevations, and
information concerning the flow of water, including direction and
velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood elevation;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 260-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-131
1:679
§ 260-132. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Middletown, the following procedures shall apply in addition to all others
contained in this article:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base flood
elevation;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood elevation, including a statement
concerning the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation elevations and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation elevations and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development;
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under § 302 of Act 1978-166;183 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Middletown
Planning Commission and Borough of Middletown Engineer for review
and comment.
183. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 260-131 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-132
1:680
§ 260-133. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of
Middletown shall notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what
respect the application is deficient.
C. If the Borough of Middletown decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Middletown approves an application, it shall file
written notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information, with the Department of Community and Economic
Development, by registered or certified mail, within five calendar days
after the date of approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Middletown shall
allow the Department of Community and Economic Development 30
days after receipt of the notification by the Department to review the
application and decision made by the Borough of Middletown.
F. If the Borough of Middletown does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Middletown and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Borough of Middletown shall not issue the special
permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of contained above, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in any other code, ordinance, or
regulation, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood elevation without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or
contents below the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 260-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-133
1:681
§ 260-134. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood elevation.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow thorough technical
review by the Borough of Middletown and the Department of
Community and Economic Development.
A. The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions
of § 158-35 shall apply.
B. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the base flood elevation.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any special floodplain area that would, together
with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the
BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more
of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement, and
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(4) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the
greatest extent possible.
(6) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
§ 260-133 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-134
1:682
§ 260-135. Variances.
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
A. In general. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the Borough of Middletown may, upon request,
grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Procedures and conditions.
(1) Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the procedures contained in § 260-233E
and the following:
(a) No variance shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any floodway area that
would cause any increase in the BFE.
(b) No variance shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any special floodplain area
that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE than one foot at any point.
(c) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood
elevation requirement involved, no variance shall be granted
for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development regulated by special permit or to development
which may endanger human life.
(d) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(e) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it
considers necessary in order to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this
chapter.
(f) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall notify the applicant in writing that:
[1] The granting of the variance may result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
[2] Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(2) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 260-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-135
1:683
§ 260-136. Definitions.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense.
[2] Nor create nuisances, pause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(3) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Zoning Officer. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
(4) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting
the one-hundred-year flood.
A. In general. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in
this article shall be interpreted in conformity with Article II, or if
undefined, so as to give this article its most reasonable application.
B. Specific definitions, as used in this article. As used in this article, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to: the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets,
§ 260-135 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-136
1:684
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
(1)
§ 260-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-136
1:685
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant, partially enclosed
area used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified
either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 260-136 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-136
1:686
started after December 8, 1976, and before the effective date of this
chapter is subject to the chapter in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this
chapter.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE)
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks when
such development is located in all or a designated portion of a
floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck;
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 260-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-136
1:687
12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter
must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
(1)
§ 260-136 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-136
1:688
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references
to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the
IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or
(e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the state Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained
from the Secretary of the Interior or the state Historic Preservation
Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
§ 260-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-136
1:689

ARTICLE XIV
A-Z Airport Zoning Overlay District
§ 260-137. Application.
The regulations and standards contained in this article shall apply to all
applications to:
§ 260-138. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the Airport Zoning Overlay District is to:
§ 260-139. Relation to other zoning districts.
The Airport Zoning Overlay District shall not modify the boundaries of any
other overlay zoning district. Where identified, the Airport Zoning Overlay
District shall impose certain requirements on land use, construction and
development in addition to those contained in the applicable underlying
zoning district and/or applicable overlay zoning district for the same area.
§ 260-140. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meaning given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet above sea level. The airport elevation for Harrisburg
International Airport is 310 feet; the airport elevation for Capital City
Airport is 347 feet.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14 CFR
77 and 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
A. Erect a new structure;
B. Add to or increase the height of an existing structure; and
C. Establish, erect, and/or maintain any use, structure, or object (natural
or man-made), within the Airport Zoning Overlay District of the
Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
A. Create an overlay district that considers safety issues around the
Capital City Airport (CXY) and Harrisburg International Airport (MDT);
B. Regulate and restrict the heights of established uses, constructed
structures, and objects of natural growth;
C. Create a permitting process for certain uses, structures, and objects
within said related zones.
§ 260-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-140
1:691
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this chapter
and the Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws Relating to Aviation).184
AIRPORT(S) [HARRISBURG INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT (MDT) AND
CAPITAL CITY AIRPORT (CXY)] — Any area of land or water which is
used, or intended to be used, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and
any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for airport
buildings or air navigation facilities for rights-of-way, together with all
airport buildings and facilities thereon. As used herein, the term "airport"
includes public airports, but excludes private airports and heliports. Public
and private airports are defined separately in this section.
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and
upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is
applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The
inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface
and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The approach
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the approach surface.
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending outward
and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20
feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
The conical surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,185 is based on the conical
surface.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of various
radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then connecting
the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the
planned approach. The horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,186 is
derived from the horizontal surface.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
184. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
185. Editor's Note: Said Figure 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
186. Editor's Note: Said Figure 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 260-140 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-140
1:692
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or an amendment thereto.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this chapter.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System
(ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved
runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on
the runway center line. The primary surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,187
is derived from the primary surface.
RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that extends
outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to the horizontal
surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically. The
transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,188 is derived from the
transitional surface.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 260-141. Conflict.
Wherever and whenever the requirements of this article are at variance
with the requirements of any other section of this chapter, the most
restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
187. Editor's Note: Said Figure 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
188. Editor's Note: Said Figure 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 260-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-142
1:693
§ 260-142. Establishment of airport zones.
There are hereby created and established certain zones within the Airport
Zoning Overlay District, defined in this chapter and depicted on Figure 1189
and illustrated on the Borough of Middletown, Dauphin County, PA: Airport
Zoning Overlay District Map as follows:
§ 260-143. Permit applications.
§ 260-144. Variances.
A. Approach Surface Zone.
B. Conical Surface Zone.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone.
D. Primary Surface Zone.
E. Transitional Surface Zone.
A. As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 CFR 77.13(a) (as amended or
replaced), proposals for applications to:
(1) Erect a new structure whose height does not surpass that of the
primary structure on the property;
(2) Add to or increase the height of an existing primary structure; or
(3) Establish, erect, and/or maintain any use, structure, or object
(natural or man-made), in the Airport Zoning Overlay District:
shall first notify the Department's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by
submitting PennDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review
of the proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof.
The Department's BOA response must be included with this permit
application for it to be considered complete. If the Department's
BOA returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the
permit request should be considered in compliance with the intent
of this overlay ordinance. If the Department's BOA returns a
determination of a penetration of airspace, the permit shall be
denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance from such
regulations as outlined in § 260-144.
B. Exceptions. In the following circumstances, notification of an approval
by PennDOT's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) shall not be required:
(1) No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace
parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the
height of an existing structure.
189. Editor's Note: Said Figure 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 260-142 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-144
1:694
§ 260-145. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use shall be made
of land or water within the Airport District Overlay in such a manner as to:
A. In addition to the provisions set forth in § 260-233E relating to
variances, any request for a variance shall include documentation in
compliance with 14 CFR 77, Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1, as amended
or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a variance will depend
on the determinations made by the FAA and the Department's BOA as to
the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space. In particular, the
request for a variance shall consider which of the following categories
the FAA has placed the proposed construction in:
(1) No objection. The subject construction is determined not exceed
obstruction standards and marking/lighting is not required to
mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination, a variance
shall be granted.
(2) Conditional determination. The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport
hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this
determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon
implementation of mitigating measures as described in § 260-147,
Obstruction marking and lighting.
(3) Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is determined
to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance shall be denied
and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the
applicant.
B. Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that
a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the
public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this
chapter.
A. Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communications between the airport and aircraft;
B. Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others;
C. Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport;
D. Create bird strike hazards; or
E. Otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the airport(s).
§ 260-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-146
1:695
§ 260-146. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or
tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming
use. No nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to
grow higher, so as to increase the nonconformity, and a nonconforming use,
once substantially abated (subject to the underlying zoning ordinance) may
only be reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
§ 260-147. Obstruction marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this article
may be conditioned according to the process described in § 260-233E to
require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question
to permit the municipality, at its own expense, or require the person
requesting the permit or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such
marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure both ground and air
safety.
§ 260-146 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-147
1:696
ARTICLE XV
General and Supplemental Regulations
§ 260-148. Purpose.
This article contains provisions which qualify or supplement the district
regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 260-149. Accessory buildings, structures or uses.
Accessory buildings, structures or uses shall only be constructed on a lot
containing a principal structure or use. No use of an accessory building will
be permitted until completion of the permitted principal building or use.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, accessory buildings, including,
but not limited to, detached garages, shall comply with the following:
A. Detached private garage for no more than three automobiles shall be
permitted in any district.
B. Detached accessory structures, buildings shall not exceed 16 feet in
height in all residential districts except as noted in Subsection H.
C. Attached accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the
principal structure.
D. Temporary buildings and structures are not permitted, except as
otherwise permitted in this article.
E. No detached or freestanding accessory building or structure shall be
located within any required front yard, except fences and walls in
accordance with § 260-153.
F. An accessory building or structure may be erected in the side or rear
yard, provided that such building is entirely separated from the
principal building by a minimum distance of 10 feet and is located
farther back from the front street line than the front most portion of the
principal building.
G. An accessory building shall have a maximum area no larger than 300
square feet in ground floor area, with the exception of accessory
garages, which shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
H. An accessory building may be erected within the rear yard, provided
where such rear yard is along an alley or adjacent to another lot, the
accessory building shall be located not less than five feet from such side
or rear lot line.
I. Any accessory building or structure erected, set or placed less than 10
feet from the principal or main building shall be attached to the
principal or main building and shall be considered as part of that
structure.
§ 260-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-149
1:697
§ 260-150. Standard antennas; amateur radio antennas.
§ 260-151. Dumpster screening and location.
J. An existing nonconforming accessory building or structure may be
repaired or completely removed, but shall not be expanded or
substantially altered.
K. No dwelling unit shall be permitted in any basement, cellar or any other
accessory building or structure except that a dwelling unit having a
minimum of 450 square feet of habitable floor area may be constructed
above an existing detached garage(s) or accessory building with
nonhabitable floor area on the ground level up to a maximum of two
stories above grade. Conversion of ground level nonhabitable floor area
into habitable floor area creates a principal building.
L. Accessory uses include but are not limited to swimming pools,
greenhouses and tennis courts.
M. The use of nontraditional storage units, including those commercially
known as "PODS®" or enclosed container of a box trailer with or
without wheels, shall be permitted on a temporary basis subject to the
following:
(1) Units shall be permitted for a maximum period of 60 days in any
one calendar year. This period may be extended upon written
request to the Zoning Officer for a period not exceeding 180 days.
(2) The enclosed container of a box trailer with wheels may be used for
temporary construction storage for the period for which a valid
building permit has been issued. Such units shall be licensed and
located in accordance with the required accessory use setback of
the zoning district in which the property is located.
(3) The container of a box trailer, with or without wheels, shall not be
used for permanent storage in any zoning district.
(4) A zoning permit must be obtained from the Zoning Officer.
A. No standard antenna, including its supporting structure, shall have a
total height exceeding 15 feet above the top of the principal building on
the lot, except that an amateur radio antenna may have a maximum
height above the average surrounding ground level of 70 feet.
B. An antenna shall be properly anchored to resist high winds.
A. Solid waste dumpsters shall be screened on three sides. Such screening
shall consist of decorative masonry walls, solid weather-resistant wood
fencing or a material of a similar appearance (such as white vinyl
vertical planks). Evergreen plantings are also encouraged in addition to
the fence or wall. The fence or wall shall include a self-latching door or
gate.
§ 260-149 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-151
1:698
§ 260-152. Excavation and demolition.
B. Setback from dwellings. An outdoor solid waste container with a
capacity of over 25 cubic feet shall be kept the maximum distance that
is feasible from any abutting dwelling, provided that the container is
not in the minimum front yard setback area. In any case, an outdoor
solid waste container shall be kept a minimum of 15 feet from an
abutting dwelling. A solid waste dumpster shall not be located in a
front, side or rear setback yard or a required buffer yard.
C. All waste containers shall be completely enclosed, and the lid shall be
kept in place. The locations of all dumpsters shall be shown on all site
plans and land development plans submitted to the Borough of
Middletown.
D. This section shall not apply to dumpsters temporarily placed during
actual construction or demolition on the premises, or for recycling
containers that do not involve garbage.
A. It shall be the duty of each person or contractor who intends to perform
excavation or demolition work at a site within the Borough to obtain a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Such permit shall not be
issued unless the person or contractor establishes proof of compliance
with the appropriate notification requirement under Pennsylvania law
(Act No. 287, approved December 10, 1974, as the same may be
changed or amended from time to time).190
B. Any excavations for the removal of topsoil or other earth products must
be adequately drained to prevent the formation of pools of water. The
Zoning Officer may require that such an excavation be enclosed by a
fence if it is deemed to be a menace to the public health, safety and
welfare. Such excavation shall be graded to avoid the creation of open
pits, holes or depressions which are below the elevation of adjacent
roadways.
C. Unless specifically permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board, open
excavations shall not be maintained, except those excavations made for
the erection of a building or structure for which a permit has been
issued.
D. The dumping of earth, gravel, rock or other materials not subject to
decay shall not be permitted in any zone or any vacant land except by
permit. In any event, the existing grade shall not be raised more than
three feet above the nearest road, hazardous or nuisance conditions
shall not be created, nor shall an unsightly appearance or unstable
slopes be created. The dumping of materials subject to decay, noxious
or offensive materials or junk shall not be permitted in any district.
190. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 260-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-152
1:699
§ 260-153. Fences and walls.
§ 260-154. Habitable floor area.
Each dwelling unit shall not have less than 650 square feet of habitable
floor area, except that efficiency units intended for occupancy by not more
than two persons shall have not less than 450 square feet of habitable floor
space.
E. Excavations shall be made only by permit and such permit shall be
issued only when shown not to be detrimental to the neighborhood or
objectives of ordinances. Excavations must not remain as a scar to the
land and must be contoured and seeded to restore the continuity of
surrounding land.
F. A maximum of 30% graded incline or decline shall be permitted in
relationship to existing adjoining property grades after excavation.
A. Fences and freestanding walls may be erected, altered and maintained
within the yards, provided that any such fence or wall in the front yard
shall not exceed four feet in height, and any fence or wall in the side or
rear yard exceeding six feet in height shall contain openings therein
equal to 50% of the area of that portion of the wall or fence exceeding
six feet in height, not to exceed two feet. Barbed wire will be permitted
at the top of a fence or barrier in the C-1, C-2 and M-1 Districts or
publicly owned properties at a minimum height of six feet. No fence or
other barrier may be electrified.
B. All yards used for the storage of any material needed for the operation
or conduct of a manufacturing or commercial enterprise shall be
enclosed by a solid wall, uniformly painted board fence or screen
planting on all sides which face upon a street or face upon a lot in a
more restricted zone.
C. All fences and walls shall be located and constructed so that no portion
of the structure extends beyond the property line.
D. No fence, wall or hedge shall obstruct the clear sight triangle
requirements of this chapter, as defined in § 260-157, Obstruction to
vision; visibility at intersections.
E. No fence, wall, or structure shall be permitted or erected in a public or
private drainage, utility or access easement, unless otherwise required
by this chapter or other Borough ordinance. Any such fence erected in
violation of this section shall be removed or relocated at the owner's
expense.
F. Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes are exempted
from the regulations of this section and are permitted by right as
needed in all zoning districts.
§ 260-152 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-155
1:700
§ 260-155. Municipal uses.
In any district, including a residential planned development district, a
building may be erected, altered or extended and land may be developed
which is arranged, intended or designed for municipal uses, including
firehouses of volunteer fire companies and municipal recreation uses.
§ 260-156. Number of principal uses and principal buildings per lot.
§ 260-157. Obstruction to vision; visibility at intersections.
A. A lot in a commercial or industrial district may include more than one
principal use and/or more than one principal building, provided that
every requirement is met for each use and each building. If differing
dimensional requirements apply for different uses on the lot, then the
most restrictive requirement shall apply.
(1) For example, if use one requires a one-acre lot area and use two on
the same lot requires a two-acre lot area, then the lot shall have a
minimum lot area of two acres.
(2) The lot may include a condominium form of ownership of individual
buildings, with a legally binding property owners' association, if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, based
upon review by the Borough Solicitor, that there will be appropriate
legal mechanisms in place and compliance with applicable state
law.
B. A lot within a residential district shall not include more than one
principal use and shall not include more than one principal building
unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
(1) A manufactured/mobile home park, condominium residential
development, student housing development or apartment
development may include more than one principal building per lot,
provided all other requirements of this chapter are met.
(2) A condominium form of ownership of individual dwelling units, with
a legally binding homeowners' or other association, may be
established if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer, based upon review by Borough's Solicitor, that there will be
appropriate legal mechanisms in place and compliance with
applicable state law.
(3) Each principal building must be served by its own utilities.
A. Walls, fences, signs or other structures shall not be erected or altered
and hedges, trees or other growth shall not be planted or maintained
which may cause danger to traffic on a street or road by obstructing the
view.
§ 260-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-157
1:701
§ 260-158. Performance standards.
B. In a clear sight triangle, no walk, fence, sign or other structure shall be
erected or altered, and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be
maintained or permitted between three feet and eight feet above the
street grade which may cause danger to traffic or a street or public road
by obscuring the view.
C. Where two streets intersect, a clear sight triangle shall be required.
Each of the two shorter legs of the triangle shall be measured from 30
feet back from the point of intersection of the street cartways
(disregarding the curbed radius at the corner). These two legs shall be
connected by a third longer leg.
D. Where a street intersects with an alley, a clear sight triangle shall be
established with one leg of the triangle 15 feet long along the edge of
the right-of-way of the street and one leg of the triangle 10 feet long
along the center line of the alley, with the two legs connected by a third
longer leg.
E. Where two alleys intersect, a clear sight triangle shall be established
with each leg of the triangle 10 feet long along the center line of each
alley, and with the two legs connected by a third longer leg.
F. All fences and walls shall be in accordance with § 260-153.
A. Middletown Borough requires safeguards to assure compliance with
the following environmental performance standards. When required,
the applicant shall demonstrate that adequate provisions will be made
to reduce and minimize any objectionable elements. Nothing in this
performance standard shall take precedence over any applicable
current state or federal law governing air management, wastewater
management, solid waste management or noise.
B. Upon request of the Borough Zoning Officer or Planning Committee,
the owner shall furnish or obtain proof, at his own expense, that the
proposed use will comply with the following standards. A use or activity
shall not:
(1) Constitute a nuisance or danger to human health and safety,
livestock or plants or any other property as a result of light flicker,
emission or dissemination of any fumes, smoke, odor or dust
beyond the property lot of the premises upon which such use or
activity is located.
(2) Create any noise or vibration exceeding the average intensity of
noise or vibration occurring from other sources at the property
line.
(3) Endanger any surrounding area by reason of fire or explosion.
(4) Produce any objectionable heat or glare beyond the property line.
§ 260-157 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-158
1:702
(5) Create any electrical disturbances or adversely affect the operation
of equipment located off the premises.
(6) Discharge any dangerous or untreated effluent into any stream or
other body of water or otherwise contribute to the pollution of
surface or underground water.
(7) Create an undesirable or dangerous traffic condition on the street
or in a nearby area or generate a nuisance to any nearby property
because of increased traffic.
(8) Create any other objectionable condition which will endanger
public health and safety or be detrimental to the proper use of the
surrounding area.
C. Outdoor lighting. Where light fixtures are installed to provide exterior
illumination, excluding overhead streetlighting and warning,
emergency, or traffic signals, the following restrictions shall apply.
These standards will only apply to nonresidential, apartment and
single-family attached or semiattached uses abutting residential uses.
(1) All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this chapter, shall
have intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the
current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America (IESNA) as contained in the IESNA
Lighting Handbook.
(2) All future amendments to the recommended practices of the IESNA
shall be made a part of the chapter without further action by
Borough Council.
(3) Streetlighting fixtures, when required for safety considerations,
may be controlled by photocells for dusk to dawn operation.
(4) The lighting from any luminary shall be shaded, shielded, or
directed to prevent direct light from being distributed onto
adjacent properties and/or surrounding areas. Unshielded lighting
is not permitted, except for temporary holiday lighting.
(5) Lighting shall be designed so that glare or direct illumination does
not exceed one footcandle beyond the property line on which the
lighting originates.
(6) Lighting on private, residential, commercial, industrial, municipal,
recreational or institutional property shall be aimed, located,
designed, fitted and maintained so as not to present a hazard to
drivers or pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse
(disabling glare).
(7) Pole-mounted lamps shall be placed directly above the area to be
illuminated and shielded at the top and sides, or positioned near
the perimeter of a property and aimed toward the area requiring
illumination, subject to applicable yard setback provisions.
§ 260-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-158
1:703
§ 260-159. Keeping of pets.
§ 260-160. Prohibited uses.
(8) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary
means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle, fixture placement, etc.
(9) The installation or erection of any lighting which may be confused
with warning signals, emergency signals, or traffic signals, shall
not be permitted.
(10) Lighting of parking lots shall be in accordance with this chapter.
(11) Maintenance. Lighting fixtures shall be maintained so as to always
meet the requirements of this chapter.
(12) Nonconforming lighting. Any lighting fixture existing on the
effective date of this chapter which does not conform with the
requirements of this chapter shall be considered a lawful,
nonconforming lighting fixture. A nonconforming lighting fixture
shall be made to comply with the requirements of this chapter
when such fixture is replaced or relocated.
A. Keeping of pets is permitted by right as an accessory use in all zoning
districts.
B. No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a manner or
of such types of animals that it creates a serious nuisance (including
noise or odor), a health hazard or a public safety hazard. The owner of
the animals shall be responsible for collecting and properly disposing of
all fecal matter from pets. No dangerous animals shall be kept outdoors
in a residential district.
C. It shall be unlawful on a residential property to maintain any exotic
wildlife as defined by the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code,191
whether or not an exotic wildlife possession permit has been issued.
A. The primary living and sleeping quarters of dwelling units shall not be
permitted in cellars or basements.
B. The following uses are prohibited in all districts throughout the
municipality:
(1) The incineration, reduction or storage of garbage, offal, animals,
fish or refuse unless by the authority of or under the supervision of
the Borough of Middletown.
191. Editor's Note: See 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 260-158 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-160
1:704
§ 260-161. Public utility facilities.
§ 260-162. Satellite dish antennas.
(2) Dumps and dumping of any kind, unless by the authority of or
under the supervision of the Borough of Middletown.
(3) The stripping of topsoil for sale, exclusive of the process of grading
a lot preparatory to the construction of a building for which a
zoning permit has been issued.
C. No use or activity shall be permitted which, by reason of noise, dust,
odor, appearance, smoke or other objectionable factor, creates a
nuisance, hazard or other adverse effect upon the value or reasonable
enjoyment of the surrounding properties.
D. Keeping of livestock and poultry, except as part of a permitted
agricultural operation, shall be prohibited.
(1) Regulations pertaining to the keeping of household pets shall be as
specified in the Borough Code of Ordinances, Chapter 101,
Animals.
A. Public utility facilities shall be permitted in any district without regard
to the use and area regulations; provided, however, that buildings or
structures erected for these utilities shall be subject to the following
regulations:
B. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of the district in which the facility is located.
C. The maximum permitted height shall be as regulated by the district
regulations.
D. Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed by a chain link fence six feet in
height.
E. Housed equipment. When the equipment is totally enclosed within a
building, no fence or screen planting shall be required, and the yards
shall be maintained in conformity with the district in which the facility
is located.
F. Screen planting in residential districts. In the R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-C and
R-3 districts, the required fence for unhoused equipment shall be
surrounded by an evergreen planting as approved by the Planning
Committee.
G. The external design of the building shall be compatible with the
buildings in the district.
A. Satellite dish antennas are subject to all accessory use standards,
except as provided herein this section.
§ 260-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-162
1:705
B. All wiring for ground-based antennas shall be underground.
C. Every satellite antenna shall be adequately grounded for protection
against a direct strike of lightning.
D. Any satellite dish antenna located within the R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3 and C-2
zoning districts shall be used only to receive signals, not to transit them
and shall be subject to the following criteria:
(1) Only one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted per unit of
occupancy.
(2) In a residential district or the C-2 district, a satellite dish antenna
or satellite antenna shall not be located within the required front
yard nor on front facades of buildings.
(3) The maximum diameter of any satellite dish installed on any lot,
building or structure shall not exceed three feet.
(4) The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the
maximum height restriction imposed upon primary and accessory
uses within the district.
(5) All applications must include certification by a registered engineer
that the proposed installation complies with all applicable Building
Code standards. Furthermore, written documentation of such
compliance, including load distributions within the building's
support structure, shall be furnished.
(6) A satellite dish antenna shall not project above the peak of a roof,
and if said satellite dish antenna is roof-mounted, no point of the
satellite dish antenna shall be greater than three feet from the
roof's surface. A satellite dish antenna shall be permitted to be
mounted on a flat roof so long as the satellite dish projects less than
three feet from the roof surface and is mounted in an inconspicuous
location.
(7) Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted to
be located in required front or side yards.
E. Any satellite dish located within the C-1 and M-1 zoning districts shall
be subject to the following criteria:
(1) All ground-mounted satellite dishes shall be completely enclosed by
an eight-foot-high nonclimbable fence that includes signage
warning of dangerous radiation levels. Any gates within the fence
shall be locked when unattended.
(2) Ground-based satellite antennas shall be placed only in the side or
rear yard. No antenna shall be placed in the front yard.
(3) Satellite dish antennas must be set back from the side and rear
property lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the
§ 260-162 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-162
1:706
§ 260-163. Solar energy systems.
Solar collectors and solar-related equipment shall be permitted in any
zoning district as an accessory use to a building or as a detached accessory
structure and may be installed upon receipt of the necessary construction,
electrical and/or mechanical permit(s).
satellite earth station, but the setback shall in no case be less than
10 feet.
(4) The maximum height of a station being limited to 14 feet. Height of
the apparatus shall include all poles, supports and related
apparatus and shall be measured vertically from the ground to the
maximum point when positioned for operation.
A. No solar energy system or equipment shall be permitted to be located
between the principal building and the public street (excluding alleys)
or within any required front yard area.
B. To the extent applicable, the solar energy system shall comply with the
Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999,192 as amended, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Labor and Industry.
C. There shall be no commercial use of solar energy collectors, except in
the M-1 Manufacturing District as noted below. Solar energy collectors
shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) Solar energy collectors shall not generate in excess of 125% of the
estimated need of the principal use of the property.
(2) The solar energy collectors shall be connected to the public utility
grid. Energy generated in excess of the requirements of the
principal use of the property may be purchased or acquired by a
public utility in accordance with the law or other government
regulations.
(3) The area of any residential solar collection system shall not exceed
500 square feet cumulatively. In the M-1 district, the cumulative
area of the solar energy system shall be considered as building
coverage.
(4) A roof-mounted solar collector shall not extend beyond the existing
overhangs of the structure to which it is attached.
(5) A roof-mounted solar energy system shall conform to the height
regulations of the zoning district where the solar energy system is
installed.
(6) No point on a ground-mounted solar collector or its support
structure shall exceed a height of 15 feet.
192. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 260-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-163
1:707
§ 260-164. Temporary storage. [Amended 4-20-2015 by Ord. No.
1314, approved 4-20-2015]
The temporary storage of portable dumpsters and bulk materials, including,
but not limited to, stone, mulch, firewood, and building materials within the
public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
§ 260-165. Unenclosed storage.
§ 260-166. Swimming pools.
(7) All exterior electrical and/or plumbing lines on a ground-mounted
system must be buried below the surface of the ground and be
placed in a conduit.
(8) Ground-mounted solar collectors shall comply with the setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(9) Nonfunctioning solar energy collectors shall be repaired or
replaced within three months of becoming nonfunctional.
D. A solar energy collection system shall be located to ensure solar access
without reliance on adjacent properties.
(1) Where necessary to ensure that solar access is not obstructed over
time by permissible uses on adjacent properties (i.e., planting and
growth of landscape vegetation or new construction), it shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the solar energy collector to obtain
appropriate solar access easements from the neighboring property
owner(s).
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the solar energy
collector to notify the Borough upon the recording of the solar
access easement and to record such easement in the Dauphin
County Recorder of Deeds.
E. No person shall install any solar energy system for a building or
structure, either residential or commercial, within the Borough without
first obtaining a permit from the Borough.
F. The design of the solar energy system shall conform to applicable
industry standards.
A. In all zones, no outdoor stockpiling of any material shall be permitted in
the required front yard.
B. In any residential zone, the outdoor stockpiling of materials (except
firewood) for more than one year is prohibited.
A. The construction of all outdoor swimming pools designed to contain a
water depth of 24 inches or more, including structure, filtration and
drainage systems and all safety equipment, shall require a building
§ 260-163 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-166
1:708
§ 260-167. Yard regulations.
permit and meet the specifications of the Borough or Engineer of the
Borough.
B. A single private outdoor swimming pool per dwelling is permitted as an
accessory use of a residential structure, provided that such pool is for
the private use of the residents of the dwelling unit or for their guests.
C. No pool shall be located in any required front yard or located closer
than 10 feet from any property line.
D. Every pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall not less than
four feet in height.
(1) Every entryway in such fence or wall shall be closed by a selfclosing,
self-latching gate. Such gates shall be maintained in good
repair and be fully functional and shall be in use at all times the
pool contains water.
(2) Such fences or walls and gates shall be located and constructed so
that no portion of the structure extends beyond the property line of
the lot on which located.
(3) Such fence or wall shall be erected before any pool is filled with
water.
E. Whenever the water in a pool is provided or replenished from a public
water supply system, the hose or pipe connected to the public water
system shall be located at a physical height greater than the overflow
level of the pool. Water discharged from the public system to the pool
must pass through the air. At no time shall a hose or pipe connected to
the public water system be located at or below the surface of the water
in a pool.
F. Water may not be discharged from a swimming pool directly onto
adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
G. No permanent pool structure shall be located over an on-lot septic
system, drain field, utility, or access easement.
A. Front yards.
(1) Front yard setback exception. In any district within a block
containing a lot proposed for construction or expansion of a
building, where 50% or more of the improved lots on such block
frontage on one side of a street currently have front yards of less
depth than is currently required for that district, and where the
clear majority of such lots are already developed, then the building
line of the majority of the buildings on that side of the block may be
used.
B. Side yards.
§ 260-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-167
1:709
§ 260-168. Dwelling location.
In all residential districts, no dwelling unit may be established on any street
having less than a twenty-foot cartway.
§ 260-169. Out-of-service storage tanks. [Added 4-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 1314, approved 4-20-2015]
(1) Extension of any primary building and detached accessory building
that is nonconforming with respect to the required side yard
setback shall comply with § 260-212E(5).
(2) The minimum residential driveway setback shall be three feet from
the side lot line, which shall be maintained as vegetation, with the
exception of shared driveways for single-family semidetached units
or single-family attached units (townhouses), in which case the
driveway may extend over the common property line of the
attached or semidetached units. A maintenance agreement shall be
required between property owners for the shared driveway.
C. Extensions into required yards. Structures may extend into the
minimum required yards, as herein specified:
(1) Cornices, eaves, gutters, bay windows and chimneys may extend
into a front, side or rear yard not more than 24 inches.
(2) On interior lots attached carports, porches and decks open on three
sides may protrude into required side yards up to 50% of the side
yard required for that district.
D. In a commercial or manufacturing district, merchandise may be
displayed in the yard space in accordance with the following
regulations:
(1) In side or rear yards not abutting streets or alleys: not closer to the
side or rear lot line than three feet.
(2) In side or rear yards abutting alleys: not closer to the right-of-way
of the alleys than five feet.
(3) In front yards not abutting streets or alleys on the side lot lines: not
closer to the side lot lines than three feet; setback from the front lot
line is not required.
(4) In front yards not abutting alleys on the side lot lines: not closer to
the side lot lines than five feet; setback from the front lot line is not
required.
(5) Merchandise displayed in front, side or rear yards abutting lots in
more restricted districts shall be enclosed by a solid wall, uniformly
painted board fence or screen planting.
E. Obstruction of vision. See § 260-157.
§ 260-167 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-169
1:710
A. Any permanent closure, pursuant to Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations, of an aboveground or
underground petroleum or petroleum derivative storage tank or tank
system shall include the removal of the tank or tank system in its
entirety, including all associated pipes, and further, including tank(s)
discovered by chance during removal. All aboveground or underground
petroleum or petroleum derivative storage tanks or tank systems to
which Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
regulations do not apply shall be removed in their entirety, including all
associated pipes, and further, including tank(s) discovered by chance
during removal, upon a cessation of use of the tank or tank system. A
period of six months of continuous nonuse of the tank or tank system
shall presumptively constitute cessation of use.
B. Removal of out-of-service storage tanks shall be in compliance with all
applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and local Fire Marshal, including, without
limitation, notifying the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, where applicable, and the Fire Marshal of the intent to
remove a minimum of 30 days prior to undertaking any activity to
disturb or move the tank or tank system.
C. Any disputes concerning location of an existing tank or tank system that
may straddle a property line shall be resolved by the two abutting
property owners and not by the Borough.
D. All costs or responsibilities associated with complying with this chapter
shall be the full responsibility of the owner(s) of the storage tank(s) or
tank system(s) and property, not the Borough, regardless of the tank
location on site, whether within public right-of-way, easement or inside
structure, unless any law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
preempts this provision. Disputes over these costs shall not delay
removal and shall not involve the Borough.
E. All disturbed areas within a public right-of-way shall be returned to
meet or exceed their original predisturbed condition. Surety in the form
of a certified check, bond or letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the
Borough, may be required for any disturbance occurring within a public
right-of-way. Removal of any tank or associated piping located within a
public right-of-way, as well as restoration of any disturbed area of a
public right-of-way, shall require written approval from the Borough
Engineer, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, if
applicable, and the Fire Marshal.
F. The owner of the tank or tank system shall provide sufficient evidence
to the Borough proving that the tank and tank system has not released
products which have resulted in or which could result in the
contamination of the surface water or groundwater. At a minimum, such
evidence shall include any testing or documentation required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 260-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-169
1:711
G. Abandonment or closure-in-place of tanks and tank systems is
prohibited unless removal is physically not possible. The physical
impossibility of removal must be determined and approved, in writing,
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, where
applicable, and the Fire Marshal.
H. In the case of tanks or tank systems subject to Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection regulation, the removal
required under this section of this chapter shall be completed within 60
days of written certification from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection that the tank and tank system are empty,
clean, secure and that there is no spillage to be remediated. In the case
of tanks or tank systems not subject to Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulation, the removal required under this
section of this chapter shall be completed within 60 days of the
cessation of use of the tanks or tank systems. The Borough, upon
written request, and in its sole discretion, may permit an additional
thirty-day period or periods for the removal of the tanks or tank systems
to be completed in either of the above cases, but only if doing so is in
compliance with applicable Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
requirements and is approved by the Fire Marshal.
§ 260-169 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-169
1:712
ARTICLE XVI
Off-Street Parking
§ 260-170. General regulations.
A. Existing use and permitted change of use. Any change of a permitted
use to another use or any increase in the area of a use which by this
chapter requires a greater number of parking spaces than existing
conditions, shall meet the requirements of this chapter. All extensions,
expansions, or changes of existing uses or structures shall meet the
requirements of this chapter for the additional space proposed to be
added or for the new use proposed.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, expansion of a use shall include an
increase in the number of uses within the original area of the existing
use and an increase in floor area or outside area devoted to a use. All
existing parking spaces shall be continued and maintained unless
equivalent spaces are found elsewhere on the lot.
C. A zoning permit must be secured from the Zoning Officer before any
parking area is established or changed, if such change would result in a
parking area of three or more spaces or deletion of any spaces.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer in
accordance with the following rules and regulations.
(1) The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of the
information requested on the application and a fee and or escrow
amount set by resolution of the Council when the application is
submitted.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall forward copies of the application to the
Borough Engineer for review. All engineering expenses incurred by
the Borough in connection with the Borough Engineer's review of
the application and inspection of the construction work shall be
reimbursed by the applicant.
(3) The Zoning Officer and/or the Borough Engineer shall inspect the
work periodically to determine the degree of compliance with the
regulations and permit governing the work.
D. Conflict with other uses. No parking area or space shall be used for any
use that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is
required to serve.
E. Multiple uses. Where two or more uses occupy a common structure,
building, or lot, the total number of parking spaces provided and
maintained will be calculated as the sum of the parking spaces required
for the individual uses that occupy the structure, building or lot or as
the combined gross floor area or number of seats devoted to customer
or patron use.
§ 260-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-170
1:713
§ 260-171. General provisions.
F. Joint use. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a
common lot, if the total spaces provided are not less than the sum of the
spaces required for each use individually, unless such parking is shared
as permitted and defined below in § 260-171.
G. Parking may not be located in the front yard in the C-2 district.
H. Remote off-street parking as per § 260-172G.
A. For the purposes of this section, required standard parking spaces shall
have an area of not less than 162 square feet, measured nine feet wide
by 18 feet long, except that parallel parking spaces may be eight feet
wide and 21 feet long. Spaces in parking lots shall be physically
separated from a street or sidewalk by a barrier or landscape planting
area and shall have access to a street or alley by way of an approved
curb opening.
B. Accessible parking spaces shall have dimensions not less than the
dimensions listed in the Americans with Disabilities Act,193 latest
edition. Accessible parking spaces must be clearly marked on the
pavement in the standard blue marking, with a sign heading the space
using the international wheelchair profile symbol for handicapped
persons. These spaces must be located as close as possible to public
entrances and ramps to buildings.
C. Accessible handicapped spaces shall be provided in the amounts
required for parking areas serving multifamily dwellings with five or
more units and commercial, institutional or public uses:
Total Number of Parking
Spaces Provided in Parking
Facility
Minimum Number of Required
Accessible Parking Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
193. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 260-170 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-171
1:714
Total Number of Parking
Spaces Provided in Parking
Facility
Minimum Number of Required
Accessible Parking Spaces
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 or fraction
thereof over 1,000
D. The minimum width of aisles in parking areas shall be as noted below:
Parking Angle
(degree)
Minimum Width of
Aisle One Way
(feet)
Minimum Width of
Aisle Two Way
(feet)
30° 16 22
45° 18 22
60° 20 22
90° 24 24
E. Parking areas for 10 or more vehicles shall be so divided by permanent
raised curbing at end islands that access lanes and parking spaces are
clearly defined, and that moving traffic will be confined to designated
lanes. All parking spaces shall be line striped with white or yellow paint.
F. A structurally sound curb or bumper guard to ensure safety shall be
provided so that no part of any parked vehicle shall extend over the
property line.
G. Outdoor parking spaces and the approaches thereto shall be paved. Offstreet
parking lots must be provided with a minimum three-foot-wide
vegetative planting area around the perimeter.
H. Drive-through establishments such as fast food order and pick up,
automatic bank teller and similar uses shall provide not fewer than
three waiting spaces for each drive-up lane, in addition to the space
where the transaction takes place and in addition to the required
parking.
I. Parking areas for nonresidential uses shall be designed such that
vehicles will not back into public streets.
J. Except for residential uses, for the purpose of traffic channelization,
defining parking areas and the reduction of visual monotony, a
minimum of 5% of all interior surface parking areas shall be devoted to
vegetative cover planted with a mixture of trees, shrubs, ground covers
and lawn areas.
K. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of
the principal building or attached to the outer walls. If attached to the
principal building, the garage shall conform to all principal building
requirements. The garage may be constructed under a yard or court,
§ 260-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-171
1:715
§ 260-172. Facilities required.
Parking spaces and connecting driveways shall hereafter be provided for
each building or use in accordance with the provisions herein, including the
table which follows and the preceding design standards.
provided that the level of such yard or court shall conform to the
general level of the outer yards or courts on the lot.
L. Porous type pavement shall be permitted for open space parking within
a floodplain district to accommodate recreation activities and other
municipal activities.
A. For newly constructed buildings, the enlargement portion of any
addition to an existing building and any new or expanded commercial
open area usage, parking shall be provided for each use, with the
number of spaces not less than that indicated by the table.
B. For existing buildings or existing commercial open area uses, when
changes in uses occur, with or without building renovation, existing offstreet
parking shall not be reduced to less than the number of spaces
indicated by the table. On properties where the land area is insufficient
to enable provision of spaces in accordance with the table, spaces shall
be provided in accordance with Subsections F and G, conformant with
coverage and safety limitations.
C. The number of parking spaces indicated by the table shall be the
minimum number required.
D. All required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the
principal building or commercial open area and shall be readily
accessible to and within a reasonable distance from the building or
open area served by the spaces, except as noted elsewhere in this
section.
E. All parking areas and means of access, other than those relating to a
dwelling, shall be illuminated during night hours of use.
F. Alternative parking. Within all districts, any use existing as of the
effective date of this chapter which can be lawfully expanded, or any
new use that cannot meet the parking requirements of this chapter
within the lot or boundary lines of the principal use may meet the
parking requirements of this chapter in one of two ways listed below. If
spaces are leased or licensed, the Borough shall require proof of the
leasing or licensing arrangement and use of the spaces to be kept on
file. Proof of ongoing leases or licenses and use of the spaces will be
required every year. Parking spaces designated for one use may not be
used to satisfy parking requirements for another use, unless the
requirements of Subsection F(1) are met.
(1) Valet parking. Valet parking may be used to meet any portion of the
required off-street parking requirement, provided that the
§ 260-171 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-172
1:716
application indicates where the cars will be parked. An annual
permit shall be required from the Borough for uses meeting
parking requirements through valet parking arrangements. Valet
parking arrangements shall be adequately managed and staffed
to minimize disruption to traffic on local roads. The use shall be
discontinued immediately upon loss of parking arrangements; and/
or
(2) The applicant shall provide an agreement, in writing, at intervals
determined by Middletown Borough that the parking spaces are
available and secured by lease or license, or the applicant shall
provide proof of the availability of the required parking spaces,
which are not needed to meet the requirements of another use and
which can be used for parking purposes by the applicant. This
option may be used to meet any portion of the parking requirement.
The use shall be discontinued immediately upon loss of parking
arrangements, and/or new lease or license agreements must be
secured. Alternative parking may be within 600 feet of the primary
residence.
(3) In the C-2 Commercial District, the applicant may credit those onstreet
parking spaces which abut their premises toward the
parking requirement for the uses contained within the proposed
development.
G. For any building or use not covered above, the Zoning Officer shall
apply the standard for off-street parking spaces in the below schedule
deemed to most closely approximate the proposed building or use.
Type of Use
Number of Parking Spaces
Required
Retail business and customer
service establishments and
public buildings
1 for every 250 square feet of gross
floor area
1 for every 400 square feet of gross
floor area in the C-2 district
Offices 1 for every 250 square feet of gross
floor area
1 for every 400 square feet of gross
floor area in the C-2 district
Restaurants, taverns and
nightclubs
1 for every 2.5 seats
1 for every 250 square feet of gross
floor area in the C-2 district
Medical and dental clinics 4 for every doctor or dentist
Motels, tourist homes or hotels 4 for every 3 sleeping rooms
Churches, theaters, auditoriums
and places of assembly
1 for every 3.5 seats
§ 260-172 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-172
1:717
§ 260-173. Vehicle parking regulations.
Type of Use
Number of Parking Spaces
Required
Elementary and secondary
public and parochial schools
1 for every 2 teachers and
employees, plus 1 for every 15
students
Colleges, universities and
commercial schools
1 for every 5 classroom seats
Social halls, clubs and lodges,
health clubs and libraries
1 for every 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Bowling alleys 4 for every 1 alley, plus 1 per
employee
Single- and two-family dwellings 2 for every dwelling unit
Apartment houses/single-family
attached dwellings
1.33 for every dwelling unit
Student housing 1.33 for every dwelling unit
Conversion apartments 1.33 for every dwelling unit
Funeral homes 10 for every parlor
Boarding-, lodging and rooming
houses
1 for each occupant
Manufacturing plants 1 for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Wholesale establishments and
warehouses
1 for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Nursing and convalescent
homes
1 for every 4 beds
NOTES:
1 The parking space requirements set forth above shall not
apply to the C-2 district, except in those situations in which
a new building or structure is erected or a structural
addition is added to an existing building or structure.
2 Existing structures and uses in existence on the effective date of
this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this article
so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed so as to require
additional parking.
A. Any vehicle may be parked in any garage or other suitable enclosed
building, provided that said building is a conformant principal or
accessory building or is a nonconforming building in accordance with
the provisions of Article XIX.
§ 260-172 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-173
1:718
B. An inspected motor vehicle or licensed trailer may be parked on the
public street in accordance with the street ordinances of Middletown
Borough and the motor vehicle laws of Pennsylvania.
C. Off-street parking for single-family detached, single-family
semidetached and two-family detached dwellings may occur in front
and side yards, in accordance with the following:
(1) Parking shall be permitted only on a paved driveway or parking
area.
(2) No more than two parking spaces may be located end to end.
(3) Only personal autos, personal trucks or light commercial vehicles
(maximum of one per dwelling unit), may be parked in front yards.
(4) Driveways are expected to connect a permitted garage, carport or
side or rear parking area to the street.
(5) The paving and spacing requirements of this article shall apply.
(6) Rear yard parking is permitted if connected to a street.
D. Off-street parking for two-family semidetached, townhouses, and
apartments shall not be permitted in front yards.
E. Repair of personal motor vehicles. The routine maintenance, repair and
servicing of personal motor vehicles, including go-carts and racing
vehicles, owned or leased by the person performing such services when
performed outside of a building within the R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, and C-2
Zones, shall comply with Chapter 210 of the Borough of Middletown
Codified Ordinances, and the International Property Maintenance
Code.
F. Storage of vehicles.
(1) Except for licensed motor vehicles, no vehicle, machinery, trailer,
mobile home, boat or other similar equipment shall be parked or
stored outside, except as follows:
(a) In any residential district within any front yard area or any
required side yard areas, for more than three days.
(b) No more than one such item shall be stored outside at any
time.
(2) The parking or storage of any licensed motor vehicle in a front yard
area shall occur only upon a driveway.
(3) In commercial and industrial districts, motor vehicles and mobile
homes of any type without current license plates must be parked or
stored within completely enclosed accessory buildings, unless the
motor vehicles or motor homes are for sale by a licensed agency.
§ 260-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-174
1:719
§ 260-174. Loading and unloading spaces.
In addition to the off-street parking space required above, all commercial
and industrial establishments, hospitals or sanitariums and other similar
uses shall provide adequate off-street area for loading and unloading of
supplies to and from vehicles. At least one loading berth shall be provided;
however, should the gross floor area of the main buildings and buildings
accessory thereto used for commercial and/or industrial purposes exceed
10,000 square feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided for each
20,000 square feet of gross floor area. The off-street loading berth shall be
not less than 10 feet by 25 feet in size.
§ 260-174 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-174
1:720
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
§ 260-175. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof, or any
device attached, painted, or represented directly or indirectly on a structure
or vehicle intended to attract the attention of those outside in the public
right-of-way, that displays or includes any letter, word, insignia, flag, object,
device, or representation used as an advertisement or announcement. Signs
may be of the following types:
ANNOUNCEMENT BOARD — A sign on which the message copy can
be changed through the use of attachable letters, numerals, or graphics
or through the use of electronic switching of lamps or other illuminated
devices. This includes public service information, such as time and
temperature displays, or any sign that features automatic or manual
switching or changing of its message content, except animated signs
that involve motion, flashing lights, or color changes requiring
electrical energy or electronic or manufactured sources of supply.
A.
AWNING — An architectural projection that provides weather
protection, identity signage or decoration and is wholly supported by
the building to which it is attached.
An awning is comprised of a lightweight, rigid noncombustible
frame with covering material and shall be either fixed, retractable,
folding or collapsible, designed and located.
(1)
(2) In accordance with the Uniform Construction Code.
B.
CANOPY — An architectural projection that provides weather
protection; identity.
Signage or decoration and is supported by the building to which it
is attached and at the outer end by not less than one stanchion. A
canopy is comprised of a rigid noncombustible frame with covering
material and shall be designed and located in accordance with
the Uniform Construction Code. This shall include freestanding
structures like those over fuel dispersing islands.
(1)
C.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign advertising a group of establishments
occupying one property, with the name of the property and the names
of the individual establishments located within the property or building.
D.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC) — A sign, or portion thereof,
that displays animated images, moving video images, graphics, or
scrolling messages, electronic images, static images, static graphics or
static pictures, with or without textual information. EMCs are capable
of change or alteration by electronic means on a fixed display screen
E.
§ 260-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-175
1:721
composed of a series of lights, including light emitting diodes (LEDs),
organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), liquid crystal displays (LCDs),
digital light processing (DLPs), plasma, fiber optics, light bulbs, or
other illumination devices within the area where the message is
displayed. EMCs include computer programmable, microprocessor
controlled electronic or digital displays. EMCs include signs that utilize
technology not listed in this definition and shall include similar
technology which may be developed in the future, or the use of which
may become widespread in the future.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign and supporting structure which is
secured on the principal lot in the ground and independent of any
building, fence or other support. For the purpose of this definition,
"freestanding signs" may consist of the following:
PYLON SIGN — A permanent sign(s) permanently by upright or
uprights which are permanently anchored into the ground. This
may have two displayed sides.
(1)
GROUND SIGN — A sign permanently located on the principal lot
independent of any building designed to be viewed at eye level or
below within the immediate vicinity and which is intended to be
designed and viewed as an architecturally unified and proportional
element. Ground signs shall be constructed so that the maximum
height from mean grade to the lowest area of the sign face does not
exceed a maximum height of eight feet except that it shall comply
with § 260-157.
(2)
F.
POLITICAL SIGN — Within the following time and manner limitations,
any sign or poster which displays or advertises the name, photograph,
image or likeness of, or which is intended to promote the election of any
candidate for public office.
G.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign used, or intended to be used, for a short
period of time and which is not affixed to a location on a building,
structure or the ground. A portable sign includes, but is not limited to,
sandwich boards, signs on wheels, buntings, A-frame signs, wire frame
signs and the like.
H.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is dependent on a building for
support and which projects more than 12 inches from the building,
including an awning or canopy sign. Whenever a canopy or awning is
affixed with any lettering, design, symbol, or made from any special
material, which is intended to be or by its nature is an identification
of a business, the applicable measurable area of the awning or canopy
is a projecting sign. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall not be
less than 7 1/2 feet above the sidewalk or ground level elevation. A
projecting sign shall not project above the eave of a structure. Any
nonparallel wall sign is a projecting sign.
I.
§ 260-175 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-175
1:722
§ 260-176. Permit required sign categories.
§ 260-177. General sign regulations.
WALL SIGN — A sign mounted parallel to the face of a building or wall,
which does not project above the eaves of the structure and is not more
than 12 inches from the plane or facade of the building or wall.
J.
WINDOW SIGN, PERMANENT — A sign permanently affixed to a
building storefront window containing only the name of the
establishment and the type of establishment. A storefront window shall
be defined as and limited to a ground floor or first story window which
is located in the main door to an establishment or on the same side of
the building where the main door to the establishment is located, or in
the side of a building which faces a public street, right-of-way, or public
parking lot. An exterior mounted permanent window sign shall have a
rigid frame with weatherproofing cover.
K.
L. WINDOW SIGN, TEMPORARY — See § 260-178B(10).
A. The erection or placement of a sign is regulated and requires a permit
unless a sign is specifically exempt from regulation. The erection shall
include any building, construction, attachment, hanging, suspension,
alteration, repair, repainting, removal, relocation, or demolition of a
sign of any type.
B. All signs in the Borough fall into one of the following categories:
(1) Signs exempt from the provisions of this article.
(2) Prohibited signs.
(3) Permitted signs:
(a) Temporary permitted signs.
(b) Permanent permitted signs.
C. The Borough Zoning Officer will provide applications for sign permits,
fee information, inspection requirements, and application requirements
dealing with submission of drawings and construction information.
A. Area of a sign.
(1) The area of a sign shall include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which it is displayed. The area shall
not include any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative trim,
which may be incidental to the copy content of the display itself.
(2) In the computation of the area of a double-faced sign, only one side
shall be considered, provided all faces are identical in size and
§ 260-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-177
1:723
content and are parallel to each other. No signs with more than two
faces are permitted.
(3) Where a sign type cannot be determined, the area and height
restrictions for the most restrictive type of sign shall apply.
(4) Total sign area permitted may be divided among different types of
signs, provided that the total sign area allowed for each use is not
exceeded. All tenants occupying the same building shall be limited
to the total sign area permitted for the building. The building
owner, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for the allocation
of the total allowable sign area among the various tenants;
however, each tenant may select a sign option with the individual
sign area limited in size to the assigned proportional areas.
B. Height of a sign.
(1) The maximum height to the top of a freestanding ground sign shall
be measured from the ground level where the sign is mounted. The
height of an earth mound on which a sign is mounted shall be
included in the allowable height. No freestanding ground sign shall
exceed a height of eight feet.
(2) The maximum height to the top of a freestanding pylon sign shall be
measured from the ground level where the sign is mounted. The
height of an earth mound on which a sign is mounted shall be
included in the allowable height. No freestanding pylon sign shall
exceed a height of 20 feet. The bottom of a pylon sign frame shall
not be less than eight feet above grade.
(3) No sign or part of a sign may extend above the eaves of a sloping
roof or the roofline of a flat roof.
(4) Signs, unless otherwise specified, shall not project above the height
of 20 feet in any district.
C. Location of signs.
(1) A sign located along the right-of-way of a state or federal highway
shall comply with all requirements of the state or federal
government relating thereto, in addition to all requirements of this
chapter.
(2) No sign or portion of any sign shall project into or over a cartway.
(3) No overhanging and projecting signs shall be less than eight feet
above any walkway.
(4) Obstruction. No sign shall be located or arranged so that it
interferes with traffic through glare or blocking of sight lines of
streets, sidewalks or driveways, or conflicts with a traffic control
device by color, location, shape or any other characteristic. No sign
shall violate the corner visibility restrictions of this chapter.
§ 260-177 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-177
1:724
(5) Hereafter signs may project beyond the property line abutting a
street provided that the overhanging sign is not less than eight feet
above the sidewalk and at least two feet from the curbline.
Overhanging signs shall not project over the cartway of a street or
alley.
(6) The main supporting structure of all freestanding signs shall not be
located closer than three feet to any property line except for official
traffic signs or other government signs.
(7) In all districts, no signage may be located outside the property line
except exempt signs.
D. Illumination of signs. Only the following types of illumination are
permitted:
(1) Internally illuminated sign. A sign designed to give forth artificial
light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from
a source of light within the sign and shall be shielded to prevent or
control glare.
(2) Indirectly illuminated sign. A sign illuminated with a light external
to the sign, which shall be shielded so that no direct rays are visible
elsewhere. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate any sign shall be
shielded to prevent or control glare.
(3) Nonilluminated sign. A sign that is not illuminated either internally
or indirectly.
E. Construction of signs.
(1) Supports for a sign or sign structure shall conform to the
requirements set forth in the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, as amended.
(2) Signs using electricity shall be installed in conformance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, as amended.
(3) Every sign permitted in this chapter must be constructed with
durable materials and must be kept in good condition and repair or
must be removed.
(4) All signs shall be removed when the circumstances leading to their
erection no longer apply.
F. Zoning information. No sign shall be erected that contains information
which states or implies that a property to which the sign relates may be
used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of this chapter
in the zoning district in which the property is located.
G. Permit required. All signs over two square feet in area shall require the
issuance of a zoning permit before erection, placement, construction, or
alteration except those in § 260-178. All signs must comply with all
§ 260-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-177
1:725
§ 260-178. Exempt signs.
other regulations regardless of whether a permit is required. Multiple
signs totaling more than two square feet shall require issuance of
separate zoning permits.
H. All valid nonconforming signs and all signs granted a sign permit prior
to the adoption of this chapter (except illegal signs) may be continued.
All new signs shall meet the terms of this chapter.
A. No sign permit shall be required for exempt signs.
B. The following signs are exempt from the requirement of obtaining a
sign permit. Exempt signs shall be erected only in accordance with the
standards set for these signs.
(1) Street sign. Official highway street name, directional, or other
traffic sign erected in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.194
(2) No trespassing sign. A sign not exceeding two square feet,
indicating the prohibition or control of fishing, hunting,
trespassing, etc., or a sign indicating a private road.
(3) Residential identification sign. A sign, not exceeding two square
feet, and not more than six feet in height bearing only the property
number, street address, and/or names of the occupants of the
residence, or the name of the dwelling.
(4) Governmental flag or insignia. Flags, other than those flown by
local, state or federal governments, are permitted, provided that
they do not exceed a size of six feet by 10 feet, are affixed to a pole
no higher than 25 feet, and meet the requirements of the Flag
Code, Public Law 94-344.
(5) Governmental, regulatory and official signs, including safety signs;
signs indicating points of interest, historical plaques, public parks
or recreation facilities; and signs identifying official Borough
buildings or facilities. Signs identifying Borough buildings, police
stations, or other Borough facilities may be internally or indirectly
illuminated.
(6) Decorative flags and plaques. Flags and plaques that are
decorative and contain designs marking seasons, holidays,
welcome, sports, and the like are permitted, provided that they
contain no advertising, no company or business logos, and no
names of businesses. Flags may be no larger 12 square feet.
Plaques shall be no larger than two square feet.
(7) Legal notices.
194. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 260-177 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-178
1:726
(8) Information sign. An information or public service sign indicating
hours of operation, availability of a public telephone, or directions
to an entrance or parking area is permitted, provided that the sign
area does not exceed one square foot and that there shall be no
more than two signs of this type per property.
(9) Temporary professional signs. A temporary advertising sign for
mechanics, contractors, architects or realtors. Such a sign may be
maintained only during the duration of the work being done at the
property, or during the duration of the sale and/or lease. No sign
shall exceed six square feet. Only one sign may be installed for each
professional and no more than four such signs on any property at
any one time. No illumination is permitted.
(10) Temporary window sign. A sign or signs displayed on the inside
surface of a window for the purpose of advertising a sale, grand
opening, new products or services. Temporary window signs may
have a total combined sign area of no more than 12 square feet.
The sign may be in place no longer than 60 days except neon signs
less than two square feet in area. The applicant shall inform the
Zoning Officer of the time period during which a grand opening
sign will be in place. Signs shall be constructed of durable material
and may not include tablet type paper and the like.
(11) Temporary yard sale sign. An on-site sign advertising a yard sale.
The sign shall not exceed four square feet in area and may remain
up only during the sale but in no case longer than five days. One
sign only shall be permitted per property. No illumination is
permitted.
(12) Temporary activity signs of religious organizations, volunteer fire
companies, nonprofit educational institutions, civic organizations
and community groups advertising a temporary fund-raising
gathering or activity erected for a special event or promotion of
civic welfare or charitable purposes, including but not limited to
exhibits, shows, sales or special events provided that:
(a) Such temporary sign is located on the property of such
organization company or institution.
(b) Such temporary sign conforms to the following regulations to
ensure that they in no way lend a commercial aspect to such
property and its adjoining properties:
[1] Types permitted: portable, projecting, or wall.
[2] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 24 square feet.
[3] Height of portable sign: maximum five feet.
(c) Such temporary sign is displayed for a duration limited to a
short time in keeping with the limits of a special event not to
§ 260-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-178
1:727
exceed two full weeks unless briefly extended by the Borough
Manager for cause shown by prior written request.
(d) Such temporary sign shall be removed by the property owner
when circumstances leading to its erection no longer apply
(that is, expiration of said two-week period or briefly extended
period) within one working day.
(13) Temporary political signs.
(a) Temporary signs advertising political parties or candidates for
public office may be erected or displayed and maintained
provided that:
[1] The signs are erected or displayed by the owner or lessee
of the parcel of real property on said parcel or by the
candidate, political party or other authorized agent of
either of them, with the express permission of the owner
or lessee of the parcel of real property;
[2] The size of any sign is not in excess of six square feet;
[3] The signs shall not be erected or displayed earlier than 60
days prior to the election to which they pertain; and
[4] No political sign shall be permitted to remain more than 72
hours after the election to which they pertain.
(b) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit the
placing or erecting of any such signs within a street right-ofway
or within or on any public alley, sidewalk, parking lot or
other public place, which placement is hereby prohibited.
(c) The erection of temporary political signs permitted by this
section by the owner or lessee of the parcel of real property,
candidate, political party or other authorized agent shall not
require a permit or other approval; provided, however, that it
shall be unlawful for any such owner or lessee of the lot,
candidate, political party or other authorized agent to permit
such signs to remain erected more than 72 hours after the date
of the election to which they relate, and failure to remove such
signs as required hereby shall subject such offenders to the
penalties prescribed in this chapter.
(d) No illumination is permitted.
(e) Enforcement; violations and penalties.
[1] Remedies for violations of the foregoing limitations shall
include the penalties set forth in § 260-230 of this chapter.
As an additional remedy for § 260-178B(13) above, the
Code Enforcement Officer may, after notice and at the
expense of the responsible owner, tenant or person in
§ 260-178 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-178
1:728
§ 260-179. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited:
control of the premises on which such sign remains more
than 72 hours after the election remove any such sign;
appropriate notice by said officer may include inter alia
the placing by him on any such sign of a legend, sticker or
notice to the effect that if this sign is not removed within
72 hours, it will be removed by the Zoning Hearing Officer
citing by number this section of the Code of the Borough
of Middletown.
[2] This subsection adopted in lieu of the prohibition in effect
since 1960 when the Middletown Zoning Ordinance,
codified in Chapter 21, was adopted includes the foregoing
time and manner limitations which are required by
compelling governmental interests. It is further found as a
fact that in the light of local conditions experience and
history, this subsection will not deter at all (much less
significantly) the effective exercise of First Amendment
rights and the foregoing limitations are necessary to give
effect to and to promote compelling interests in the
appearance of residential districts in conserving property
values in reducing accumulations of debris in minimizing
hazards and blight resulting from the effects of the
elements and of local weather conditions upon the types of
unreinforced signs commonly employed in political
campaigns in the area upon signs of various sizes and upon
signs of varying ages and time spans, including signs for
temporary purposes and in regard to other governmental
interests.
A. Any sign that states that a property may be used for a nonpermitted
use.
B. Any sign that flashes, rotates, revolves or oscillates. This does not
include electronic message centers.
C. Any animated signs, movable message signs or signs with internally
generated messages or symbols; no sign shall consist of any moving,
rotating, or otherwise animated part or message. This does not include
electronic message centers.
D. Any roofed sign structure attached to and supported by the building
placed above the roofline of a flat roof or the lowest point of eaves of a
sloping or mansard roof.
E. Any portable sign of any kind, other than a portable menu sign three
square feet or less placed at the entrance to a restaurant, is prohibited,
including any signs on wheels or advertising banners.
§ 260-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-179
1:729
§ 260-180. Permitted signs.
F. Any vehicle or trailer which is parked on public or private property so
as to be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or
located thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of
providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business
or activity located on the same or on another property.
G. Any sign nailed or in any way attached to a tree, utility pole, streetlight
pole, street identification sign, another sign, mailbox, fence, rock or
natural features, traffic signal device, or other regulatory device, such
as stop signs, yield signs, etc.
H. Signs erected within any public right away or near the intersections of
any streets in such a manner as to materially obstruct free and clear
vision.
I. Signs not properly maintained, showing neglect, or in a dilapidated or
hazardous condition so as to violate the purpose, intent and objective of
this chapter are required to be repaired or removed.
J. Abandoned signs.
K. Pylon signs, except as noted in § 260-180.
A. Residential signs in R-1 and R-1A districts.
(1) The following sign uses are permitted:
(a) Professional office, as follows:
[1] Projecting sign having a maximum area of two square feet;
[2] Wall sign having a maximum area of six square feet or
ground sign having a maximum area of six square feet and
a maximum height of three feet.
(b) Home occupation having a maximum area of two square feet.
(c) Exempt signs, except temporary window signs.
(2) Projecting signs may be attached to a decorative freestanding post,
lighted lamppost or building.
(3) Illumination. Residential signs may be illuminated indirectly and
must be shielded to prevent glare.
(4) All signs must be inside the property line.
(5) No sign shall be in violation of § 260-157.
B. Residential signs in R-2, R-3, and R-C Districts. Individual buildings
containing apartments or multifamily dwelling units may contain a sign
which identifies an individual building having multiple dwelling units.
§ 260-179 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-180
1:730
The sign may identify only the property number, street address and/or
the name of the building for a multiple-family dwelling development.
(1) Types permitted.
(a) Freestanding ground, wall, or projecting.
(b) Exempt signs, except temporary window signs.
(2) Signs in R-2 District.
(a) No more than one sign shall be placed on any one building
unless the building is located on a corner lot, in which case a
sign may be erected on each street frontage.
(b) Total sign area permitted for all signs: 12 square feet.
(3) Signs in R-3 and R-C District. All signs in R-2 District, in addition to
the following:
(a) One sign for each entrance; and
(b) Each entrance sign shall have maximum area of 12 square feet.
(4) Signs shall be located in compliance with § 260-177C.
C. Religious, educational, recreational, and institutional uses in any
district.
(1) An identification sign for the following uses is permitted:
(a) Religious use.
(b) School or nonprofit educational institution.
(c) Library or museum.
(d) Public recreation facility.
(e) Nursing home.
(f) Personal care facility.
(g) Volunteer fire companies.
(h) Civic organizations.
(2) Number. No more than one sign, except for corner properties
where one sign is permitted along each street frontage.
(3) Types permitted: freestanding ground, projecting, or wall.
(4) Size: 16 square feet maximum for buildings located 35 feet or more
from the cartway of the street; 12 square feet maximum for
buildings located less than 35 feet from the cartway of the street.
(5) Height of freestanding sign: eight feet maximum.
§ 260-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-180
1:731
(6) Temporary announcement board. In addition to the provisions for
signs above, one temporary announcement board may be placed on
the property for the purpose of announcing events. An
announcement board is permitted for the following uses only: place
of worship, school, library or museum, and emergency services.
The size shall not exceed 12 square feet. The announcement board
may be placed at the site for a period of 15 days prior to the event
and must be removed by the second day following the event. No
such sign may be illuminated.
D. Signs for C-2 District. Office, retail, service, and other require a permit
and shall comply with the following:
(1) Sign area and number. The total area of all signs together shall not
exceed a total of one square foot for each two linear feet of building
width measured along the front of the building and in no case shall
the total number of permanent signs exceed four.
(2) Sign options for the uses. The following sign options are permitted:
(a) Wall, projecting, freestanding ground, permanent window
signs are permitted in any combination not to exceed the
following: one wall sign having a maximum area of 20 square
feet; one projecting sign having a maximum area of 12 square
feet; one freestanding ground sign having a maximum area of
12 square feet; one permanent window sign having a maximum
area of 12 square feet.
(b) Window signs shall be painted on the window and shall contain
only the name of the establishment and type of establishment.
The area devoted to window signs may be split evenly between
two storefront windows.
(c) The maximum height of a freestanding ground sign is eight
feet.
(d) Fuel island type canopies may have no more than two business
names, identification or logos; signs not to exceed 20 square
feet total.
(e) Pylon signs are permitted by special exception.
(3) If a property is a corner lot or has frontage on a street or a public
parking lot, one additional sign may be erected on the side street
frontage or the building facade facing the parking lot. The size shall
not exceed 12 square feet.
(4) Directory sign for group of establishments.
(a) Number. No more than one directory sign shall be placed for
joint use, unless it fronts on a corner lot or parking lot, in which
case one additional sign may be erected on the side street
frontage or the public parking lot side.
§ 260-180 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-180
1:732
(b) Types permitted: freestanding ground or wall sign.
(c) Size: 20 square feet maximum for the sign, to be divided
among the businesses occupying the building or property
jointly.
(d) Height of freestanding sign: six feet maximum.
(e) Uniformity. The sign dimensions for each establishment in
directory listings shall be exactly the same as the dimensions
of each of the establishment's other listings within the
directory sign and shall be the same color and style.
E. Signs for C-1 and M-1 Districts. For a shopping center in the C-1
district, with six or more individual stores and a total floor area of
20,000 square feet or greater, one freestanding pylon sign for each
front primary entrance will be permitted.
(1) A pylon sign may be double sided.
(2) A pylon sign may be internally illuminated. No ground lighting or
spot lighting of a pylon sign shall be allowed.
(3) A pylon sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
(4) An entrance pylon sign may identify the name of shopping center
and individual businesses within the center, as long as the total
square footage does not exceed 75 square feet of sign(s).
(5) Individual stores having a store frontage up to 100 feet shall have a
total sign area equal to no more than one square foot of sign area
for each two linear feet of store frontage width measured along the
front of the store.
(6) Individual stores having a store frontage greater than 100 feet up
to a maximum of 200 feet shall have a total sign area equal to no
more than one square foot of sign area for each 1.5 linear feet of
store frontage width measured along the front of the store.
(7) Individual stores having a store frontage greater than 200 feet shall
have a total sign area equal to no more than one square foot of sign
area for each 1.25 linear feet of store frontage width measured
along the front of the store to a maximum of 160 square feet.
(8) Fuel island type canopies may have no more than two business
names, identification or logos; signs not to exceed 20 square feet
total.
F. Accessory uses.
(1) The following accessory uses and no others are permitted to have
signs:
(a) Accessory office.
§ 260-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-180
1:733
§ 260-181. Nonconforming signs.
The following regulations shall apply to signs legally existing at the time
of passage of this chapter that do not conform in use, location, type,
illumination, height or size with the regulations of the district in which the
sign is located.
(2) Number. No more than one sign shall be placed on a property
containing an accessory office.
(3) Types permitted: freestanding, projecting, or wall.
(4) Size: three square feet maximum.
(5) Height of freestanding sign: three feet maximum.
(6) Illumination. Accessory office signs may be indirectly illuminated
during hours of office operation only.
A. Any sign existing at the time of the passage of this chapter that does not
conform in use, location, illumination, height or size with the
regulations of the district in which the sign is located shall be
considered a nonconforming sign and may continue in such use in its
present location, subject to the following caveats:
(1) If a new use or occupancy is established, all new signs or
replacement signs must comply with this chapter in terms of
quality, type, and dimensional requirements.
(2) A sign not complying with this chapter may continue if a building or
structure is renovated. If a building or structure is demolished and
rebuilt, all signs must be made to conform to this chapter in terms
of quality, type, and dimensional requirements.
(3) If a new business certificate is issued, all signs must be made to
conform to this chapter in terms of quality, type and dimensional
requirements.
§ 260-180 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-181
1:734
ARTICLE XVIII
Specific Criteria for Certain Permitted Uses
§ 260-182. Compliance with standards.
In addition to the general and supplemental regulations listed in Article XV,
the following sets forth standards that shall be applied to each individual
special exception, conditional use, or use permitted by right. These
standards must be satisfied prior to approval of any applications for a
special exception or conditional use, or prior to issuance of a zoning permit
for a use permitted by right. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate
compliance with these standards and must furnish whatever evidence is
necessary to demonstrate such compliance. All uses must comply with the
standards expressed within the underlying zone, unless those standards
expressed for each special exception, conditional use or use permitted
by right specify different standards. In such cases, the specific special
exception, conditional use, or use permitted by right use standards shall
apply.
§ 260-183. Accessory child care.
A. The accessory child-care center shall meet all state and federal
licensing and registration requirements and shall provide proof of
compliance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Code, 55 Pa. Code
Chapter 3270, Child Day Care Centers, or 6 Pa. Code Chapter 11, Older
Adult Daily Living Centers.
B. The accessory day-care center is located at and is accessory to a legally
established house of worship, a public or nonpublic school, or a place of
employment. Such buildings shall obtain an occupancy certificate.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVI.
D. The accessory day-care center provides safe off-street pickup and
dropoff points in order to minimize traffic congestion. Vehicles shall
enter and exit from the pickup and dropoff points at least 60 feet from
any intersection. The passenger pickup and dropoff points shall be
arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic.
E. An outdoor play area shall be provided in accordance with state
regulations. Adult passive recreation areas may be provided for older
adult daily living centers. Off-street parking compounds shall not be
used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located
within the front yard and must be set back 25 feet from all property
lines. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a four-foothigh
fence that shall screen the area from adjoining residentially zones
or use properties. All outdoor play areas must provide a means of shade
such as shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
§ 260-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-184
1:735
§ 260-184. Agricultural operation.
Agricultural operations, excluding commercial livestock operations, shall be
permitted in the C-D Zone, subject to the following criteria:
§ 260-185. Animal hospitals, veterinary offices and/or kennels.
Within the C-1 Zone, animal hospitals, veterinary offices, dog day care and/
or kennels shall be permitted, subject to the following criteria:
§ 260-186. Apartment houses and conversion apartments.
A. No structure for the housing of poultry, livestock or feedlot, including
the storage of manure or odor or dust-producing substances shall be
located:
(1) Within 300 feet of any residential structure, other than a structure
in which the applicant resides, located on the same lot.
(2) Within 125 feet of any right-of-way line.
(3) Within 300 feet from adjoining property line in other than the C-D
Zone.
B. The building height restrictions shall be subject to provisions of the
Zoning District.
C. Greenhouse heating plants shall not be operated within 100 feet of any
lot line, unless contained within a building.
A. Kennels and/or animal hospitals shall have a minimum lot size in
accordance with the requirements of the zoning district.
B. All areas used for exercise shall be securely fenced.
C. All animal boarding buildings that are not wholly enclosed and any
outdoor animal pens, stalls or runways shall be a minimum of 25 feet
from all property lines and a minimum of 200 feet from any adjacent
residence whose owner is other than the animal building owner.
D. Animals shall be permitted to exercise outside daily between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
A. Apartment houses, including garden apartments, shall be permitted
subject to the following criteria:
(1) Public sanitary sewer and public water supply utilities shall be
provided.
(2) The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.4. See Article II definitions of
"floor area of building" and "floor area ratio."
(3) Building height shall be controlled by floor area ratio.
§ 260-184 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-186
1:736
(4) The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 2,000 square
feet.
(5) The lot width at the building line shall be not less than 100 feet.
(6) For each apartment building of one or two stories, there shall be a
front yard, two side yards and a rear yard, each of not less than 30
feet. For each story over two, five feet of width or depth shall be
added to each yard.
(7) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVI.
(8) Applications shall comply with § 260-205.
B. Conversion apartments shall be permitted subject to the following
criteria:
(1) An existing single-family detached, single-family semidetached,
two-family detached or two-family semidetached dwelling may be
converted to contain additional dwelling units, but shall have a
total of no more than four dwelling units, each containing no more
than one family living independent of each other.
(2) Lot area, lot width, minimum yards and maximum coverage shall be
in accordance with the standards of the applicable zone in which
the conversion apartment(s) will be located and this article,
corresponding to the type and number of dwelling units as
converted.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses on the property, in
accordance with Article XVI.
(4) There shall be no exterior evidence of change in the building except
as required by building or housing codes.
(5) Exterior fire escapes, where required, shall be in the rear or side of
the building if practical and shall not be located on any wall facing
a street. Exterior fire escapes above the second floor level shall be
noncombustible.
(6) Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than 650 square feet of
habitable floor area.
(7) No dwelling unit shall be permitted in basements or cellars.
(8) All units shall be served by public sanitary sewer and public water
supply utilities.
(9) Applications shall comply with § 260-205.
§ 260-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-187
1:737
§ 260-187. Automobile service garage.
Auto repair garages are permitted by right in the C-1 and M-1 Zones,
subject to the following criteria:
§ 260-188. Automobile service stations.
Automobile service stations (including minor incidental repair) are
permitted in the (C-1) Zone, subject to the following criteria.
A. All paint work shall be performed within a building with a fume
collection and ventilation system that directs fumes away from any
adjacent dwellings. Outdoor major repairs (such as body work and
grinding) and outdoor welding shall not occur within 250 feet of a
residential lot line.
B. All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize noise, odor,
vibration, light or electrical interference to adjacent lots in accordance
with this chapter.
C. Overnight outdoor storage of junk other than permitted junk vehicles
shall be prohibited within view of a public street or a dwelling.
D. Any junk vehicle shall not be stored for more than 20 days. A maximum
of four junk vehicles may be parked on a lot outside of an enclosed
building at any one time, except that additional numbers of vehicles
may be parked outside overnight if they are screened from view from
streets and other lots by landscaping or buildings and are actively
undergoing repair.
E. Service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting dwelling
(not including a dwelling separated from the garage by a street).
A. The subject property shall have a minimum width of 125 feet.
B. The subject property shall front on an arterial or collector road.
C. The subject property shall be set back at least 300 feet from any lot
containing a school, day-care facility, park, playground, library, hospital
or nursing, rest or retirement home.
D. The outdoor storage of motor vehicles (whether capable of movement
or not) for more than one month is prohibited.
E. All structures (including air compressors, kiosks, gasoline pump
islands, but not including signs) shall be set back at least 15 feet from
any street right-of-way line.
F. No outdoor storage of auto parts shall be permitted.
G. All ventilation equipment associated with fuel storage tanks shall be set
back 100 feet from and oriented away from any adjoining residence.
§ 260-187 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-188
1:738
§ 260-189. Bed-and-breakfast accommodations and residential
tourist homes.
Residential bed-and-breakfast accommodations and residential tourist
homes shall be permitted by special exception within the R-2 Zone and as a
permitted use in the C-2 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
H. The applicant shall furnish evidence that the storage and disposal of
materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and
federal regulations.
A. The owner of the dwelling structure in which such uses are conducted
must reside in the dwelling structure. No modification to the external
appearances of the building (except fire and safety requirements) which
would alter its residential character shall be permitted.
B. The dwelling structure is served by public sanitary sewer and public
water supply utilities. The use of a residential dwelling for a bed-andbreakfast
home or inn must be in compliance with the Borough of
Middletown Sewer Authority requirements.
C. Accommodations at bed-and-breakfast homes and inns may include
breakfast prepared on the premises for guests and included in the
charge for the room. No meal other than breakfast may be prepared on
the premises for the registered guests. Catered food service from a
licensed facility is permitted without additional licensing requirements.
Bedrooms shall not be used for cooking of any kind, and all meals for
transient or semipermanent residents shall be taken in substantially
family-type dining facilities.
D. No public restaurant service shall be conducted.
E. Bedrooms shall contain a minimum of 120 square feet of habitable floor
area for two persons.
F. No more than two persons per bedroom shall be permitted.
G. Off-street parking shall be provided on the premises for all uses
improved in accordance with Article XVI.
(1) Spaces for the owner of the premises shall be as specified in Article
XVI for single- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Spaces for residential bed-and-breakfast accommodations and for
residential tourist home accommodations shall be as specified
Article XVI for motels, tourist homes or hotels.
(3) Spaces for other uses on the premises shall be in accordance with
the applicable provisions of Article XVI.
H. All bed-and-breakfast homes and bed-and-breakfast inns shall comply
with the Federal Life Safety Code, and all other applicable building,
safety, and fire codes of the federal, state, or local government.
§ 260-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-190
1:739
§ 260-190. Boarding-, lodging and rooming houses.
Within the R-2 Zone, boarding-, lodging and rooming houses shall be
permitted by special exception, subject to the following criteria:
§ 260-191. In-home child care.
In-home child care shall be permitted by right in all zoning districts. The
child care shall be limited to six children not related to the operator by
legal marriage, birth or adoption. All child-care facilities shall obtain and
maintain proper licensure from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 260-192. Commercial child day-care facilities.
A. The owner of the dwelling structure in which such uses are conducted
must reside in the dwelling structure.
B. The dwelling structure is served by public sanitary sewer and public
water supply utilities. The applicant shall furnish evidence that
approved systems for sewage disposal and water supply shall be used
and all other federal and state license requirements have been met.
C. Bedrooms shall not be used for cooking of any kind, and all meals for
transient or semipermanent residents shall be taken in substantially
family-type dining facilities.
D. No public restaurant service shall be conducted.
E. Bedrooms shall contain a minimum of 70 square feet of habitable floor
area for one person.
F. A boarding-, lodging or rooming house shall not accommodate more
than five persons as paying guests.
G. No more than one person per bedroom shall be permitted.
H. Off-street parking shall be provided on the premises for all uses
improved in accordance with Article XVI.
(1) Spaces for the owner of the premises shall be as specified in Article
XVI for single- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Spaces for boarding, lodging or rooming houses shall be as
specified in Article XVI for boarding-, lodging and rooming houses.
(3) Spaces for other uses on the premises shall be in accordance with
the applicable provisions of Article XVI.
(4) No modifications to the external appearance of the building (except
fire escapes) which would alter its residential character shall be
permitted.
A. Within the C-1 and C-2 Zones, commercial day-care facilities are
permitted by right, subject to the following criteria:
§ 260-190 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-192
1:740
§ 260-193. Communication antennas, towers, equipment,
transmitting and receiving facilities.
(1) An outdoor play area shall be provided at a rate of 65 square feet
per individual enrolled. Off-street parking compounds shall not be
used as outdoor play areas. Outdoor play areas shall not be located
within the front yard. Additionally, outdoor play areas shall be
located and designed so as not to disrupt normal activities of
adjoining uses. There shall be a minimum of a four-foot-high fence
with screening to screen the play area from adjoining residentially
used or zoned properties. Any vegetative materials located within
the outdoor play areas shall be of a nonharmful type (poisonous,
thorny, allergenic, etc.). All outdoor play areas must provide a
means of shade, such as a shade tree(s) or pavilion(s).
(2) "Enrollment" shall be defined as the largest number of persons and/
or children under day-care supervision at any one time during a
seven-day period.
(3) Passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided on site and
arranged so that the passengers do not have to cross traffic lanes
on or adjacent to the site;
B. All commercial day-care facilities shall obtain and maintain proper
licensure from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Within nonresidential districts, communication antennas, towers,
equipment, transmitting and receiving facilities are permitted by
special exception, subject to the following criteria:
(1) Applicants are required to show compliance with the provisions of
this section and other applicable provisions of this chapter.
(2) Applications for the construction of communication antennas,
support structures, and related facilities shall include a written
report containing the following:
(a) Information describing the tower height and design.
(b) A cross section of the structure.
(c) Engineering specifications detailing construction of tower,
base, and guy wire anchorage.
(d) Information describing the proposed painting and lighting
schemes.
(e) Information describing the tower's capacity, including the
number and type of antennas that it can accommodate.
(f) All tower structure information shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
§ 260-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-193
1:741
(g) Certification that there is not suitable space on existing sites or
structures where the intended facility can be accommodated
and function as required without reasonable modification.
(h) Technological evidence that the facility must go where
proposed in order to satisfy its function in the grid system and
provide the quality of service required by law.
(i) Written authorization from the property owner of the proposed
site.
(j) Inventory of existing antenna support structures within a twomile
radius of the proposed site, discussing the unavailability
of sites and reasons therefor.
(k) Evidence of the applicant's good faith efforts to locate the
antenna on an existing structure.
(l) Applicant shall demonstrate that he/she is licensed by the FCC
to operate a communications tower and/or communications
antenna.
(3) All other uses ancillary to the antenna, tower, and associated
equipment are prohibited (except accessory equipment buildings),
unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the site is
located. This includes, but is not limited to, business offices,
maintenance depots and vehicle storage.
(4) Other standards of approval for antenna support structures and
antenna-related facilities include the following:
(a) Setbacks.
[1] Antenna support structures shall be set back from all
property lines a distance equal to the height of the
antenna.
[2] The structure shall be self-collapsing or have a clear fall
area setback equal to the height of the structure and any
attached antennas.
(b) Antenna support structure height.
[1] The maximum height of any single antenna support
structure located at a single site for one antenna shall be
at the lowest height to function at the proposed location,
based upon specific engineering data pertaining to the
function of the antenna support structure, to be supplied
to the applicant.
[2] An antenna support structure may exceed the maximum
allowable height to allow for the collocation of another
antenna, provided that the applicant shows evidence that
§ 260-193 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-193
1:742
the antenna support structure will be a shared location
site.
(c) Landscaping and screening.
[1] If the antenna support structure site is located in an area
of existing woodlands, the existing woodlands shall be
preserved to the fullest extent possible. The existing
woodlands shall be supplemented as needed to fully
screen the antenna support base.
[2] If the site is not wooded, the entire perimeter of the fence
surrounding the antenna support structure compound
shall be planted with evergreen trees for other planting as
approved by the Borough Council or Zoning Hearing
Board, at least six feet in height at the time of planting.
The planting area around the antenna support structure
shall have a minimum radius of 10 feet. The evergreens
shall be planted every five feet on center.
[3] The site shall be landscaped to a density and height
sufficient enough to screen the facility base tower and
buildings from abutting properties.
(d) Equipment or accessory buildings. Accessory buildings must
conform to the yard setbacks as required for the zoning district
in which the tower is located.
(e) Parking. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided.
(f) Security, maintenance, and fencing.
[1] The site shall be secured by a fence with a minimum height
of eight feet to limit accessibility by the general public.
[2] All guy wires shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at
all times and shall be located within the fence enclosure.
[3] All equipment and buildings shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the applicable building
code.
(g) Lighting and signs.
[1] No signs shall be mounted on a communications tower
except as may be required by the Federal Communications
Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or other
governmental agency which has jurisdiction.
[2] All communications towers shall have lights as may be
required by the Federal Communications Commission,
Federal Aviation Administration, or other governmental
agencies which have jurisdiction. If lighting is not required
§ 260-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-193
1:743
by other agencies, then lighting acceptable to the Borough
of Middletown shall be required.
(h) Antenna support structures shall be painted in the color that
best allows it to blend into the surroundings unless otherwise
required by the Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
The use of grays, blues and greens may be appropriate.
(i) Antenna support structure design and structural integrity. The
owner of the antenna or antenna support structure shall
provide a registered professional engineer's report
documenting that the structure meets the structural standards
of the applicable building code in the Telecommunications
Industry Association.
(j) Other.
[1] Evidence shall be submitted from a registered professional
engineer certifying that the proposed installation will not
exceed the structural capacity of the building or structure,
taking into consideration winds and other loads associated
with location.
[2] The applicant, owner, or operator of the antenna shall be
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
[3] The tower shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation
Administration, commonwealth Bureau of Aviation, and
zoning regulations.
[4] Certification of insurance evidencing general liability in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per incident and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per incident is required to cover the tower,
antenna and structures.
(k) Abandonment.
[1] If an antenna support structure is unused, as evidenced by
notice to the Federal Communications Commission of
intent to cease operations, for a continuous period of 12
months after said notice, it shall be deemed abandoned.
[2] Any antenna support structure or antenna that is deemed
to be abandoned must be removed within 90 days.
[3] Removal of the antenna support structure shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the antenna support
structure. At the time of land development plan approval,
the owner and/or his successors and assigns of the
antenna support structure must enter into an agreement
with the Borough of Middletown regarding the removal of
§ 260-193 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-193
1:744
§ 260-194. ECHO housing (Eden Council for Home Opportunity).
Within the C-2 and R-2 Zones, ECHO housing is permitted by special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
an abandoned antenna support structure, as herein
defined.
[4] In the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a
single tower, this provision shall become effective when all
users cease operation.
B. The collocation of a communications antenna upon an existing antenna
structure shall be a use permitted by right in all zoning districts,
provided that the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed
placement of the communications antenna is permitted by right
pursuant to the Wireless Broadband Collocation Act, 53 P.S. § 11702.1
et seq.
A. The ECHO housing may not exceed 900 square feet of floor area.
B. The total building coverage for the principal dwelling, any existing
accessory structures and the ECHO housing together shall not exceed
the maximum requirement for the zone in which the ECHO housing is
located.
C. The ECHO housing shall be occupied by either an elderly, handicapped
or disabled person related to the occupants of the principal dwelling by
blood, marriage or adoption.
D. The ECHO housing shall be occupied by a maximum of two people.
E. Utilities.
(1) For public sewer and water supply and all other utilities, the ECHO
housing shall be physically connected to those systems serving the
principal dwelling. No separate utility systems or connections shall
be constructed or used. All connections shall meet the applicable
utility company standards; and
(2) If the ECHO housing use is discontinued, utilities that would not
otherwise be allowed in an accessory structure must be
disconnected.
F. A minimum of one off-street parking space, with unrestricted ingress
and egress to the street or alley, shall be provided for the ECHO
housing, in addition to that required for the principal dwelling.
G. The ECHO housing shall not be permitted in the required front yard
setback and shall adhere to all side and rear yard setback requirements
for principal uses. Conversion of an existing accessory structure may be
permitted by a grant of special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board,
in which case the accessory structure setback standards shall apply.
§ 260-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-194
1:745
§ 260-195. Home improvement and building supply stores.
Within the C-1 Zone, home improvement and building supply stores are
permitted by right, subject to the following criteria:
§ 260-196. Home occupations.
H. If the ECHO housing use is discontinued, the structure used for the
ECHO housing shall not be converted to or leased as an apartment or
any use not otherwise permitted in the district.
A. If the subject property contains more than two acres, it shall front along
an arterial or collector road.
B. The retail sales area shall be all areas open for public display, including
but not limited to shelves, racks, bins, stalls, tables, and booths, plus
any adjoining aisles or walkways from which consumers can inspect
items for sale. The retail sales area shall include both interior and
exterior areas as listed above.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in Article XVI.
D. All exterior retail sales areas shall include a dust-free surface.
E. All exterior storage and retail sales areas (exclusive of nursery and
garden stock) shall be screened from adjoining residential properties.
F. The applicant shall furnish expert evidence that any exterior amplified
public address system and/or exterior lighting has been arranged and
designed so as to prevent objectionable impact off the site.
G. Any drilling, cutting, sawing, mixing, crushing or other preparation of
building materials shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
A. Within all residential districts, home occupation is a permitted use, and
subject to the following criteria:
(1) The use shall be conducted primarily by a permanent resident of
the dwelling, and involve a maximum of one person working on site
at any one time who does not reside within the dwelling.
(2) The use shall be conducted indoors. No outdoor storage or display
related to the home occupation shall be permitted. No changes
shall occur to the exterior of a building that would reduce its
residential appearance as viewed from a street.
(3) The use shall occupy an area that is not greater than 25% of the
total floor area of the principal dwelling unit. The use shall clearly
be secondary to the residential use.
(4) Two off-street parking spaces shall be required.
§ 260-194 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-196
1:746
(5) The use shall not require delivery or pick up by tractor-trailer
trucks.
(6) No excavating equipment shall be parked overnight on a residential
lot or an adjacent street as part of a home occupation.
(7) No equipment or machinery shall be permitted that produces noise,
noxious odor, vibration, glare, electrical or electronic interference
detectable on another property. The use shall not involve the
storage or use of hazardous, flammable or explosive substances,
other than types and amounts typically found on a residential
property. The use shall not involve the storage or use of toxic or
highly hazardous substances.
(8) A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner that is
perceptible to other residents between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:30 a.m.
(9) Any tutoring or instruction shall be limited to a maximum of three
students at a time.
(10) A barbershop or beauty shop shall not include any nonresident
employees.
(11) The main office of a medical doctor, chiropractor or dentist shall
not be permitted as a home occupation.
(12) See home occupation sign requirements in Article XVII.
(13) The use shall not involve manufacturing, other than of custom
crafts and sewing. The use shall not involve commercial repair of
motor vehicles.
(14) Retail sales shall be limited to sales that are clearly accessory to
the primary residential use.
(15) If more than one home occupation is accessory to a dwelling, the
total aggregate impact of the home occupations shall be considered
in determining compliance with this chapter. In any case, no more
than one nonresident employee shall be allowed to work on site at
one time.
B. No-impact home-based businesses, as defined in the Municipalities
Planning Code,195 shall be permitted in all residential zones of the
Borough as a use permitted by right, except that such permission shall
not supersede any deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting
the use of land, nor any master deed, bylaw or other document
applicable to a common interest ownership community.
(1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
195. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-196
1:747
(2) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(3) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(4) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
but not limited to parking, signs or lights.
(5) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(6) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(7) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
C. The home occupation proposed must be covered by a home occupation
permit, applied for by the person conducting such occupation.
(1) The application for such permit shall include:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The type of home occupation.
(c) Whether a state license is required and, if so, whether there is
a validly issued license currently in effect.
(d) The number of parking spaces provided for the residence and
for the home occupation.
(e) Other information relevant to a permit for such home
occupation in the designated dwelling, including a copy of the
applicant's lease, if any, and of the deed.
(2) Such home occupation permits are required for all home
occupations, including those already in existence.
(3) A fee is required for a home occupation permit. Said fee includes an
inspection by the Zoning Officer for compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations, and such inspection shall be made
prior to the issuance of a home occupation permit.
(4) Failure to hold a home occupation permit shall constitute a
violation of this chapter by the operator of a home occupation, and
such person, owner or lessee of a dwelling and residing therein
under the very definition of a home occupation otherwise lawful
§ 260-196 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-196
1:748
§ 260-197. Housing for elderly.
Housing for the elderly shall be permitted by special exception within the
C-2 Zone, subject to the following criteria:
hereunder shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the
penalties therein provided for violations, including hereby failure
to hold a home occupation permit.
A. The housing units are designed and intended for occupancy exclusively
by the elderly.
B. The following uses shall be permitted as principal uses within the
housing for the elderly community:
(1) Nursing home.
(2) Personal care home.
(3) Multifamily independent elderly housing to include:
(a) Single-family attached dwellings.
(b) Apartment house.
(4) Public uses.
(a) Public park, recreational areas and greenways.
(b) Public libraries and community activity buildings.
C. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in the housing
for the elderly community for the use of residents and guests:
(1) Accessory service uses.
(a) Adult and child day care.
(b) Dispensaries.
(c) Medical facilities.
(d) Common dining facilities.
(e) Group recreation facilities.
(2) Accessory commercial uses.
(a) Banks and financial institutions.
(b) Florists, stationery and gift stores.
(c) Food and beverage stores.
(d) Personal care services.
(e) Restaurants.
§ 260-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-197
1:749
(f) Hobby, book, and music stores.
(3) Each accessory use shall be located in a building occupied by
residential uses or in a community activities building.
(4) Each accessory commercial use shall not exceed 2,500 square feet
of net floor area (for accessory commercial uses, net floor area as
defined herein shall also exclude food preparation areas and
lavatories).
(5) The total area reserved for commercial accessory uses shall not
exceed 4% of the total land area, including buildings, sidewalks,
open space, access drives and parking, and no more than 25,000
square feet, whichever is less.
(6) Parking spaces shall be provided per Article XVI for each accessory
commercial use in addition to other required parking for the
facility.
D. Housing for the elderly communities shall meet the following area,
density, coverage and yard requirements:
(1) Minimum development area shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum density for residential units shall be 18 units per acre.
(3) Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be 80%.
(4) Yards shall meet the following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Front yard: 10 feet.
(b) Side yards: district standard.
(c) Rear yard: district standard.
(5) More than one building on a single lot shall meet the minimum
building-to-building spacing standards of the district.
(6) Staging of development. When the housing for the elderly
community is to be developed in stages, the following criteria must
be met:
(a) The land development plan presented to the Borough must
show the approximate location and type of use for each stage
of the development.
(b) If nonresidential uses will be a part of the development, the
sequencing shall be shown so that not all residential
development is constructed prior to the construction of the
nonresidential development, unless the development involves
an existing continuing care retirement community that already
includes existing nonresidential components, in which case the
staging requirement would not apply.
§ 260-197 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-197
1:750
§ 260-198. Manufactured (mobile) home parks.
E. Public water and public sewer shall be required.
F. A landscaping plan for the entire tract shall be required. A landscape
architect licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
retained to complete such a plan to ensure the proper species, use,
arrangement of plant materials and installation by the developer. All
areas of the development not covered by impervious surfaces shall be
landscaped and maintained with suitable ground cover and plants.
(1) The plan shall indicate the extent in which existing vegetation will
be preserved for landscaping purposes.
(2) When deemed necessary by the Borough Council or Zoning
Hearing Board, earthen berms shall be incorporated into the
landscaping plan along public street frontage and along property
lines abutting existing dwellings.
(3) Landscaped areas shall be continually maintained by the
landowner or retirement community association. Care, grooming,
and replacement of plants shall be included as part of the required
maintenance. Failure to adequately maintain landscaped areas
shall be subject to a citation issued by the Borough.
(4) In addition to landscape elements, the plan shall include the layout
of walkways, lighting in accordance with the Borough Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance196 and recreation areas
throughout the development for the safety and security of the
residents.
(a) Entrances to dwelling units shall be provided with all-weather
walkways to parking and refuse collection points.
(b) The development shall have shaded sidewalks or shaded paved
walking paths throughout the development.
(c) The layout and design of pedestrian-level streetlighting shall
be provided throughout the development and parking areas.
(5) Parking areas within the housing for the elderly community shall be
adequately landscaped in order to provide shade, to screen
vehicles from public streets, and to reduce glare and noise within
the development itself, and shall be designed in accordance with
the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
G. The continuing care retirement community shall provide proof that all
applicable state, county and municipal licenses have been obtained.
A. A permit to construct or make alterations to a manufactured (mobile)
home park shall be issued only after a plan which has been approved by
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Subdivision of Land.
§ 260-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-198
1:751
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection has been
filed with and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board
shall require that the surrounding areas are satisfactorily protected by
planting or other suitable buffer or screening arrangements.
B. Manufactured (mobile) homes shall be placed only in a manufactured
home park, and each such park shall contain a minimum of five acres.
C. Yard and area regulations.
(1) The maximum density of manufactured (mobile) homes shall be
based on eight manufactured (mobile) homes per acre.
(2) Each manufactured (mobile) home space shall have a minimum
area of 4,200 square feet.
(3) Each manufactured (mobile) home space shall be at least 40 feet
wide.
(4) There shall be a minimum of 20 feet between manufactured
(mobile) homes.
(5) No manufactured (mobile) home shall be closer to the street rightof-
way line of a public street than the minimum requirements of 30
feet.
(6) All manufactured (mobile) homes shall be located a minimum of 25
feet from the manufactured (mobile) home park boundary line, and
all manufactured (mobile) homes shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the edge of all internal private driveways.
D. All roads in the park shall be private driveways, shall be lighted and
shall be paved with a bituminous or concrete surface at least 24 feet
wide.
E. Each manufactured (mobile) home space shall abut on a park driveway
with access to such driveway. Access to all manufactured (mobile) home
spaces shall be from the driveways and not from public streets or
highways.
F. Service and accessory buildings located in a manufactured (mobile)
home park shall be used only by the occupants and guests of the
manufactured (mobile) home park.
G. Each manufactured (mobile) home space shall contain no more than
one manufactured (mobile) home for not more than one family.
H. A manufactured home park shall only include homes of single or
multiple widths, but shall not include travel trailers or motor homes.
I. The maximum coverage of any individual manufactured home lot by all
principal and accessory buildings and structures, including covered
patios, and decks, shall not exceed 30%.
§ 260-198 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-198
1:752
§ 260-199. Manufacturing.
§ 260-200. Private recreation facilities.
J. Each manufactured (mobile) home space shall be provided with a
minimum of two paved parking spaces of bituminous or concrete
surface.
K. Each manufactured (mobile) home park shall be established,
maintained, conducted and operated in strict compliance with the rules
and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Chapter 4, Article 415, Regulations for
Mobile Home Parks, adopted October 30, 1959, as the same may be
changed or amended from time to time.
A. In order that the Zoning Officer may have a reasonable basis upon
which to approve a proposed industrial operation for conformity with
the requirements of this chapter, the following data shall be submitted
with an application for a permit:
(1) The plot plan.
(2) The architectural plan.
(3) A description of the operation.
(4) Engineering and architectural plans for water supply and sewage
disposal.
(5) Plans for prevention or control of noise, vibration, glare, fire
hazards, air pollution, water pollution and traffic.
(6) Proposed fuel.
(7) The number of shifts and the maximum employment per shift.
(8) Additional pertinent data as may be required by the Zoning Officer.
B. As a special exception, front, side or rear yards may be modified.
A. Within the C-D Zone, private commercial recreation facilities are
permitted by right, subject to the following criteria:
(1) If the subject property contains more than two acres, it shall front
on an arterial or collector road;
(2) Those uses involving extensive outdoor activities shall provide
sufficient screening and/or landscaping measures to mitigate any
visual and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties;
(3) Any structures exceeding the maximum permitted height may be
permitted so long as they are set back from all property lines at
least the horizontal distance equal to their height, plus an
§ 260-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-200
1:753
§ 260-201. Public utility facilities.
Public utility facilities shall be permitted in the R-1, R-1A, and R-2 districts
as a special exception, and in the C-1 and M-1 districts as a permitted use,
without regard to the use and area regulations; provided, however, that
buildings or structures erected for these utilities shall be subject to the
following regulations:
additional 50 feet. Furthermore, such structures shall not be used
for occupancy;
(4) The applicant shall furnish expert evidence that the proposed use
will not be detrimental to the use of adjoining properties due to
hours of operation, noise, light, litter, dust and pollution;
(5) Required parking will be determined based upon a combination of
the types of activities proposed and the schedule listed in this
chapter. In addition, an unimproved grassed overflow parking area
provided for peak use periods may be required. Such overflow
parking areas shall be accessible only from the interior driveways
of the permanent parking lot. Overflow parking areas shall contain
fencing to prevent vehicles from crossing adjoining properties or
directly accessing adjoining roads; and
(6) Any booths or other structures used for the collection of admission
and/or parking fees shall be set back and arranged to prevent
vehicle backups on adjoining roads during peak arrival periods.
Any other collection of fees (roaming parking lot attendants) shall
be conducted in a manner to prevent vehicle backups on adjoining
roads.
B. If, at any time after the opening of the commercial recreation facility,
the Borough of Middletown determines that traffic backups are
occurring on adjoining roads, and such backups are directly related to
the means of access to the subject property, the Borough can require
the applicant to revise means of access to relieve the undue congestion.
C. Where required, the private recreation facilities shall comply with the
Borough Floodplain Ordinance.197
A. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of the district in which the facility is located.
B. Height shall be as required by the district regulations.
C. Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a chain link fence six feet
in height topped with barbed wire.
D. Housed equipment. When the equipment is totally enclosed within a
building, no fence or screen planting shall be required, and the yards
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 158, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 260-200 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-201
1:754
§ 260-202. Student housing.
§ 260-203. Wind energy facilities.
Nonpersonal wind energy facilities shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone by
special exception, subject to the following:
shall be maintained in conformity with the district in which the facility
is located.
E. Screen planting in residential districts. The required fence for
unhoused equipment shall be surrounded by an evergreen planting as
approved by the Planning Committee.
F. The external design of the building shall be compatible with the
buildings in the district.
G. For special exception applications, the applicant must demonstrate that
the selected location is necessary for public service and the use cannot
be supplied if located elsewhere.
A. Student housing is permitted, subject to the following criteria:
(1) Each apartment must have a minimum of 650 square feet of
habitable floor area.
(2) The owner of a student housing building shall annually register the
tenants in accordance with Chapter 219, Ordinance No. 635.
(3) In no case shall the number of tenants exceed the number of
bedrooms in each apartment of the student housing building.
(4) The owner of a student housing building shall obtain an occupancy
permit.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses on the property, in
accordance with Article XVI.
(6) Exterior fire escapes, where required, shall not be located on any
wall facing a street. Exterior fire escapes above the second floor
level shall be noncombustible.
(7) No apartment shall be permitted in the basement or cellar of the
student housing building.
(8) All apartments shall be served by public sanitary sewer and public
water supply utilities.
B. The requirements of § 260-67B notwithstanding, the total coverage
ratio for lots containing student housing shall not exceed 60%.
C. The total coverage ratio for lots containing student housing may be
increased, not to exceed a total of 65% by special exception, consistent
with the requirements of §§ 260-69 and 260-233E(3).
§ 260-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-203
1:755
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The person or entity filing an application under this
section.
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having an equity interest
in the wind energy facility, including their respective successors and
assigns.
HUB HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is
attached.
NONPARTICIPATING LANDOWNER — Any landowner except those on
whose property all or a portion of a wind energy facility is located
pursuant to an agreement with the facility owner or operator.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A residence, school, hospital, church, public
library or other building used for public gathering that is occupied or in
use when the permit application is submitted.
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the wind energy facility.
SHADOW FLICKER — Alternating changes in light intensity caused
by the moving wind rotor blade casting shadows on the ground and
stationary objects.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the
tower foundation to the highest point of the wind rotor.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electric generating facility whose main
purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations,
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts
wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine
generator, and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer,
if any.
B. Applicability.
(1) These provisions apply to all wind energy facilities proposed to be
constructed after the effective date of this chapter, except that this
chapter is not intended to apply to stand-alone wind turbines
constructed primarily for use on the property upon which the wind
turbine is located. Where permitted, stand-alone wind turbines
constructed primarily for use on the property upon which the wind
turbine is located shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) Any structure supporting the wind turbine, including
guideposts and cables, shall be independent of any occupied
structure and located a minimum distance of the turbine height
§ 260-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-203
1:756
plus 10 feet from any existing aerial utility line or occupied
dwelling, and shall not be more than 75 feet in height.
(b) The minimum distance between the wind turbine and any
property line shall not be less than twice the turbine height.
(c) The minimum distance between the ground and the lowest
point of the wind rotor blade shall be 20 feet.
(d) All electrical or utility lines shall be buried underground.
(e) One wind turbine shall be permitted per lot, and all energy
produced from such turbine shall be used on the lot.
(f) The wind turbine shall be enclosed by a six-foot fence with
locking gate or the base of the wind turbine shall not be
climbable for a distance of 12 feet.
(2) Wind energy facilities constructed prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
chapter; provided that any physical modification to an existing
wind energy facility that materially alters the size, type and number
of wind turbines or other equipment shall require a permit under
this chapter.
C. A wind energy facility shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone as a special
exception, subject to the following criteria:
(1) Any physical modification to an existing and permitted wind energy
facility that materially alters the size, type and number of wind
turbines or other equipment shall require a conditional use or
special exception permit modification under this chapter. Like kind
replacements shall not require a permit modification.
(2) The design of the wind energy facility shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those of the American National
Standards Institute. The applicant shall submit certificate of design
compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturers from
Underwriters' Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer
Lloyd Wind Energies, or other similar certifying organizations.
(3) To the extent applicable, the wind energy facility shall comply with
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, 34 Pa. Code §§ 403.1
through 403.142.
(4) All wind energy facilities shall be equipped with a redundant
braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed
controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems)
and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a
fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient
braking system for overspeed protection.
§ 260-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-203
1:757
(5) All electrical components of the wind energy facility shall conform
to relevant and applicable local, state and national codes, and
relevant and applicable international standards.
(6) Wind turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color such as white, off-white
or gray.
(7) Wind energy facilities shall not be artificially lighted, except to the
extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other
applicable authority that regulates air safety.
(8) Wind turbines shall not display advertising, except for reasonable
identification of the turbine manufacturer, facility owner or
operator.
(9) On-site transmission and power lines between wind turbines shall,
to the maximum extent practicable, be placed underground.
(10) The design of buildings and related structures shall, to the extent
reasonable, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the wind energy facility into the natural
setting and existing environment.
(11) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed at
the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(12) Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape
shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and along the guy
wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground.
(13) All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by nonauthorized
persons.
(14) The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the
wind rotor blade shall be 30 feet.
(15) To limit climbing access, a six-foot-high fence with a locking gate
shall be placed around the wind energy facility, or the wind
turbines' climbing apparatus shall be limited to no lower than 12
feet from the ground or the wind turbines' climbing apparatus shall
be fully contained and locked within the tower structure.
(16)Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied building
or nonoccupied building on the participating landowner's property
a distance not less than the greatest normal boundary setback
requirements for the zoning classification or 1.1 times the turbine
height, whichever is greater. The setback distance shall be
measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the nearest
point on the foundation of the occupied building or nonoccupied
building.
§ 260-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-203
1:758
(17)Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied building
or nonoccupied building located on a nonparticipating landowner's
property a distance of not less than two times the turbine height, as
measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the nearest
point on the foundation of the occupied or nonoccupied building.
(18) All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest property line a
distance of not less than the normal setback requirements for that
zoning classification of 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is
greater. The setback distance shall be measured to the center of
the wind turbine base.
(19) All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest public road a
distance of not less than 1.1 times the turbine height, as measured
from the right-of-way line of the nearest public road to the center of
the wind turbine base.
(20) Audible sound from a wind energy facility shall not exceed 55 dBA,
as measured at the exterior of any occupied building on a
nonparticipating landowner's property. Methods for measuring and
reporting acoustic emissions from wind turbines and the wind
energy facility shall be equal to or exceed the minimum standards
for prevision described in AWEA Standard 2.1 — 1989 titled
"Procedures for the Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic
Emissions from Wind Turbine Generation Systems, Volume I, First
Tier."
(21) The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts to
minimize shadow flicker to any occupied building on a
nonparticipating landowner's property.
D. Use of public roads.
(1) The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to be
used within the Borough to transport equipment and parts for
construction, operation or maintenance of the wind energy facility.
(2) The Borough Engineer or a qualified third party engineer hired by
the Borough and paid for by the applicant shall document road
conditions prior to construction. The engineer shall document road
conditions again 30 days after construction is complete, or as
weather permits.
(3) The Borough may bond the road in compliance with state
regulations.
(4) Any road damage caused by the applicant or its contractors shall be
promptly repaired at the applicant's expense.
(5) The applicant shall demonstrate that it has appropriate financial
assurance to ensure the prompt repair of damaged roads.
E. Local emergency services.
§ 260-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-203
1:759
(1) The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and site
plan to local emergency services, including paid or volunteer Fire
Department(s).
(2) Upon request, the applicant shall cooperate with emergency
services to develop and coordinate implementation of an
emergency response plan for the wind energy facility.
F. Signal interference. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to
avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television or similar
signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the wind energy facility.
G. Liability insurance. There shall be maintained a current general liability
policy covering bodily injury and property damage with limits of at least
$1 million per occurrence and $1 million in the aggregate. Certificates
shall be made available to the Borough upon request.
H. Decommissioning.
(1) The facility owner and operator shall, at its expense, complete
decommissioning of the wind energy facility, or individual wind
turbines, within 12 months after the end of the useful life of the
facility or individual wind turbines. The wind energy facility or
individual wind turbines will be presumed to be at the end of its
useful life if no electricity is generated for a continuous period of 12
months.
(2) Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines, buildings,
cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations to a depth of 36
inches, and any other associated facilities.
(3) Disturbed earth shall be graded and reseeded, unless the
landowner requests, in writing, that the access roads or other land
surface areas not be restored.
(4) An independent and certified professional engineer shall be
retained to estimate the total cost of decommissioning
("decommissioning costs") without regard to salvage value of the
equipment, and the cost of decommissioning net salvage value of
the equipment ("net decommissioning costs"). Said estimates shall
be submitted to the Borough after the first year of operation and
every fifth year thereafter.
(5) The facility owner or operator shall post and maintain
decommissioning funds in an amount equal to net decommissioning
costs; provided that at no point shall decommissioning funds be
less than 100% of decommissioning costs. The decommissioning
funds shall be posted and maintained with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by
the facility owner or operator and participating landowner posting
the financial security, provided that the bonding company or
§ 260-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-203
1:760
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within
the commonwealth and is approved by the Borough.
(6) Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a performance bond,
surety bond, letter of credit, corporate guarantee or other form of
financial assurance as may be acceptable to the Borough.
(7) If the facility owner or operator fails to complete decommissioning
within the period prescribed above, then the landowner shall have
six months to complete decommissioning.
(8) If neither the facility owner or operator, nor the landowner
complete decommissioning within the periods prescribed above,
then the Borough may take such measures as necessary to
complete decommissioning. The entry into and submission of
evidence of a participating landowner agreement to the Borough
shall constitute agreement and consent of the parties to the
agreement, their respective heirs, successors and assigns that the
Borough may take such action as necessary to implement the
decommissioning plan.
(9) The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds when
the facility owner or operator has demonstrated and the Borough
concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed,
or upon written approval of the Borough in order to implement the
decommissioning plan.
I. Public inquiries and complaints.
(1) The facility owner and operator shall maintain a phone number and
identify responsible person for the public to contact with inquiries
and complaints throughout the life of the project.
(2) The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts to
respond to the public's inquiries and complaints.
(3) The facility owner and/or operator shall keep a record of all such
inquiries and complaints and shall submit a report thereof to the
Borough not less than quarterly.
J. Remedies.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or
fail to comply with or take any action which is contrary to the terms
of this article, or any permit issued under this article, or cause
another to violate or fail to comply, or to take any action which is
contrary to the terms of this article or any permit issued under this
article.
(2) If the Borough determines that a violation of this article or the
permit has occurred, the Borough shall provide written notice to
any person, firm, or corporation alleged to be in violation of this
article or permit. If the alleged violation does not pose an
§ 260-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-203
1:761
immediate threat to public health or safety, the Borough and the
parties shall engage in good faith negotiations to resolve the
alleged violation. Such negotiations shall be conducted within 30
days of the notice of violation.
(3) If after 30 days from the date of the notice of violation, the Borough
determines, in its discretion, that the parties have not resolved the
alleged violation, the Borough may institute civil enforcement
proceedings or any other remedy at law to ensure compliance with
this article or permit.
K. Application for wind energy facilities.
(1) Among other things, the application shall contain the following:
(a) A narrative describing the proposed wind energy facility,
including an overview of the project; the project location; the
approximate generating capacity of the wind energy facility;
the approximate number, representative types and height or
range of heights of wind turbines to be constructed, including
their generating capacity, dimensions and respective
manufacturers; and a description of ancillary facilities.
(b) An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the
property owner and the facility owner or operator
demonstrating that the facility owner or operator has the
permission of the property owner to apply for necessary
permits for construction and operation of the wind energy
facility and setting forth the applicant's and property owner's
name, address and phone number.
(c) Identification of the properties on which the proposed wind
energy facility will be located, and the properties adjacent to
where the wind energy facility will be located.
(d) A site plan showing the planned location of each wind turbine,
property lines, setback lines, access road and turnout
locations, substation(s), electrical cabling from the wind
energy facility to the substation(s), ancillary equipment,
buildings, and structures, including permanent meteorological
towers, associated transmission lines, and layout of all
structures within the geographical boundaries of any
applicable setback.
(e) Documents related to decommissioning.
(f) Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as
may be reasonably requested by the Borough to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(2) Throughout the permit process, the applicant shall promptly notify
the Borough of any changes to the information contained in the
§ 260-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-203
1:762
§ 260-204. Temporary FEMA trailers.
In the event of a major storm occurrence, trailers provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) shall be a permitted temporary
use in all zoning districts.
§ 260-205. Applications for special exception uses.
conditional use permit application. Changes to the pending
application that do not materially alter the initial site plan may be
adopted without a renewed public hearing.
A. Applications for special exception uses shall be approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board, with recommendations by the Middletown Borough
Planning Committee.
B. Applications for permitted uses involving development activities shall
be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Officer.
C. Applications shall be accompanied by a plan providing the information
herein below required.
(1) A location map to scale which provides the following information:
(a) Proposed development area and surrounding areas.
(b) Identification of all streets, avenues and alleys.
(c) Existing zoning districts.
(2) A property plan which provides the following information:
(a) Tract boundaries.
(b) Adjacent properties by deed reference and tax parcel number.
(c) Rights-of-way and cartway of streets, avenues or alleys.
(d) Location and description of all easements.
(e) Topographic contour information with salient physical
features.
(f) Location of existing sanitary sewer and water supply systems.
(3) A plan which provides the following information:
(a) Location, type, use and mix of all buildings and facilities
existing and proposed.
(b) Existing uses of all adjacent lands and buildings.
(c) Existing and proposed public and/or private streets, avenues,
alleys, driveways.
§ 260-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-205
1:763
§ 260-206. Academic clinical research centers. [Added 2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
(d) Off-street parking plan, compliant with the requirements and
standards of Article XVI providing sufficient spaces for all uses,
existing and continued, as well as added or new uses.
(e) Stormwater drainage facilities existing and proposed.
(f) Erosion control plan.
(g) Buffer areas, natural and constructed.
(h) Impervious coverage by each building and total buildings,
coverage by driveways, parking, walkways, other facilities and
total coverage.
(i) Total tract area, tract area allocated for nonresidential uses,
tract area allocated to residential uses and residential density
in units per acre.
(4) Reports addressing the following:
(a) Capacity of the sanitary sewer system to handle the flow from
the development at the point at which it would be connected.
(b) Capacity of the public water supply system to supply the
necessary domestic and firefighting water flow, at the point at
which it would be connected.
(c) Traffic impact analysis on the public streets which provide
access to the site.
(d) Stormwater management plan.
A. Parking requirements shall follow the parking regulations in Article
XVI. Academic clinical research centers shall meet the off-street
parking requirements listed for colleges, universities and commercial
colleges.
B. An academic clinical research center may only grow medical marijuana
in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which includes electronic
locking systems, electronic surveillance and other features required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Health. The grower/processor facility
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit,
mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
C. All external lighting serving an academic clinical research center must
be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or
onto adjoining properties.
D. A buffer planting is required where an academic clinical research
center adjoins a residential dwelling and or building.
§ 260-205 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-207
1:764
§ 260-207. Medical marijuana grower/processor. [Added 2-7-2017
by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
A. A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which includes
electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance and other features
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Health. The grower/
processor facility shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container,
mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other
motor vehicle.
B. The floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor shall include
sufficient space for production, secure storage of marijuana seed,
related finished product cultivation, and marijuana-related materials
and equipment used in production and cultivation or for required
laboratory testing.
C. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste into
the environment from any facility where medical marijuana growing,
processing or testing occurs.
D. Marijuana remnants and by-products shall be secured and properly
disposed of in accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of
Health's policy and shall not be placed within any unsecured exterior
refuse container.
E. The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to other
medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and dispensing of medical
marijuana and related products is prohibited at medical marijuana
grower/processor facilities.
F. Growers/processors may not locate within 1,000 feet of the property
line of a public, private, or parochial school or day-care center.
G. All external lighting serving a medical marijuana grower/processor
must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be emitted
skyward or onto residential adjoining properties.
H. Parking requirements shall follow the parking regulations in Article
XVI. Medical marijuana growers/processors shall meet the off-street
parking requirements listed for manufacturing plants.
I. A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana grower/
processor adjoins a residential use and or building.
J. Entrances and driveways shall meet the design standards of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance198 and the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Subdivision of Land.
§ 260-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-208
1:765
§ 260-208. Medical marijuana transport vehicle service. [Added
2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
§ 260-209. Medical marijuana dispensary. [Added 2-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1336, approved 2-21-2017]
A. Parking requirements shall follow the parking regulations in Article
XVI.
B. External lighting serving a medical marijuana transport vehicle service
shall not emit onto adjoining residential properties.
C. The facility shall be secured to the same level as a medical marijuana
grower and dispensary if medical marijuana is temporarily stored.
D. Entrances and driveways shall meet the design standards of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance199 and the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
A. A medical marijuana dispensary must be legally registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and possess a current valid medical
marijuana permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
B. A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical marijuana
in an indoor, enclosed, permanent, and secure building and shall not be
located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile
home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
C. A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site as a
facility used for growing and processing medical marijuana.
D. Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure public
entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to deter
and prevent the theft of marijuana and unauthorized entrance into
areas containing medical marijuana and or medical marijuana
equipment.
E. Hours of operation shall be compliant with Act 16200 or any succeeding
amendments approved by the General Assembly and/or regulatory
rule(s) generated from a state agency overseeing such uses.
F. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not exceed 3,000 gross square
feet, of which no more than 500 square feet shall be used to secure
storage of product, and shall have an interior customer waiting area
equal to a minimum of 25% of the gross floor area.
G. A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
(1) Not have a drive-through service;
199. Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Subdivision of Land.
200. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1023.101 et seq.
§ 260-208 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-209
1:766
(2) Not have outdoor seating area(s);
(3) Not have outdoor vending machines;
(4) Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of medical
marijuana on the premises; and
(5) Not offer direct or home delivery service.
H. A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical marijuana
to certified patients and caregivers and shall comply with all lawful
applicable health regulations.
I. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within 1,000 feet of
the property line of a public, private or parochial school or a day-care
center.
J. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within 1,000 feet
from the nearest medical marijuana facility. This does not include
complementing or supporting businesses covered by different
definitions. This separation distance shall also not apply to the distance
between the grower/processor or academic clinical research centers
and the specific dispensary they serve and or partner with.
K. Any medical marijuana facility lawfully operating shall not be rendered
in violation of these provisions by the subsequent location of a public,
private or parochial school or a day-care center.
L. All external lighting shall not emitted skyward or onto an adjoining
residential property.
M. A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana dispensary
adjoins a residential use and or building.
N. Entrances and driveways shall be designed in accordance with the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance201 and the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
O. Parking requirements shall follow the parking regulations in Article
XVI. Medical marijuana dispensaries shall meet the off-street parking
requirements listed for medical and dental clinics.
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Subdivision of Land.
§ 260-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-209
1:767

ARTICLE XIX
Nonconforming Status
§ 260-210. Nonconforming status.
All buildings, structures, uses of land, uses of buildings, lots and signs which
do not conform to all of the applicable requirements of this chapter shall be
considered as nonconforming, provided that:
§ 260-211. Nonconforming classifications.
Nonconforming status shall be classified as follows:
§ 260-212. Nonconforming uses.
The following regulations shall govern all properties to which
nonconforming status is applied:
A. They lawfully existed on the date of passage of this chapter.
B. They lawfully existed on the date of passage of a text or map
amendment to this chapter, which amendment caused the
nonconforming status.
A. Nonconforming use. The existing lawful use of land and/or buildings
and/or structures upon the land which does not conform to any of the
permitted uses of the district in which it is located.
B. Nonconforming building or structure. Any existing lawful building or
structure that does not conform to the height, location, size, bulk or
other dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located.
This does not include signs.
C. Nonconforming lot. Any existing lot which does not conform to the area
and/or width requirement for lots in the district in which it is located.
D. Nonconforming sign. Any sign, signboard, billboard or advertising
device existing at the time of the passing of this chapter that does not
conform in use, location, height or size with the regulations of this
chapter shall be considered a nonconforming sign.
E. Temporary nonconforming use. A temporary nonconforming use, which
will benefit the public health, safety or welfare or promote proper
development of a district in conformity with the intent of this chapter,
may be permitted for a period of not more than 30 days on the approval
of an application for a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board,
but any such use to be permitted for a longer period shall require a
public hearing thereon, after which a Zoning Hearing Board approval
may be granted for a period not to exceed one year. A building permit
and/or use and occupancy permit shall be required for any structure
associated with such a temporary use, in accordance with the standards
and regulations for permanent structures and uses.
§ 260-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-212
1:769
A. Nonconforming status shall be permitted to continue and a property
may continue to be used as nonconforming until it complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Change of use.
(1) A nonconforming use may be changed only to a conforming use.
(2) If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, then the
previous nonconforming status shall become null and void.
(3) The conversion of one nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use on a lot or in a building that is nonconforming
shall be permitted by special exception from the Zoning Hearing
Board, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Where a
special exception approval is required, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall determine whether the applicant has provided sufficient proof
to show that the proposed new use will be equal or less
objectionable in external effects than the preexisting
nonconforming use with regard to:
(a) Traffic safety and generation (especially truck traffic).
(b) Noise, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odors, glare, vibration, fire,
hazardous substances and explosive hazards.
(c) Amount and character of outdoor storage.
(d) Late night and early morning hours of operation if the new use
would be close to dwellings.
(e) Compatibility with the character of surrounding uses.
C. Abandonment and discontinuance.
(1) A nonconforming use shall be presumed abandoned when
operations associated with the nonconforming use have ceased by
an apparent act or failure to act on the part of the tenant or owner
to reinstate such use within one year from the date the activity
stopped and the use is not actively advertised for sale or lease.
Such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reinstated except
in conformance with this chapter. A nonconforming building or
land, which is actively marketed, but has not been sold or leased,
shall not be considered abandoned. The applicant shall be
responsible to provide evidence that the nonconformity was not
abandoned.
(2) Except for in a mobile home park, the removal of a nonconforming
mobile home from the site it occupied (and if such site is not leased,
actively marketed, or purchased within one year or less) shall
constitute abandonment of the site, and any occupation or
subsequent use of said site shall conform with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 260-212 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-212
1:770
§ 260-213. Additional building regulations.
(3) The removal of a mobile home from a residential lot already
occupied by a residential building shall constitute abandonment of
the nonconforming use and such use shall not thereafter be
permitted. (Exception: mobile homes utilized for temporary
housing for farm employees.)
(4) Mobile home parks, trailer camps or trailer parks, which are
nonconforming under the terms of this chapter, shall be operated in
accordance with Public Health Regulations, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, under the
provisions of Act 175 of April 9, 1929, P.L. 177,202 as amended, and
all other applicable laws.
D. Whenever a district classification shall be thereafter changed, any
existing use in such changed district may be continued, provided that
no structural alterations are made other than those permitted by this
chapter.
E. Extension of expansion. A nonconforming use, building or structure, not
including signs, may be extended or expanded in compliance with the
following:
(1) The parcel on which extension or expansion occurs shall include
only that lot, held in single and separate ownership, on which the
use, building or structure existed at the time it became
nonconforming. Expansion or extension onto adjoining lots is
prohibited.
(2) Nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout the
building.
(3) A nonconforming use may be extended to a new building on the
same lot, in compliance with Subsection E(5) below, and provided
that the nonconforming use continues in the existing building.
(4) A building which houses a nonconforming use may be expanded by
no more than 25% of its gross floor area at the time it became
nonconforming.
(5) Extension and/or expansion as provided for above shall be
permitted only to extent that all new construction shall comply with
the dimensional standards of the district in which the building is
located, except that expansion of a building that is nonconforming
with respect to a required setback may be built on line with the
existing nonconforming building line. A violation of any
dimensional standard not previously violated shall not be
permitted, unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
202. Editor's Note: The "Administrative Code of 1929," see 71 P.S. § 51 et seq.
§ 260-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-213
1:771
§ 260-214. Nonconforming lots of record.
A. Buildings that are under construction at the time they become
nonconforming may be continued to completion, provided that valid
building permits have been issued for those buildings and substantial
construction has begun. If the building was intended for a use which
has become nonconforming after construction of the building had
begun, the building may be occupied and used for that legal use
intended at the time the building permit was issued, or for one which is
otherwise in conformance with the regulations for the zoning district in
which the building is located.
B. Nonconforming primary structures damaged or destroyed by fire,
explosion, accident of calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due to
time or neglect) may be reconstructed and used as before, provided
that:
(1) The reconstructed building shall not exceed the dimensions of the
damaged or destroyed building, including height, width, depth,
volume.
(2) Building reconstruction shall be started within 12 months from the
date the building was damaged or destroyed and shall be carried
out without interruption.
(3) The building will pose no hazard to safety.
C. Legally condemned nonconforming buildings shall not be rebuilt or
used except to conformance with this chapter.
A. A lot of public record, in single and separate ownership at the time of
enactment of this chapter, or amendments thereto, which is not in
conformance with the area or width requirements of the district in
which it is located, shall be deemed nonconforming and shall be subject
to the following regulations:
(1) Said lot may be used as otherwise permitted in that district
following the granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board
for the particular use.
(2) Where two or more contiguous undeveloped lots are held in single
ownership within a subdivision which has been duly recorded prior
to the effective date of this chapter, which lots are individually not
of the required minimum area or width for the district in which they
are situated, such lots shall be developed in groups thereof in order
to provide the minimum lot area and frontage required for each lot.
B. Exception. A nonconforming lot of record, which is part of a subdivision
plan approved by Borough Council and recorded in the office of
Recorder of Deeds as such and which is in compliance with the zoning
regulations in effect immediately prior to the date of enactment of this
§ 260-213 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-214
1:772
§ 260-215. Nonconforming signs.
§ 260-216. Administration.
chapter may be developed in accordance with the terms of such
approval and preceding zoning regulations.
A. A nonconforming sign may continue in its current use and location,
provided it is maintained in safe and good repair.
B. If and when the sign is replaced, the new sign shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter. Replacement of the sign shall not include
simply revising the text or color of the sign, but shall include structural
replacement and/or relocation of the sign.
A. In all matters pertaining to nonconforming status, the Zoning Officer
shall make the initial determination. The Zoning Officer may seek the
advice of the Borough Planning Committee, Borough Solicitor and/or
others in making a determination.
B. If it cannot be determined by means of positive documentation that a
use or structure was in lawful existence at the time an ordinance or
amendment would have rendered it nonconforming, the Zoning Officer
must refuse to confer nonconforming status.
C. If the applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination, the
applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided by law.
§ 260-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-216
1:773

ARTICLE XX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 260-217. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply throughout the Borough. Any activity regulated
by this chapter shall only occur in such a way that conforms with the
regulations of this chapter.
§ 260-218. Administration; duties of Zoning Officer.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by an agent, to be
appointed by the Middletown Borough Council who shall be known as
the "Zoning Officer." The Zoning Officer may have designated an
employee of the Borough as his assistant, who shall exercise all the
powers of the Zoning Officer during the temporary absence or disability
of the Zoning Officer.
B. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
(1) Administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
(2) To receive, examine and process all applications and permits as
provided by the terms of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall also
issue zoning permits for special exception and conditional uses, or
for variances after the same have been approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board or Borough Council.
(3) To record and file all applications for zoning permits or certificates
of occupancy, and accompanying plans and documents, and keep
them for public record.
(4) To inspect properties to determine compliance with all provisions
of this chapter as well as conditions attached to the approval of
variances, special exceptions, conditional uses and curative
amendments.
(5) Determine the date before which steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed. The Zoning Officer shall determine an appropriate
duration of time for compliance of the specified activity, not to
exceed 30 days. Extensions up to a total of 90 days from the date of
receipt of the enforcement notice may be granted at the discretion
of the Zoning Officer, if applied for in writing.
(6) Upon the request of the Borough Council, the Borough Manager,
the Planning Committee or the Zoning Hearing Board, present to
such bodies facts, records, and any similar information on specific
requests, to assist such bodies in reaching their decisions.
(7) To be responsible for keeping this chapter and the Official Zoning
Map up to date, including any amendments thereto. The Zoning
§ 260-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-218
1:775
§ 260-219. Permits and certificates.
A zoning permit indicates that a zoning application complies with this
chapter to the best knowledge of the Zoning Officer or his/her designee. No
zoning permit or certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted by him/
her for any purpose except in compliance with the literal provisions of this
chapter and with all the provisions of the Borough's Building Codes. The
Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings
as a means of enforcement when acting within his/her scope of employment.
Officer shall maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning
district and overlay areas for all the land within the Borough. Upon
request, the Zoning Officer shall make determination of any Zoning
Map district boundary question.
(8) To revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this
chapter in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact
in the application or on the plans on which the permit or approval
was based or for any other cause set forth in this chapter, or
otherwise permitted by law.
(9) To receive and review all applications for proposed subdivisions,
land developments, building permits or zoning permits for
compliance with this chapter.
(10) To take enforcement actions as provided by the state Municipalities
Planning Code,203 as amended.
A. A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the start of any of the
following activities:
(1) Erection, construction, movement, placement, razing, demolition,
removal, alteration or expansion (vertical or horizontal) of a
structure, building or sign;
(2) Of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure or area of
land;
(3) Creation of a new use;
(4) Demolition of a building;
(5) Other activities required to have a permit by this chapter;
(6) The alteration or development of any improvement or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations for underground
utilities provided the final grade is not altered;
(7) The erection or alteration of any signs specified in Article XVII of
this chapter;
203. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-218 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-219
1:776
(8) The construction or installation of animal waste impoundments,
lakes, ponds, dams, or other water retention basins;
(9) No zoning permit shall be required for repairs or maintenance of
any structure or land, provided such repairs do not change the use
or the exterior dimensions of the structure, or otherwise violate the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The Borough may, at its option, issue combined or separate building
permits and zoning permits and/or may utilize a single or separate
application for the permits.
C. The only determination by the Zoning Officer that shall be official shall
be a written determination after the Zoning Officer receives a duly
submitted written official application.
D. Such zoning permits shall be granted or refused within 90 days from
date of application.
E. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with:
(1) All applicable regulations of this chapter;
(2) Any conditions imposed upon the site by the Zoning Hearing Board
or the Borough Council; and
(3) Any recorded subdivision or land development plan.
F. In all instances in which the Zoning Officer expresses a reasonable
doubt as to the ability of a proposed use to meet all of the abovedescribed
requirements, it will be incumbent upon the applicant to
furnish adequate evidence in support of his application. If such
evidence is not presented, the zoning permit will be denied.
G. Application for a zoning permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of
any building or structure, or the agent of either; provided, however,
that if the application is made by a person other than the owner or
lessee, it shall be accompanied by a written authorization of the owner
or the qualified person making the application, that the proposed work
is authorized by this owner. The full names and addresses of the owner,
lessee, applicant, and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee
is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
H. The Zoning Officer may call upon other Borough staff and/or municipal
appointed consultants in the review of submitted materials for
applications.
I. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of this chapter in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans which the
permit or approval was based or for any other cause set forth in this
chapter.
§ 260-219 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-219
1:777
J. Where a zoning permit is required by this chapter, but the work is
commenced or changed prior to obtaining such permit and after notice
by the Borough, the fees set by ordinance or resolution of the Borough
Council for such permit shall be doubled. The doubling of the permit fee
shall be required to reflect the additional expense incurred by the
Borough resulting from the need to inspect the property, respond to any
complaints, and issue any enforcement notices and/or process the
application as soon as it is received. The payment of such increased
permit fee shall not relieve any person from complying with all
requirements of this chapter or any other applicable Borough
ordinances or from any penalties or enforcement actions authorized by
this chapter.
K. Issuance of permits. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning Officer
shall examine the same within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application or plans do not conform to the provisions of all pertinent
local laws, he shall reject such application, in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. He shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board in the event such application is rejected. If
satisfied that the proposed work and/or use conforms to the provisions
of this chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and that
the certificate of use and occupancy as required herein has been
applied for, he shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practical but not
later than 90 days from receipt of the application.
L. Reconsideration of application. An applicant whose request for a permit
has been denied by the Zoning Officer may make a later application for
a permit provided all deficiencies which were the basis for the prior
denial of the permit have been eliminated. Additional fees may apply as
set by the Borough Council.
M. Expiration of zoning permit. The permit shall expire after one year from
the date of issuance; provided, however, that the same may be extended
one time for one additional year, upon written request by the applicant
on a form provided by the Borough.
N. Compliance with ordinance. The permit shall be a license to proceed
with the work and should not be construed as authority to violate,
cancel, or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, except as
stipulated by the Zoning Hearing Board.
O. Compliance with permit and plot plan. All work or uses shall conform to
the approved application and plans for which the permit has been
issued as well as the approved plot plan.
P. Display of zoning permit. All approved zoning permits shall be
prominently displayed on the subject property during construction,
renovation, reconstruction, repair, remodeling or the conduct of other
site improvements. Such permit displays shall occur within five days of
permit issuance, or prior to the commencement of actual work on the
§ 260-219 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-219
1:778
§ 260-220. Certificate of use and occupancy.
site, whichever occurs first. Such permit display shall be continuous
until the site receives its certificate of occupancy.
Q. Inspections. Inspections of the property in question by the Zoning
Officer or other duly appointed official may be required at various
intervals during the construction process. By submitting an application
for a zoning permit, the landowner authorizes the Borough to perform
such inspections as required.
A. It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, sign, land area
or portion thereof for which a zoning permit is required until a
certificate of use and occupancy for such activity has been issued by the
Zoning Officer.
B. The Borough staff may permit the zoning permit application to serve as
the application for the certificate of use and occupancy.
C. The certificate of use and occupancy shall only be issued by the Zoning
Officer if the Zoning Officer determines that the activity complies with
this chapter, to the best knowledge of the Zoning Officer.
D. The applicant shall keep a copy of the certificate of use and occupancy
available for inspection.
E. Upon request of the applicant, the Zoning Officer may issue a
temporary certificate of use and occupancy. Such temporary certificate
may permit as activity to occur in all or part of a structure before the
entire work covered by the zoning permit has been completed.
(1) However, such temporary certificate shall only be issued if the
applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that the activity or
occupancy can occur safely without endangering public health or
safety.
(2) The temporary certificate shall establish in writing a maximum
time period under which it is valid. A six-month maximum time
period shall apply if not otherwise specified.
(3) Failure to receive a permanent certificate of use and occupancy
within such time period shall be a violation of this chapter.
(4) The temporary certificate may be conditioned upon compliance
with certain specific requirements within certain time periods.
F. The Zoning Officer shall inspect any structure, building, or sign within
10 days upon notification that the proposed work that was listed under
a zoning permit has been completed and if satisfied that the work is in
conformity and compliance with the work listed in the issued permit
and all other pertinent laws, he shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy for the intended use listed in the original application. Where
a building permit is required under the Uniform Construction Code, a
§ 260-219 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-220
1:779
§ 260-221. Zoning permit for temporary uses and structures.
§ 260-222. Types of uses.
§ 260-223. Applications for zoning permits.
certificate of use shall not be issued until a final inspection by the
Building Code Official is complete and found to be satisfactory.
A. A zoning permit for a temporary use or structure may be issued by the
Zoning Officer for any of the following:
(1) Customary, routine and accessory short-term special events,
provided that only a well-established nonprofit organization or a
permitted place of worship proposing a temporary use
demonstrates clearly that the proposed use will primarily serve a
charitable, public service or religious purpose in order to be
eligible to receive approval for commercial-type activities in a
district where a commercial use would not otherwise be permitted;
(2) Temporary storage and office trailers that are necessary to serve
on-site construction, while such construction is actively underway;
(3) Such other activities that the applicant proves are routine,
customary and temporary.
B. Time period. The Zoning Officer shall state a reasonable maximum time
period on the temporary permit. If no time limit is stated, then a sixmonth
maximum period shall apply. A temporary permit may be
renewed for just cause.
A. Permitted by right uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit
under this chapter in response to an application for a use that is
permitted by right if it meets all of the requirements of this chapter.
B. Special exception use. A zoning permit under this chapter for a use
requiring a special exception permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer only in response to a written approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board following a hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the
Zoning Hearing Board and any conditions required by this chapter.
C. Conditional use. A zoning permit under this chapter for a use requiring
a conditional use permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in
response to a written approval by the Borough Council following a
hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the Borough Council
and any conditions required by this chapter.
D. Application requiring a variance. A permit under this chapter for a use
requiring a variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in
response to a written approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, following
a hearing, and compliance with any conditions by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
§ 260-220 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-223
1:780
A. Submittal. All applications for a zoning permit shall be made in writing
on a form provided by the Borough. Such completed application, with
required fees, shall be submitted to a designated Borough employee.
B. Site plan. The applicant shall submit a minimum of two copies of a site
plan with the application if the application involves a new principal
building, expansion of a principal building or addition of three or more
parking spaces. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and show the
following:
(1) Locations, dimensions and uses of existing and proposed
structures, parking and loading areas, and location of existing and
proposed uses of areas of land, with existing features clearly
distinguished from proposed features.
(2) Notes showing the dimensions of all buildings from lot lines and
street rights-of-way.
(3) Location of any watercourses and any one-hundred-year floodplain.
(4) Proposed lot areas, lot widths and other applicable dimensional
requirements.
(5) Locations and widths of existing and proposed sidewalks.
C. Additional information. Any application under this chapter shall include
the following information, unless the Zoning Officer determines such
information is unnecessary to determine compliance with this chapter:
(1) Address of the lot.
(2) Name and address of the applicant, and of the owner of the
property if different from the applicant.
(3) Description of the proposed use of the property.
(4) All other applicable information listed on the official Borough
application form.
(5) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may determine
is reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
D. Application for zoning permits for uses in all commercial and industrial
zones (excluding demolition permits) shall include the following:
(1) A location plan showing the tract to be developed, zone boundaries,
adjoining tracts, significant natural features, and streets for a
distance of 200 feet from all tract boundaries;
(2) A plot plan certified by a professional surveyor or engineer of the
lot showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings,
driveways, parking lots showing access drives, circulation patterns,
curb cut accesses, parking stalls, access from streets, screening
fences and walls, waste disposal fields or other methods of sewage
§ 260-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-223
1:781
disposal, other construction features on the lot, and the location of
all topographical features;
(3) A description of the operations proposed in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, vibration,
fire hazards, safety hazards, or the emission of any potentially
harmful or obnoxious matter or radiation;
(4) Evidence that the disposal of materials and wastes will be
accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal
regulations. Such evidence shall, at a minimum, include copies of
contracts with waste haulers licensed to operate within Dauphin
County which have been contracted to dispose of the materials
used and wastes generated on site. The zoning permit shall remain
valid only so long as such contracts remain in effect and all
materials and wastes are properly disposed of on a regular basis.
Should the nature of the use change in the future such that the
materials used or wastes generated change significantly, either in
type or amount, the owner shall so inform the Zoning Officer, and
shall provide additional evidence demonstrating continued
compliance with the requirements of this section;
(5) Engineering plans for the handling of traffic, noise, glare, air
pollution, water pollution, vibration, fire hazards, or safety hazards,
smoke, or emission of any potentially harmful or obnoxious matter
or radiation;
(6) Designation of the manner by which sanitary sewage and
stormwater shall be disposed and water supply obtained;
(7) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift;
(8) Where use by more than one firm is anticipated, a list of firms
which are likely to be located in the center, their floor area, and
estimated number of employees; and
(9) Submission, approval and recordation of a subdivision or land
development plan, as required.
E. Areas subject to flooding. If the proposed development, excavation or
construction is located within an area subject to regulation by the
Borough Floodplain Ordinance,204 the following information is
specifically required to accompany all applications, as prepared by a
licensed professional:
(1) The accurate location and elevation of the floodplain and floodway;
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 158, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 260-223 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-223
1:782
(2) The elevation, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 (NGVD), of the lowest floor, including basements;
(3) The elevation, in relation to the NGVD, to which all structures and
utilities will be floodproofed or elevated; and
(4) Where floodproofing is proposed to be utilized for a particular
structure, the zoning permit application shall be accompanied by a
document certified by a licensed professional engineer registered
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or a licensed professional
architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
certifying that the floodproofing methods used meet all applicable
codes and ordinances.
F. Uniform construction code. Where the proposed use is regulated under
the Uniform Construction Code, the applicant shall submit an
application of building permit concurrently with the zoning permit. A
zoning permit will not be issued until satisfactorily meeting the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
G. Submittals for special exception or conditional uses. In addition to the
information listed above, an application for a special exception or
conditional use requiring a site plan and action by the Zoning Hearing
Board or Borough Council shall also include the following information,
unless the Zoning Officer determines that such information is not
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter:
(1) Present zoning district and major applicable lot requirements.
(2) For nonresidential use:
(a) Description of the proposed nonresidential operations and
storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential nuisances and
hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic, glare, odors, dust,
fire or toxic or explosive hazards or other significant public
health and safety hazards.
(b) Maximum hours of operation.
(3) Existing directions of stormwater flow (and any proposed revisions)
and any proposed methods of stormwater management.
(4) Listing of any sections of this chapter from which a variance is
being requested.
(5) Approximate locations of principal buildings and locations of
streets and alleys and zoning district boundaries within 100 feet of
the boundaries of the tract, and description of uses of adjoining
properties (such as drugstore or single-family detached dwelling).
(6) Heights, locations, methods of illumination and intensity of exterior
lighting and sign lighting.
§ 260-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-223
1:783
§ 260-224. Issuance of permits.
§ 260-225. Revocation of permits; appeal of permit or approval.
§ 260-226. Compliance with Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
If an application under this chapter would also be regulated by the Borough
of Middletown Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance ("SALDO"),206
(7) Name and address of person who prepared the site plan.
(8) Signed acknowledgement of the site plan by the applicant.
(9) Such additional information required under applicable sections of
this chapter.
A. At least one copy of each zoning permit application and any other
zoning approvals shall be retained in the Borough files.
B. PennDOT permit. Where necessary for access onto a state road, a
Borough zoning or building permit shall be conditioned upon issuance
of a PennDOT highway occupancy permit.
A. Revocation. The Zoning Officer shall revoke, withhold or suspend a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in the
case of one or more of the following:
(1) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application
or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based. (NOTE:
The Pennsylvania Crimes Code205 provides for penalties for
providing false information to a municipal employee in the carrying
out of his/her duties.)
(2) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board for a special exception use or a variance.
(3) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Borough
Council for a conditional use.
(4) Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in such a
way that does not comply with this chapter or an approved site plan
or approved permit application.
(5) Any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
B. Appeals. A party with legitimate standing, or as otherwise provided by
state law, may appeal decisions made under this chapter within the
provisions of the MPC. Such appeal shall occur within the time period
established by the MPC.
205. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Subdivision of Land.
§ 260-223 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-226
1:784
then any permit or approval under this chapter shall automatically be
conditioned upon compliance with the SALDO.
§ 260-227. General procedure for permits.
§ 260-228. Interpretation and uses not regulated.
A. For example, if an applicant applies for a permit for a single-family
detached dwelling on a proposed new lot, the construction permit for
such dwelling shall not be valid until after the lot is granted final
subdivision and land development approval and the lot is officially
recorded by the County Recorder of Deeds.
A. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either
issue the applicable permit(s) or deny the application(s) as submitted,
indicating one or more reasons in writing to the applicant.
B. After the permit under this chapter has been issued, the applicant may
undertake the action specified in the permit, in compliance with other
Borough ordinances. However, it is recommended that applicants wait
30 days to begin construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by
another party to have the permit revoked. Any commencement of
construction or a use within this thirty-day appeal period shall be at the
risk of the applicant.
A. Minimum requirements. Where more than one provision of this chapter
controls a particular matter, the provision that is more restrictive upon
uses and structures shall apply. The provisions of this chapter are in
addition to any other applicable Borough ordinance.
B. Uses not specifically regulated. If a use clearly is not permitted by right,
conditional use or as a special exception use by this chapter within any
Zoning District, the use is prohibited, except that the Zoning Hearing
Board may permit such use as a special exception use if the applicant
specifically proves to the clear satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board
that all of the following conditions would be met:
(1) Proposed use would be less intensive in external impacts and
nuisances than uses that are permitted in the Zoning District.
(2) Proposed use would be closely similar in impacts and character to
uses permitted in that zoning district.
(3) Use would meet the standards that would apply under
§ 260-233(E)(3)(b) for a special exception use.
(4) Use is not specifically prohibited in that Zoning District.
C. Interpretation of ordinance text and boundaries.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall literally apply the wording of this chapter
and the location of all Zoning District boundaries to applications. In
any case, the Zoning Officer may also request an advisory opinion
§ 260-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-228
1:785
§ 260-229. Interpretation of zoning boundaries.
The following rules shall apply where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of
any district as shown on the Zoning Map:
§ 260-230. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
All of the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,207 as amended, are hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference.
from the Borough Solicitor to aid in the Zoning Officer's
determination.
(2) If an applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination
and believes that this chapter should be interpreted in the
applicant's favor, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of street rights-of-way, creeks, railroads and lot lines
(according to official county records) as they existed at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by
dimensions as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed to
follow such lot lines unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. The location of a district boundary that divides a lot shall be determined
by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map unless indicated
otherwise by dimensions.
D. Where a municipal boundary divides a lot, the minimum lot area shall
be regulated by the municipality in which the principal use(s) are
located, unless otherwise provided by applicable case law. The land
area within each municipality shall be regulated by the use regulations
and other applicable regulations of each municipality.
A. Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit any of the
following actions violates this chapter:
(1) Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to a change in use of land or
structure, or the erection, construction or alteration of any
structure or portion thereof, or the excavation of land to prepare
for the erection, construction or alteration of any structure or
portion thereof.
(2) Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant information
from an application for a zoning permit.
207. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-228 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-230
1:786
(3) Undertaking any action in a manner which does not comply with an
approved zoning permit.
(4) Violation of any conditions imposed by a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board in granting a variance, special exception or other
approval.
(5) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Borough
Council in granting a conditional use.
B. Causes of action; enforcement; remedies.
(1) Enforcement. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice, as provided in this
section. Prior to sending an official enforcement notice, the Zoning
Officer may at his/her option informally request compliance.
(2) Enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred,
to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person
requested, in writing, by the owner of record. An enforcement
notice shall state the following, at minimum:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough of Middletown intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 15 days, in accordance with
procedures set forth in this chapter.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
(3) Evidence and fees. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Borough shall have the responsibility of
presenting its evidence first. Any filing fees paid by a party to an
appeal to an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be returned to the appealing party by the Borough if the Zoning
§ 260-230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-230
1:787
§ 260-231. Fees.
Determination. The Borough Council may, by resolution, establish fees for
the administration of this chapter. All fees shall be determined by a schedule
that is made available to the general public. The Borough Council may
reevaluate the fees schedule and make necessary alterations to it. Such
alterations shall not be considered an amendment to this chapter and may
be adopted at any public meeting of the Borough Council.
Hearing Board, or any court in a subsequent appeal, rules in the
appealing party's favor.
(4) Cause of action. If the enforcement notice is not complied with
within the specified time period, the Zoning Officer shall notify the
Borough Council. With the consent of the Borough Council, the
Borough Solicitor or other officer of the Borough may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent in
or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation.
(5) Violations and penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation
who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in
a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including the
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District
Justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination by the District Justice, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's
fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to
the Borough. Imprisonment shall not be authorized by this chapter.
(6) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant any order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to
any person or entity, other than the Borough, the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 260-230 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-232
1:788
§ 260-232. Amendments.
A. Power of amendment. The Borough Council may, from time to time, by
the affirmative vote of a majority of the members amend, supplement,
change or repeal this chapter, including the Official Zoning Map. Any
amendment, supplement, change or repeal may be initiated by the
Borough Planning Committee, the Borough Council or by a petition to
the Borough Council by an interested party, by proceeding in the
following manner:
(1) The Borough Council, by resolution adopted at a stated meeting,
shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed
amendment, advertised as noted in this section.
(2) At the public hearing, full opportunity to be heard shall be given to
any citizen and all parties in interest.
B. Hearing and enactment procedures for zoning amendments:
(1) Public hearing. Before hearing and enacting chapter and/or Zoning
Map amendments, the Borough Council shall conduct a public
hearing to inform the general public of the nature of the
amendment, and to obtain public comment. Such public hearing
shall be conducted after public notice (as defined herein and listed
below) has been given.
(2) Public notice. Before conducting a public hearing, the Borough
shall provide public notice as follows:
(a) This notice must appear in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough of Middletown at least 14 days in advance but
not more than 30 days in advance of the public hearing. It must
also be advertised twice; however, not twice within the same
week. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include
either the full text thereof or the title and brief summary,
prepared by the Municipal Solicitor and setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail;
(b) For Zoning Map amendments, public notice shall also include
the posting of a sign at conspicuous locations along the
perimeter of the subject property; these sign(s) shall be posted
at least one week prior to the hearing and will exhibit the
nature, date, time, Borough of Middletown, location of the
hearing;
(c) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted on the
subject property, where the proposed amendment involves a
Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing shall be
mailed by the Borough at least 30 days prior to the date of the
hearing by first-class mail to the addresses to which real estate
§ 260-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-232
1:789
tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area
being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the
possession of the Borough. The notice shall include the
location, date and time of the public hearing. The provisions
of this section shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning;
(d) For curative amendments, public notice shall also indicate that
the validity of this chapter and/or map is in question, and shall
give the place where and the times when a copy of the request,
including any plans, explanatory material or proposed
amendments may be examined by the public; and
(e) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the
proposed amendment is changed substantially, or is revised to
include land previously not affected by it, the Borough Council
shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice,
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
(3) Enactment notice. In addition to the public notice requirements
defined herein, the Borough Council must publish a reference to
the time and place of the meeting at which passage of this chapter
or amendment will be considered, and a reference to a place within
the Borough where copies of the proposed ordinance or
amendment may be examined without charge, or obtained for a
charge not greater than the cost thereof. Enactment notice shall be
published at least once in one newspaper of general circulation in
Middletown Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven
days prior to passage. The published content of the enactment
notice shall be the same as that required for public notice
described in the preceding subsection.
(4) Borough Planning Committee referrals. For amendments proposed
by parties other than the Borough Planning Committee, the
Borough Council shall submit each amendment at least 30 days
prior to public hearing to the Borough Planning Committee for
review and comment. The Borough Planning Committee shall
submit a report of its review, together with any recommendations,
to the Borough Council within 45 days from the date of said
referral. The recommendation of the Borough Planning Committee
may include a specific statement as to whether or not the proposed
amendment is in accordance with the intent of this chapter and any
officially adopted Comprehensive Plan of the Borough of
Middletown. The Borough Council cannot act upon the amendment
until it has received a recommendation from the Borough Planning
Committee; however, should the Borough Planning Committee fail
to submit its recommendation within 45 days, the Borough Council
may proceed without its recommendation.
(5) County planning committee referrals. All proposed amendments
shall be submitted to the County Planning Committee at least 30
§ 260-232 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-232
1:790
days prior to public hearing on such amendments. The County
Planning Committee may submit recommendations to the Borough
Council within 45 days of such referral. The Borough Council
cannot act upon the amendment until it has received a
recommendation from the County Planning Committee; however,
should the County Planning Committee fail to submit its
recommendation within 45 days, the Borough Council may proceed
without its recommendation.
(6) Adjournment of public hearing. If during the public hearing
process, the Borough Council needs additional time to understand
the proposal, inform the public, receive public comment, and/or
render a decision, it may adjourn the public hearing to a specific
time and place.
(7) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the County Planning Committee.
C. Amendment initiated by the Borough Planning Committee. When an
amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Borough
Planning Committee, the proposal shall be presented to the Borough
Council which shall then proceed in the same manner as with a petition
to the Borough Council which has already been reviewed by the
Borough Planning Committee.
D. Amendment initiated by the Borough Council. When an amendment,
supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Borough Council, such
amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall follow the procedure
prescribed for a petition under § 260-232 above.
E. Amendment initiated by a petition from an interested party. A petition
for amendment, supplement, change or repeal for a portion of this
chapter shall include an accurate legal description and surveyed plan of
any land to be rezoned, and all of the reasons supporting the petition to
be considered. The petition shall also be signed by at least one record
owner of the property in question whose signature shall be notarized
attesting the truth and correctness of all the facts and information
presented in the petition. A fee to be established by Borough Council
shall be paid upon the filing of such petition for change and for the
purpose of defraying the costs of the proceedings prescribed herein.
The Borough Council may require duplicate sets of petition materials.
F. Curative amendment by a landowner. A landowner who desires to
challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this chapter or the
Official Zoning Map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts
the use or development of land in which he has an interest, may submit
a curative amendment to the Borough Council, including all of the
reasons supporting the request to be considered, with a written request
that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as
provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,208 as
amended. The Borough Council shall commence a hearing thereon
§ 260-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-232
1:791
within 60 days of the request. The curative amendment shall be
referred to the County Planning Commission as provided for in
§ 260-232 and public notice of the hearing shall be provided as defined
herein.
(1) In reviewing the curative amendment, the Borough Council may
deny the request, accept the request as submitted, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The
Borough Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans
and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall
also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of this
chapter or map;
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(2) The Borough Council shall render its decision within 45 days after
the conclusion of the last hearing.
(3) If the Borough Council fails to act on the landowner's request
within the time limits referred to above, a denial of the request is
deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
hearing.
(4) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
this chapter or Zoning Map is in question and shall give the place
where and the times when a copy of the request, including any
plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments may be
examined by the public.
208. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-232 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-232
1:792
(5) The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(a) The Borough Council fails to commence the hearing within 60
days;
(b) The Borough Council notified the landowner that it will not
adopt the curative amendment;
(c) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner; or
(d) The Borough Council fails to act on the request 45 days after
the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent by the landowner and Borough of
Middletown.
(6) Where a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of
a curative amendment application by the Borough Council
pursuant to this section or a validity challenge is sustained by the
Zoning Hearing Board or the court acts finally on appeal from
denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge,
and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a further
application for subdivision or land development, the developer
shall have two years from the date of such approval for a
subdivision, land development or planned residential development.
Within the two-year period, no subsequent change or amendment
in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan
shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of
the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the
sustained validity challenge. Upon the filing of the preliminary or
tentative plan, the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code209 shall apply.
(7) Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment
application or the validity challenge is approved but does not
require further application under any subdivision or land
development ordinance, the developer shall have one year within
which to file for a zoning permit. Within the one-year period, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During
these protected periods, the court shall retain or assume
jurisdiction for the purposes of awarding such supplemental relief
as may be necessary.
G. Curative amendment by the Borough Council.
(1) The Borough Council, by formal action, may declare this chapter or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a
209. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-232
1:793
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days
following such declaration proposal, the Borough Council shall:
(a) By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter or portions thereof which may
include:
[1] References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
[2] References to a class of use or uses which require revision;
or
[3] References to the entire ordinance which requires
revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough Council shall enact a curative amendment to validate or
reaffirm the validity of this chapter pursuant to the provisions
required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code210 in
order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter;
(3) Upon the date of the declaration and proposal, the Borough Council
shall not be required to entertain or consider any curative
amendment filed by a landowner. Nor shall the Zoning Hearing
Board be required to give a report, upon request, for a challenge to
the validity of this chapter subsequent to the declaration and
proposal, based upon the grounds identical to or substantially
similar to those specified in the resolution required by this section.
Upon the enactment of a curative amendment to, or the
reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter, no rights to a cure by
amendment or challenge shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of the unamended chapter for which the Borough Council
proposes to prepare a curative amendment; and
(4) The Borough Council, having utilized the procedures as set forth in
this section, may not again utilize said procedures for a thirty-sixmonth
period following the date of the enactment of a curative
amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter;
provided, however, that if after the date of declaration and
proposal, there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed
upon the Borough by virtue of a decision by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the Borough Council may utilize the provisions of this
section to prepare a curative amendment to this chapter to fulfill
this duty or obligation.
210. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-232 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-232
1:794
§ 260-233. Zoning Hearing Board.
H. Authentication of Official Zoning Map. Whenever there has been a
change in the boundary of a zone or a reclassification of the zone
adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the Official
Zoning Map shall be made, and shall be duly certified by the Borough
Secretary and shall thereafter be refiled as part of the permanent
records of Borough.
A. Establishment and membership. There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board
which shall consist of three members who shall be appointed by
resolution by the Borough Council. The membership of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall consist of residents of the Borough. Their terms of
office shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
promptly notify the Borough Council of any vacancies which occur.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall hold no other office in the Borough.
Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council taken after the member
has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing. The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at
least one but no more than three residents of the Borough of
Middletown to serve as alternate members of the Zoning Hearing
Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years.
When seated pursuant to the provisions of this section, an alternate
shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the
Zoning Hearing Board to the same and full extent as provided by law for
Zoning Hearing Board members, including specifically the right to cast
a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all
the powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise
provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough,
including membership on the Planning Committee and Zoning Officer.
Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the
Zoning Hearing Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of
the Zoning Hearing Board nor be compensated, unless designated as a
voting alternate member pursuant to this article.
B. Organization of Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual
terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a
majority of all members of the Zoning Hearing Board, but the Zoning
Hearing Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership
to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further
action by the Zoning Hearing Board as provided in § 260-233D(2). If, by
reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as
many alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on the
§ 260-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-233
1:795
Zoning Hearing Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any
alternate member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve
on the Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings involving the matter
or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until the Zoning
Hearing Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on
a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority among
all alternates. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter, and rescind
rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the
Borough and laws of the commonwealth. The Zoning Hearing Board
shall keep full public records of its business, which records shall be the
property of the Borough, and shall submit a report of its activities to the
Borough Council upon request.
C. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
the Borough Council, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or
contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other
technical and clerical services. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board
may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may
be fixed by the Borough Council. Alternate members of the Zoning
Hearing Board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the
Borough Council, for the performance of their duties when designated
as alternate members pursuant to § 260-233A, but in no case shall such
compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to
the members by the Borough Council.
D. Hearings.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Public notice, as defined herein, shall be provided. In addition,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify by mail the Zoning
Officer, Borough Secretary, each member of the Borough
Council, Secretary of the Planning Committee, and every other
person or organization who shall have registered with the
Zoning Hearing Board for the purposes of receiving such
notices. Such mailed notices shall state the location of the site
and the nature of the request. It shall also state the time, date,
and location of the proposed hearing. In addition to the written
notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one
week prior to the hearing;
(b) The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for
said hearings may include compensation for the Secretary and
members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising
costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with
the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal
expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board, expenses for
§ 260-233 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-233
1:796
engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or
expert witness costs;
(c) The first hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing
officer shall be commenced within 60 days from the date of
receipt of the applicant's application, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent
hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer
shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the
record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of its
case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the
request of the applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing
officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearing within the 100 days, including the first
hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the
presentation of their opposition to the application within 100
days of the first hearing held after the completion of the
applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be
granted additional hearings to complete its case-in-chief,
provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an
equal number of additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted
an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
(2) The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board or
the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member or an
independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where
no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Zoning
Hearing Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case
may be, in addition to the Borough may, prior to the decision of the
hearing, waive decisions or findings by the Zoning Hearing Board
and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
(3) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Zoning Hearing Board, and any other person,
including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the Zoning
Hearing Board for that purpose.
(4) The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or
the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths
and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(5) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
§ 260-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-233
1:797
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(6) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
and unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(7) The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may
be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The
appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the
applicant and the Zoning Hearing Board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the Zoning Hearing Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing
officer, or shall be paid by the person appealing the decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board if such appeal is made, and in either event,
the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting
such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the
original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
(8) The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the materials so noticed and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative
unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
(9) The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may
be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for,
make written findings on the application within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer.
Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by the findings of fact and conclusions based thereon
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of this or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall
contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why
the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found. If
the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Zoning
Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the
Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30
days after the report of the hearing officer. Except for challenges
filed under Article IX of the MPC,211 where the Zoning Hearing
Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
211. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10901 through 10918.
§ 260-233 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-233
1:798
subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required
hearing as provided in § 260-233D of this chapter, the decision
shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant
unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an
extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of
the applicant because of the failure of the Zoning Hearing Board
to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall give public notice of said decision with 10 days
from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided in § 260-233D of this chapter. If the Zoning
Hearing Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may
do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any
party opposing the application to appeal.
(10) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the next business day following its date. To all
other persons who have filed their name and address with the
Zoning Hearing Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at
which the full decision or findings may be examined.
(11) Effect of Zoning Hearing Board's decision.
(a) If the variance or special exception is granted or the issuance
of a permit is approved, or other action by the appellant is
authorized, the necessary permit shall be secured and the
authorized action begun within two years after the date when
the variance or special exception is finally granted, or the
issuance of a permit is finally approved, or the other action by
the appellant is authorized, and the building or alteration, as
the case may be, shall be completed within three years of said
date. For good cause, the Zoning Hearing Board may at any
time, upon application in writing, extend either of these
deadlines;
(b) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within said two-year period, or having obtained the
permit, should he fail to commence work thereunder within
such two-year period, it shall be conclusively presumed that
the appellant or applicant has waived, withdrawn, or
abandoned his appeal or his application, and all provisions,
variances and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the Zoning Hearing Board;
(c) Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or
alteration within said two-year period, but should he fail to
complete such construction or alteration within said three-year
period, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon 10 days' notice, in
writing, rescind or revoke the granted variance or special
§ 260-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-233
1:799
exception, or the issuance of the permit, or permits, or the
other action authorized to the appellant or applicant, if the
Zoning Hearing Board finds that no good cause appears for
the failure to complete within such three-year period, and if
the Zoning Hearing Board further finds that conditions have
so altered or changed in the interval since the granting of the
variance, permit or action, that revocation or rescission of the
action is justified; and
(d) As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as
part of the original application before the Zoning Hearing
Board, the granting of a timetable associated with the request
which would supersede the deadlines imposed. In so doing, the
applicant must demonstrate that the times requested are
logically related to normal and expected progress of the
project. In approving a timetable under this section, the Zoning
Hearing Board must establish and bind a definite time frame
for issuance of a zoning permit, and completion of construction
of the project.
E. Zoning Hearing Board's functions. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
have the exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render decisions in the
following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of this chapter, except those
brought before the Borough Council pursuant to Section
916.1(a)(2) of the MPC.212
(a) If a challenge heard by a Zoning Hearing Board is found to
have merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
include recommended amendments to the challenged
ordinance which will cure the defects found. In reaching its
decision, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
[1] The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities,
water supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
[2] If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the
effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of
a type actually available to and affordable by classes of
persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged
provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map;
[3] The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed
by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural
features;
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1(a)(2).
§ 260-233 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-233
1:800
[4] The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
nature features, the degree to which these are protected
or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development and any adverse environmental impacts; and
[5] The impact of the proposal on the preservation of
agriculture and other land uses which are essential to
public health and welfare.
(b) Public notice of the hearing shall be provided as specified in
§ 260-233D of this chapter.
(c) The Zoning Hearing Board shall commence its hearings within
60 days after the request is filed unless the landowner requests
or consents to an extension of time.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board shall render its decision with 45
days after the conclusion of the last hearing. If the Board fails
to act on the landowner's request within this time limit, a
denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th
day after the close of the last hearing.
(2) Challenges to the validity of this chapter, raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or
adoption which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken
within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter.
(3) Special exceptions as provided for in this chapter and subject to all
applicable requirements, including, but not limited to:
(a) Filing requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit
information, each special exception application shall include
the following:
[1] Ground floor plans and elevations for proposed structures;
[2] Names and addresses of adjoining property owners,
including properties directly across a public right-of-way;
[3] A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient
detail and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all
applicable provisions of this chapter; and
[4] A written description of the proposed use in sufficient
detail to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(b) General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance
with the following:
[1] The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and
intent of this chapter;
§ 260-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-233
1:801
[2] The proposed use shall not detract from the use and
enjoyment of adjoining or nearby properties;
[3] The proposed use will not substantially change the
character of the subject property's neighborhood;
[4] Adequate public facilities are available to serve the
proposed use (e.g., schools, fire, police and ambulance
protection, sewer, water and other utilities, vehicular
access, etc.);
[5] The proposed use complies with the Borough Floodplain
Ordinance;213
[6] The proposed use shall comply with those criteria
specifically listed in Article XVIII of this chapter. In
addition, the proposed use must comply with all other
applicable regulations contained in this chapter; and
[7] The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity
of the Borough of Middletown Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in approving special
exception applications, may attach conditions considered
necessary to protect the public welfare and the purposes listed
above, including conditions which are more restrictive than
those established for other uses in the same zone. The
conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and
failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(d) Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the
special exception pursuant to § 260-233E(3) shall become an
official part of the record for said special exception. Approval
of any special exception will also bind the use in accordance
with the submitted site plan; therefore, should a change in the
site plan be required as part of the approval of the use, the
applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the
subject property not reflected on the originally approved site
plan, shall require the obtainment of another special exception
approval.
(4) Variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for
variances where it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter
inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning
Hearing Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application to the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance,
provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant
in a given case:
213. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 158, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 260-233 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-233
1:802
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or zone in which
the property is located;
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is not a possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
reasonable use of the property;
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the zone or neighborhood in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare;
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulations in issue;
(f) The proposed use complies with the Borough Floodplain
Ordinance;214
(g) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer
and failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a
violation of this chapter;
(h) Filing requirements. In addition to the required zoning permit,
each variance application shall include the following:
[1] Ground floor plans and elevations of existing and/or
proposed structures;
[2] Names and addresses of adjoining property owners,
including properties directly across a public right-of-way;
[3] A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient
detail and accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all
applicable provisions of this chapter; and
214. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 158, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 260-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-233
1:803
[4] A written description of the proposed use in sufficient
detail to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter;
(i) Conditions. The Zoning Hearing Board, in approving variance
applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to
protect the public welfare and the purposes listed above,
including conditions which are more restrictive than those
established for other uses in the same zone. These conditions
shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to
comply with such conditions will constitute a violation of this
chapter; and
(j) Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of a
variance shall become an official part of the record for said
variance. Approval of any variance will also bind the use in
accordance with the submitted site plan.
(5) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and-desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(6) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(7) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 (and any subsequent amendments) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.215
(8) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance with
reference to sedimentation and erosion control, and/or stormwater
management for applications not involving a subdivision/land
development, nor a planned residential development as regulated
in Article V and VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.216
F. Parties appellant before the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals under
§§ 260-233E(4)(d), (e), (f), (g) and (h), and proceedings to challenge this
chapter under § 260-233E, may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board,
in writing, by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the
Borough of Middletown, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
variance or a special exception may be filed with the Zoning Hearing
Board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such
landowner. Any appeal shall state:
215. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
216. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10501 through 10516 and 10701 through 10713, respectively.
§ 260-233 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-233
1:804
(1) The name and address of the appellant and applicant;
(2) The name and address of the landowner of the real estate to be
affected;
(3) A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by
such proposed change, together with a plot plan drawn to scale
with sufficient clarity to show the nature and character of the
request;
(4) A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon, and the present use thereof;
and
(5) A statement of the section of this chapter under which the request
may be allowed, and reasons why it should or should not be
granted.
G. Time limitations.
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for
development, preliminary or final, has been approved by the
Zoning Officer or the agency responsible for granting such
approval if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to
limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and
proves that he had no notice or knowledge, or reason to believe
that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to
his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the
knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
(2) The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an
adverse decision by the Zoning Officer a challenge to the validity of
this chapter or the Official Zoning Map pursuant to Section 916.2 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,217 as amended,
shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case
where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative preliminary approval.
H. Stay of proceeding.
(1) Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Subsection F, above,
and during its pendency before the Zoning Hearing Board, all land
development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all
official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer
or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Zoning
Hearing Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the development
or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
217. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 260-233 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-233
1:805
§ 260-234. Conditional uses.
order, which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by
the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after
notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body.
When an application for development, preliminary or final, has
been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit
the approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by person
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such person to post
bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board. After the petition is presented, the court
shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is
frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits
of the case. It shall be the burden of the applicant for a bond to
prove the appeal is frivolous. After consideration of all evidence
presented, if the court determines that the appeal is frivolous,
it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition the
court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by the
appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court. The question whether or
not such petition should be granted and the amount of the bond
shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An order denying
a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order directing the
responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
(2) If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from
an order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post
a bond and the appellant court sustains the order of the court
below to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond,
upon motion of the petitioner and after hearing in the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable
costs, expenses, and attorney's fees incurred by the petitioner.
I. Appeal. Any person, taxpayer, or the Borough aggrieved by any decision
of the Zoning Hearing Board may within 30 days after such decision of
the Zoning Hearing Board, seek review by the Court of Common Pleas
of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,218 as amended.
A. Filing of conditional use. For any use permitted by conditional use, a
conditional use must be obtained from the Borough Council. In addition
to the information required on the zoning permit application, the
conditional use application must show:
(1) Ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures;
218. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-233 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-234
1:806
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way;
(3) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and
accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
B. General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the
following:
(1) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of
this chapter;
(2) The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of
adjoining or nearby properties;
(3) The proposed use will not effect a change in the character of the
subject property's neighborhood;
(4) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use
(e.g., schools, fire, police and ambulance protection, sewer, water,
and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.);
(5) The proposed use complies with the Borough Floodplain
Ordinance;219
(6) The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically listed
in Article XVIII of this chapter. In addition, the proposed use must
comply with all other applicable regulations of this chapter; and
(7) The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the
Borough of Middletown's Comprehensive Plan;
C. Conditions. The Borough Council, in approving conditional use
applications, may attach conditions considered necessary to protect the
public welfare and the purposes listed above, including conditions
which are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the
same zone. These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer
and failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
D. Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the conditional
use shall become an official part of the record for said conditional use.
Approval of any conditional use will also bind the use in accordance
with the submitted site plan; therefore, should a change in the site plan
be required as part of the approval of the use, the applicant shall revise
the site plan prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. Any subsequent
change to the use on the subject property not reflected on the originally
approved site plan shall require the obtainment of another conditional
use approval.
219. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 158, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 260-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-234
1:807
E. Hearing procedures.
(1) Before voting on the approval of a conditional use, the Borough
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. The Borough Council shall submit each such application to
the Borough Planning Committee at least 30 days prior to the
hearing held upon an application to provide the Borough Planning
Committee an opportunity to submit recommendations. If, after any
public hearing held upon an application, the proposed application
is revised, the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public
hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
application.
(2) Public notice, as defined herein, and written notice shall be given to
the applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the
Borough Council shall designate by ordinance, and to any person
who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be
given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by
ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provisions, by rules of the
Borough Council. In addition to the written notice provided herein,
written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(3) The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the
secretary, notice and advertising costs, and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses, expenses for
engineering, architectural, or other technical consultants, or
expert witness costs.
(4) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Borough Council, and any other person, including
civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the
Borough Council. The Borough Council shall have power to require
that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearance, in writing, on forms provided by the Borough Council
for that purpose.
(5) The Council President or Acting Council President of the Borough
Council shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant documents and paper, including witnesses and documents
requested by the parties.
(6) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
§ 260-234 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-234
1:808
(7) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(8) The Borough Council may keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and the Borough Council. The cost
of the original transcript shall be paid by the Borough Council if the
transcript is ordered by the Borough Council, or shall be paid by
the person appealing the decision of the Borough Council if such
appeal is made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other
cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the
cost thereof.
(9) The Borough Council shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their
solicitor, unless parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
(10) The hearing shall be conducted by the Borough Council or the
Borough Council may appoint any member or an independent
attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or where there is no
decision, the findings shall be made by the Borough Council.
However, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in
addition to the Borough may, prior to the decision of the hearing,
waive decision or findings by the Borough Council and accept the
decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
(11) The Borough Council shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for, make written finds on the conditional use
application within 45 days after the last hearing before the
Borough Council. Where the application is contested or denied,
each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or
conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(12) Where the Borough Council fails to render the decision within the
period required by this article or fails to commence, conduct or
complete the required hearing as provided in this chapter, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the
record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered
§ 260-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-234
1:809
in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Borough
Council to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
Borough Council shall give public notice of the decision within 10
days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the
same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this
article. If the Borough Council shall fail to provide such notice, the
applicant may do so.
F. Time limitation.
(1) If a conditional use is granted, the necessary permit shall be
secured and the authorized action begun within two years after the
date when the conditional use is finally granted, and the building or
alteration, as the case may be, shall be completed within three
years of said date. For good cause, the Borough Council may at any
time, upon application in writing, extend either of these deadlines;
(2) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within said two-year period, or having obtained the permit
should he fail to commence work thereunder within such two-year
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his application,
and all approvals and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the Borough Council;
(3) Should the appellant commence construction or alteration within
said two-year period, but should he fail to complete such
construction or alteration within said three-year period, the
Borough Council may, upon 10 days' notice, in writing, rescind or
revoke the granted conditional use, if the Borough Council finds
that no good cause appears for the failure to complete within such
three-year period, and if the Borough Council further finds that
conditions have altered or changed in the interval since the
granting of the conditional use that revocation or rescission of the
action is justified; and
(4) As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as
part of the original application before the Borough Council the
granting of a timetable associated with the request which would
supersede the deadlines imposed in this article. In so doing, the
applicant must demonstrate that the times requested are logically
related to normal and expected progress of the project. In
approving a timetable under this section, the Borough Council must
establish and bind a definite time frame for issuance of a zoning
permit, and completion of construction of the project.
§ 260-234 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 260-234
1:810
Appendix
Chapter A264
CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
§ A264-1. Grant of franchise; execution of franchise agreement.
[Amended 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 1276, approved 2-8-2011]
§ A264-2. Other franchises unaffected.
Nothing in this chapter, including the agreement, shall alter the terms
of any other franchise(s) previously granted by the Borough. Such other
franchise(s) shall remain in effect according to their particular terms and
conditions.
§ A264-3. Authority of the Capital Region Council of Governments.
Pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2305, the Borough hereby authorizes the Capital
Region Council of Governments to undertake those responsibilities that it is
specifically permitted to undertake pursuant to the agreement.
§ A264-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not render this chapter
invalid.
Chapter A265
CIVIL SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 60.
A. The Borough hereby grants Verizon a nonexclusive cable franchise
subject to and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
agreement. A copy of the agreement is attached hereto and made a part
hereof as Exhibit 1.
B. The Borough Council hereby grants Comcast of Southeast
Pennsylvania, LLC a nonexclusive cable franchise agreement subject to
and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement. A
copy of the agreement is attached hereto and made a part hereof as
Exhibit 2.220
220. Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 260-234 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A264-4
1:811
§ A265-1. Promulgation of policies and procedures.
The following policies and procedures are promulgated under the authority
of Article XI, Section 1171 to 1195, and other sections of the Pennsylvania
Borough Code.221
§ A265-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases when
used in these rules and regulations shall be construed to have the meaning
indicated herein.
ASSISTANT BOROUGH MANAGER — The Assistant Manager of the
Borough.
BOROUGH — Reference in this text to be the Borough of Middletown.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — Borough Council of the Borough.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the Borough Council of names taken
from the eligible list developed by the Civil Service Commission or any
authorized agent, including but not limited to the Dauphin County Chiefs of
Police Association, Inc.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Borough.
DEMOTION — The assignment of an employee from one class to another
with a lower maximum rate of pay.
DISCHARGE — The involuntary termination of an employee for reasons
other than lack of funds or work.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list or
furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST — A list of names of persons who have passed an
examination for a particular position in the Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST — A list containing the names of persons temporarily laid
off from positions in the Police Department because of a reduction in the
number of officers.
JOB DESCRIPTION — A written description of a class containing the class
title, a general statement of the duties and responsibilities, essential job
functions and/or examples of the typical duties performed and minimum
qualification requirement(s).
LAY-OFF — The involuntary separation of an employee from Borough
service due to lack of work, lack of funds or the abolishment of a position or
classification.
221. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ A264-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-2
1:812
MEDICAL EXAMINER — For purposes of these rules, a qualified medical
physician, psychologist (mental portion only), psychiatrist, physicians
assistant, certified nurse practitioner or other practitioner allowed by law.
POLICE OFFICER — For purposes of these rules, an entry level sworn
position in the Police Department.
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligible list, but who has not yet completed his
probationary (work test) period.
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different position or rank which
results in a decrease in salary; provided, however, that a decrease in salary
without a change to a different position or rank shall not necessarily
constitute a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the Police
Department.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Board of the Commission.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation of a member of the Police
Department from his position.
TEMPORARY APPOINTMENT — A temporary noncompetitive appointment
of a qualified individual to a classified position pending the establishment of
an eligible list for such position.
§ A265-3. Civil Service Commission.
A. Officers. The Civil Service Commission (Commission) of the Borough on
the first Monday in February of even-numbered years shall elect one of
its members as the Chairperson, one as Vice Chairperson and one as
Secretary. If the first Monday is a legal holiday, the meeting shall be
held the first day following.
B. Duties of Chairperson. The Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the Vice
Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the
Commission, decide all points of order or procedure and perform all
duties required by law of these rules.
C. Duties of Secretary. The Secretary shall be responsible for, at the
direction of the Commission, all official correspondence of the
Commission, sending out all notices required by law and these rules of
procedure, keeping minutes, keeping a record of each examination or
other official action of the Commission and performing all other duties
required by law, by these rules and by the Commission. The Assistant
Borough Manager shall assist the Commission Secretary in the
performance of these duties.
D. Meetings. Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings
shall be held either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two
members of the Commission. At least 24 hours' written notice of such
meetings shall be given each member. No rule or regulation of the
§ A265-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-3
1:813
§ A265-4. Applications.
Commission shall be adopted without prior approval of the Borough
Council, except when otherwise provided in these rules. The
Commission shall have the discretion to determine whether meetings
shall be open to the public, when not specifically regulated by law,
including but not limited to the Sunshine Act,222 or these rules.
E. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. Each
member shall vote on each issue that comes before the Commission,
except as provided by § A265-11E. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No.
1362, approved 5-8-2019]
F. Order of business. The order of business of all meetings of the
Commission shall be as follows:
(1) Roll call.
(2) Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
(3) Unfinished business.
(4) Hearing of cases.
(5) New business.
(6) Communications and reports.
G. Solicitor. When circumstances arise which require the Commission to
retain a solicitor, the Commission shall request Borough Council to
authorize the funds to do so. The selection of the solicitor shall be the
sole choice of the Commission.
H. Minutes. The Secretary shall keep minutes of the Commission
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or
if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
I. Annual report. The Commission shall make an annual report to the
Council containing a brief summary of its work during the year at the
first Council meeting scheduled in March.
J. Scope. The provisions of these rules as of January 1, 2007, apply only to
the Police Department.
A. Police officers.
(1) Application form. No person shall be admitted to an examination
for a position in the Police Department of the Borough until after
having filed, on the official form prescribed by the Commission, or
its authorized agent, a sworn application giving such information
as the Commission, or its authorized agent, may require. The
official application form and all notations, references and
222. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ A265-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-4
1:814
statements appearing in it are incorporated by reference into these
rules and regulations and shall be as much a part of these rules as
if they were fully described herein.
(2) Availability. As advertised, application forms shall be available to all
interested persons in the office of the Assistant Borough Manager
and may be mailed upon written request. Application forms shall
include a separate attachment regarding reasonable
accommodation for testing. Any applicant requiring a reasonable
accommodation for testing shall make such request at the time the
application form is returned.
(3) Age qualifications. At the date of actual application, no applicant
for any position in the Police Department shall be less then 18 years
of age. Each applicant shall present satisfactory evidence of date of
birth.
(4) Testing. The Borough Council has authorized entry level testing to
be performed by the Dauphin County Chiefs Association, Inc.
B. General qualifications for all applicants. Each applicant for a position in
the Police Department shall satisfactorily pass the testing identified in
Subsection A(4), be a citizen of the United States, shall have graduated
from an accredited high school or have a GED (Graduate Equivalency
Diploma), and shall possess an Act 120 diploma and current MPOETC
(Municipal Police Officer Education Training Commission) card either
at the time of hiring or following the completion of the Police Academy,
but before the time he or she is required to start work as a police officer.
Upon appointment, each applicant shall be medically fit for the
performance of the duties of a police officer with or without reasonable
accommodation, of good moral character without felony convictions,
guilty pleas or no contest pleas, licensed to operate a motor vehicle in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and legally entitled to work in the
United States. In the case of a foreign-born applicant, evidence
satisfactory to the Commission, which fulfills I-9 requirements, shall be
produced showing the person to be a naturalized citizen. [Amended
5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1362, approved 5-8-2019]
C. Special qualifications required for advanced ranks in police service
other than Chief of Police.
(1) In addition to meeting the general qualifications specified in
Subsection A(1) and (2), each applicant for advanced rank in the
police service shall meet the following special qualifications, at the
time of appointment have:
(a) Been continuously employed in the Middletown police service
for at least two years on the date of application in the case of a
Sergeant and at least three years for all higher ranking
positions;
§ A265-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-4
1:815
(b) Satisfactorily completed their basic training program for police
officers, and graduated from a recognized police school or an
equivalent combination of training and experience;
(c) Demonstrated an ability to carry out orders from superiors;
(d) Demonstrated a working knowledge of police science and
administration;
(e) Demonstrated an ability to deliver and supervise the work of
subordinates; and
(f) Received at least a grade of "satisfactory" on the latest service
rating.
(2) In addition, any candidate appointed to such position under these
regulations must continue to meet all state or federal certification
requirements on an ongoing basis.
D. Filing applications.
(1) Application for entry level testing shall comply with the
requirements established by the Dauphin County Chiefs of Police
Association, Inc.
(2) Applications for any other position in the Police Department may be
received as advertised during normal business hours in the office of
the Assistant Borough Manager. The receipt of such applications
shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) No application received after 12:00 noon on any day that is 14
calendar days prior to the date fixed for the written
examination in the public announcement shall be considered
for such examination, but;
(b) Additions, corrections or deletions can be made in applications
up to the fourteenth day prior to the date fixed for the written
exam.
E. Recording applications. The Assistant Borough Manager shall review
each application upon receipt, for the purpose of determining that such
application contains no errors or omissions. An application containing
errors or omissions may, at the Assistant Borough Manager's discretion,
be returned to the applicant for correction. The Assistant Borough
Manager shall date, number and record in the order of receipt all
acceptable applications, which once recorded shall be Commission
records and shall not be returned to the applicants.
F. Penalty for false statement.
(1) The statements made by the candidate in his/her resume shall
contain no falsification, omission or concealment of material fact.
Should investigation disclose any willful misstatement,
§ A265-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-4
1:816
falsification, omission or concealment with respect to an
application:
(a) The application shall be invalid, and the candidate shall be
disqualified from examination; or
(b) If the candidate has been examined, the name of such
candidate shall be removed from the consideration for the
position;
(c) If the candidate shall have been appointed, such willful
misstatement, falsification, omission or concealment shall
constitute grounds for dismissal from the Police Department.
(2) No person who makes any willful false statement or omission shall
be permitted to make any future application for any position in the
Police Department of the Borough or other Borough position.
G. Chief of Police.
(1) Resume. No person shall be considered for the position of Chief of
Police until he/she has submitted to Borough Council a current
resume stating all police experience and expertise.
(2) General qualifications. In addition to meeting qualifications fixed
for each applicant for a position in the Police Department, all
applicants for the position of Chief of Police shall have:
(a) Been continuously employed in police service for at least five
years or an equivalent combination of education and
experience;
(b) Satisfactorily completed the in-service training program for
police officers as required by state law or regulation, be
eligible for a waiver of the training, or be able to comply with
requirements within one year of appointment to the position;
(c) Demonstrated an ability to carry out order(s) from superiors;
(d) Demonstrated managerial and leadership skills and abilities;
(e) Demonstrated an ability to deliver and supervise the work of a
subordinate;
(f) Received at least a grade of "satisfactory" on the latest service
ratings, providing that an evaluation of the experience,
training, general background and such other records of
performance of the applicant, at the discretion of the
Commission, may be substituted for the service requirement.
(3) Special qualifications required. In addition to the above general
qualifications, each candidate shall meet the following special
qualifications:
§ A265-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-4
1:817
§ A265-5. Announcement of examinations.
(a) All candidates shall have served in a federal, state or local law
enforcement agency in a supervisory capacity for a minimum of
two years;
(b) All candidates shall have a degree in Police Science or related
field, or an equivalent to such degree in experience, training
and understanding of managerial techniques, sufficient to
supplement command experience.
(4) Background investigation. Each candidate for the Chief position
may be subject to a complete background investigation to ascertain
the character, qualifications and the managerial potential of each
candidate. Each candidate will be asked to complete and provide a
Federal Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) authorization for this
purpose. Refusal to sign such form shall result in disqualification
from consideration.
A. Public notice.
(1) Public notice of the time and place of every examination conducted
by the Commission itself, together with information as to the
position to be filled, shall be given by publication in two
newspapers of general circulation a minimum of two times in the
Borough. The public notice shall be published at least four weeks
prior to an examination, and a copy of the notice shall be posted in
a public place in the Borough Building. Additional public notice by
publication, posting or otherwise may be given at any time at the
discretion of the Commission.
(2) Public notice of the time and place of every examination conducted
by an authorized agent of the Commission shall be given on a time
and manner reasonably calculated to alert the general public to the
examination.
B. Notice of examinations. In addition to the public notice in the event of
an examination conducted by the Commission itself, the Secretary shall
give written notice at least five days prior to the date fixed for the
examination by certified or registered mail to each qualified applicant
as follows:
(1) By mailing or otherwise delivering to each applicant a notice which
shall include the date, time, place and duration of the examination;
the type of examination (physical agility, written, oral, etc.).
(2) By mailing or otherwise delivering a form to each application
qualified for medical and/or psychological examination. For a
medical examination, a Borough medical examination form stating
the established medical requirements for a position in the Police
Department, as stated in § A265-6 of these rules, will be included.
§ A265-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-5
1:818
§ A265-6. Medical and psychological examinations.
The notice will contain the name of the examiner and the date, time
and place the applicant should report for examination.
(3) Only applicants receiving notices to report for any examination
shall be permitted to participate in such examination, and each
applicant shall present his/her notice to the examiner before he/she
shall be examined. Failure to report for an examination in
accordance with the instructions contained in the written notice
shall disqualify the applicant; except in the case of a medical
examination, the applicant, with the prior approval of the medical
examiner designated in the notice, may fix another date and time
for such examination.
A. Introduction. The Borough is aware of both the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act (PHRA),223 and its need to protect the health, safety and
welfare of its citizens through the continuous efforts of its Police
Department. As a result, the Borough requests that candidates for
positions make any need for reasonable accommodation known to the
Borough at the time of the application and medical/psychological
examination.
B. Medical and mental requirements. Every applicant to whom the
Borough has made a conditional job offer for appointment to a position
in the Police Department shall submit, at Borough expense, to a medical
examination by a Borough-appointed examiner, who shall determine if
the applicant is free from any bodily or mental defect, deformity or
disease that might make it impossible for that candidate to perform his/
her essential job functions, with or without reasonable accommodation.
C. Report of examiner. The Commission shall furnish each applicant with
forms upon which the medical examiner shall state the physical and/or
mental condition of each applicant. The report of each examination
shall be submitted to the Commission within five days after the date of
examination.
D. Rejection of applicants. If the examiner shall deem any applicant
medically unfit for performance of the essential duties of a police officer
because of any physical or mental defect, which cannot be reasonably
accommodated, whether or not the defect shall be specifically stated as
a cause for rejection in the statement of medical requirements, such
applicant shall be rejected and a brief statement of the reason for
rejection shall be entered in the report of the medical examination.
Insofar as possible, however, the medical examiner shall determine the
medical fitness of an applicant after reviewing the job descriptions and
its essential job functions and mental and physical requirements. The
medical examiner shall discuss any request for reasonable
223. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. and 43 P.S. § 951 et seq., respectively.
§ A265-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-6
1:819
§ A265-7. Examinations.
accommodation with the Borough Manager and Chief of Police prior to
making final determination.
E. Reexamination of medical fitness. Each applicant eligible for
certification to the Borough Council for appointment to any position in
the Police Department shall be instructed by the Assistant Borough
Manager, before being certified, to inform the Commission of any
illness or injuries requiring the attendance of a physician or requiring
hospitalization, rehabilitation or outpatient treatment, and of any
surgical operations that shall have occurred subsequent to the original
medical examination. If, in the judgment of the Commission, there has
been any change which is contrary to what was reported by the
applicant, whether or not such change has been reported, the
Commission may require the applicant to submit to a further medical
and/or psychological examination before being certified for
appointment. Any such further examination(s) shall be performed at the
expense of the Borough, conducted by a Borough-appointed examiner.
F. Employee medical examination. When, in the opinion of the
Commission or Borough Council, an employee is physically or mentally
incapable of performing the essential duties of his/her position, the
Commission or Council may require the employee in question to submit
to a medical and/or psychological examination by an examiner
appointed by the Commission. At that time, the employee is urged to
make recommendations regarding any desired reasonable
accommodation in order to begin the interactive exchange process. If
after consideration of such reasonable accommodation, the Borough
still believes that the employee cannot perform the essential functions
of his/her job, written findings shall be made. The written findings of
such examiner or examiners may be deemed a just basis for discharge
due to disability. Dismissals because of physical and/or mental disability
shall be made in accordance with § A265-11 of these rules.
A. Entry level examinations for police officer.
(1) Entry-level written examinations for police officers shall be
conducted either by the Dauphin County Chiefs of Police
Association, Inc., and the results of such shall be submitted to the
Commission, or by the Commission or its designee if the
Commission elects to administer either the written or agility tests.
[Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1362, approved 5-8-2019]
(2) Test scoring. Testing shall include:
(a) Successful completion of a physical fitness assessment
conducted on a pass/fail basis. Candidates who do not
successfully complete this test will not be admitted to the
written examination.
§ A265-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-7
1:820
(b) A score of 70% or more on a written examination;
(c) An oral examination which is considered 30% of the final score
(the written is weighted as 70%).
B. Examination for ranks above the position of police officer and below the
rank of Chief of Police.
(1) An examination for the above positions shall consist of three parts,
namely:
(a) A written examination which shall include a test of police
knowledge, supervision and performance and such other
written tests as the Commission may, from time to time,
designate. The written examination shall represent 60% of all
examinations.
(b) An oral examination which represents 40% of all examinations.
(c) The total of all examinations shall not exceed 100%.
(d) If deemed necessary and/or desirable, psychological
assessments, physical assessments and agility tests may be
administered. (Pass/fail scored only.)
(2) So far as they are able, the Commission shall provide that the
written portion of the examination for the varying ranks shall place
emphasis upon those qualifications which are important in each
rank. In every case, however, the total weight assigned to the
written examination shall be a total of 60%.
C. Passing grades.
(1) The minimum passing grade for an examination and to be eligible
to proceed to the next examination for the position of police officer
shall be a score of 70%. The minimum passing grade for any
examination for positions above the rank of police officer and to be
able to proceed to the next examination shall be a score of 80%.
(2) Every applicant for the position of police officer who receives a
total score of at least 70%, after weighting the written and oral
exams, and who is entitled by law to additional credit for service in
the Armed Forces of the United States, shall have his/her score
adjusted accordingly as provided by law. Applicants claiming
veteran's preference shall submit satisfactory proof of active
service and honorable discharge.
D. Notice of applicant's grade. When the grading of each examination is
completed, the Secretary shall give each applicant written notice of his/
her grade. A copy of the eligibility list which lists the passing scores
shall be posted in the Municipal Building listing the applicant's name
and grade.
§ A265-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-7
1:821
E. Administering examinations. The Commission may designate the
Dauphin County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., to perform entrylevel
testing. The Commission may designate the Department of
Community and Economic Development, Governor's Center for Local
Government Services, the Commission of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a consulting company or any other recognized examining
agency to act as examiner for the written examinations. If the
Commission elects to perform its own testing, the Commission or its
designee shall be responsible for administering the written or the
agility tests. The oral examination of any applicant shall be the
responsibility of the Commission, provided that the Commission may
designate, from time to time, such persons qualified in oral examination
techniques and procedures or qualified to evaluate performance or
service records as considered necessary to assist in such examinations
and evaluations. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1362, approved
5-8-2019]
F. Conduct of written examination.
(1) The Commission and/or its testing agent shall prepare a statement
of instructions and rules for the conduct of written examinations.
(2) A blind system for scoring examinations will be used. The
candidate's test number and name is placed on a card and sealed in
an envelope until the test scores are calculated. Later, the test
number is matched to the candidate's name.
G. Penalty for improper conduct. Should an applicant for a entry level
position be found guilty of an act tending to defeat the proper conduct
or the result of any examination, his/her name shall be removed from
the eligible list resulting from the examination, and the applicant shall
not be permitted to make future application for any position in the
Police Department or Borough. Should any member of the Borough of
Middletown Police Department be found guilty of an act tending to
defeat the proper conduct on the result of any examination, his or her
name shall be referred to the Mayor for appropriate action.
H. Examination for Chief of Police. The Commission may certify a
candidate to the position of Chief of Police who meets the qualifications
specified in § A265-4G by one of the following options as selected by
Borough Council.
(1) A noncompetitive process. The Council nominates a candidate for
the position to the Commission at which time the Commission
administers a noncompetitive examination to the candidate. The
examination must test the candidate's knowledge of police
management and administration. If the candidate passes the
examination by a score of 80% or higher, the Commission may
certify the candidate to the position of Police Chief; or
§ A265-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-7
1:822
§ A265-8. Eligible list.
(2) A competitive process. Commission or designate, or Borough
Council or designate, may minimally administer written and oral
examinations to test the candidates' knowledge of police
management and administration. To be considered, the candidate
must pass all the requirements for police officer and any additional
requirements imposed by the Commission for Police Chief.
I. The Commission may refuse to examine, or, if examined, may refuse to
certify after examination as eligible, any applicant who: [Added
5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1362, approved 5-8-2019]
(1) Is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for examination
prescribed in the rules and regulations adopted for the position or
employment for which the applicant has applied;
(2) Is physically unfit for the performance of the duties of the position
to which the applicant seeks employment;
(3) Is illegally using a controlled substance, as defined in Section 102
of the Controlled Substances Act (91-513, 21 U.S.C.A. § 802);
(4) Has been guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude or of
infamous or notoriously disgraceful conduct;
(5) Has been dismissed from public service for delinquency or
misconduct of office; or
(6) Is affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are
subversive to the form of government enumerated in the
Constitutions and laws of the United States and this
Commonwealth.
J. If an applicant is aggrieved by the refusal of the Commission to certify
the applicant as eligible after examination or a person is aggrieved by
refusal of the Commission to examine the person, the Commission shall,
at the request of the applicant or person aggrieved, within 10 days,
appoint a time and place for a public hearing. At the hearing, the
applicant or person aggrieved may appear with or without counsel, and
the Commission shall take testimony and review its refusal to provide
examination or certification. The deliberations of the Commission,
including interim rulings on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be
held in the nature of a closed executive session. The Commission's
disposition of the matter shall constitute official action which shall
occur at a public meeting held under 65 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7 (relating to
open meetings). The decision of the Commission shall be final. [Added
5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1362, approved 5-8-2019]
A. Preparation of eligible list. As soon as possible after the completion of
all examinations other than entry level, the Secretary shall prepare an
eligible list upon which shall appear the name of each applicant who
§ A265-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-8
1:823
§ A265-9. Certification and appointments.
has successfully completed the examination process. The names on the
eligible list shall be arranged, from the highest to the lowest, in the
order of the final weighted score received by each eligible applicant.
The eligible list shall be filed in the office of the Assistant Borough
Manager and a copy shall be posted on the bulletin board in the
Borough Municipal Building.
B. Breaking tie scores. When two or more eligible applicants shall receive
the same final weighted score, the order in which the names of such
persons shall appear on the eligible list shall be determined by their
respective scores on that part of the examination assigned the greatest
weight. In the event that two or more qualifying applicants also receive
identical scores on that part of the examination assigned the greatest
weight, the order of listing shall be determined by the order in which
the applications were numbered for recording purposes.
C. Life of eligible lists. The eligibility list will be valid for one year from the
date the Commission formally adopts the eligibility list. Prior to
expiration of the one-year period, the Commission may extend the
validity of the eligibility list for up to an additional 12 months by a
majority vote of the Commission at a duly authorized Commission
meeting. In the absence of a lawful extension by the Commission, the
list shall expire. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1362, approved
5-8-2019]
D. Furlough lists. Whenever the Borough Council shall determine the need
for a reduction in the number of police officers, the Commission shall
prepare and maintain a list of the names of all such furloughed officers,
together with the position held by each such officer at the time of
furlough. The names on the furlough list shall be arranged in priority
order based on seniority of each furloughed officer. Seniority shall be
defined by the applicable collective bargaining agreement.
A. The Council shall notify the Commission of any vacancy which is to be
filled and shall request the certification of an eligibility list. The
Commission shall certify for each existing vacancy from the eligibility
list the names of the three persons, or a lesser number if three are not
available, who have received the highest average. The Council shall
make a conditional appointment from the three names certified, based
solely on the merits and fitness of the candidates, unless Council makes
objections to the Commission regarding one or more of the certified
persons for any of the reasons stated in § A265-7I and J (relating to
rejection of applicant and hearing). If the objections are sustained by
the Commission as provided in § A265-7I and J or the conditional
appointee is determined to be unqualified in accordance with the
procedures specified in § A265-7I and J, the Commission shall strike the
name of the person from the eligibility list and certify the next highest
name for each name stricken from the eligibility list. As each
subsequent vacancy occurs in the same or another position, the same
§ A265-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-9
1:824
procedure shall be followed. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1362,
approved 5-8-2019]
B. Furlough list to fill appointments. Upon receipt of a request from the
Borough Council, the Commission shall first certify the names of those
eligible applicants who were furloughed because of a reduction in the
force. In filling a vacancy from furlough lists, the Commission shall
certify the top name only. If more than one vacancy is to be filled, the
Commission shall certify the number of names equal to the number of
vacancies by the order of the list, highest to lowest.
C. Certification from eligible lists. If no furlough list exists, or if the total
number of vacancies cannot be filled from the available names on the
furlough list, the Commission shall certify names from the eligible list.
The number of available names certified from the eligible list shall
exceed by two the number of vacancies to be filled from such eligible
list. If there are less than three available eligibles on the eligible list,
the Borough Council shall request that the Commission or the Dauphin
County Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., hold another examination.
D. Removal of names from furlough and eligible lists.
(1) In addition to the other reasons stated as grounds for removal in
these rules, the name of any person appearing on a furlough list or
an eligible list shall be removed by the Commission if such person:
(a) Is appointed to a position in the Police Department;
(b) Declines an appointment to a permanent position in the Police
Department;
(c) Fails to make written reply to the Commission within 14
calendar days from the mailing of a certified letter for the
position offered; or
(d) Indicates availability for appointment and is appointed to fill a
vacancy but fails to report for duty at the time prescribed,
unless, in the opinion of the Commission, such person can
show good and sufficient reasons for failure to report.
(2) Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed as authorizing
the removal of the name of a person from a furlough list or eligible
list who refuses or accepts a position of a lower rank than that from
which furloughed or for which eligible on a Commission list.
E. Appointment procedures. Whenever the name of a person is certified
from either the furlough list or the eligible list, a notarized statement of
waiver shall be obtained from the candidate to permit a comprehensive
background check. Upon the completion of a background check,
including the FCRA, indicating an acceptable background, the person
shall be notified immediately of such certification by registered or
certified mail. The notice shall include the title of the position the
§ A265-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-9
1:825
§ A265-10. Promotions.
compensation to be paid and shall request a written reply within 14
days from the date of mailing.
F. Probationary period. All initial appointments to positions in the Police
Department shall be for a probationary period of one year. The Chief of
Police shall investigate the adjustment, performance and general
acceptability of each probationer to determine whether such
probationer is fully qualified for permanent appointment. The Chief of
Police shall make a report on the performance and conduct of each
probationer at the end of the fourth and eighth months of the
probationary period and, finally, not less than 15 calendar days before
the next regular meeting of the Borough Council immediately preceding
the end of the probationary period. Each final probationary report shall
include the recommendation of the Chief of Police either to retain or
reject the probationer. Each report shall be submitted in writing to the
Mayor for presentation to the Borough Council within 15 days prior to
the regular meeting of the Borough Council immediately preceding the
end of the probationary period. The Borough Council shall notify the
Commission and shall notify the probationer of such decision on or
before the last day of the probationary period. In the event the
probationary appointment is the Chief of Police, the Mayor shall
evaluate the performance and conduct of the Chief in the same manner
and subject to the same procedures as all other positions, by providing
a written report to Borough Council.
G. Provisional appointments. Whenever there are urgent reasons for the
filling of a vacancy in any position in the police force and there are no
names on the eligible list for such appointment, Council may nominate a
person to the Commission for noncompetitive examination and if such
nominee shall be certified by the Commission as qualified after such
noncompetitive examination, he/she may be appointed provisionally to
fill such vacancy. It shall thereupon become the duty of the Commission
within three weeks to request an examination from the Dauphin County
Chiefs of Police Association, Inc., and/or other authorized testing agent
to hold a competitive examination and certify a list of eligible's and
regular appointment shall then be made from the name or names
submitted by the Commission.
H. Notification. It shall be the duty of the Council to notify any provisional
appointee in writing at the time of appointment concerning the terms
and tenure of such appointment as provided by law and to receive his/
her written acknowledgement of such notice.
A. Promotions. Promotions shall be based on examinations. The nature
and scope of which shall be determined by the Commission and shall be
in concert with the applicable sections of § A265-7 of these rules.
B. Examinations. Promotional examinations shall be conducted by the
Commission and an eligible list drawn up in the same manner as that
§ A265-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-10
1:826
§ A265-11. Suspensions, removals and reductions in rank.
prescribed for original appointment, provided that only the names of
those participants in a promotional examination who shall have
attained a final average rating of 80% shall be placed on the resultant
eligible list for promotional appointment. In response to requisition for
names to fill a position by promotion, the Commission shall certify the
entire appropriate eligible list and the appointing officer or body shall
have the right to appoint any person whose name appears on the said
list.
C. Deputy Chief duties. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Mayor or
the Police Chief from adding additional functions, responsibilities and/
or compensation to an officer or other police employee covered by these
regulations without an examination and promotion. Conversely,
removal of such additional functions, responsibilities and/or
compensation shall not be considered a suspension, removal or
reduction in rank for purposes of § A265-11.
A. Procedures.
(1) Whenever a police officer is suspended without pay, removed or
reduced in rank, the specific charges warranting such actions shall
be stated in writing by the Mayor and relayed to the police officer
by the Commission. The charges shall be stated clearly and in
sufficient detail to enable the officer to understand the charges and
to allow the officer an opportunity to respond to those charges. The
charges shall specify that which provides the basis for the
disciplinary action as well as an explanation of the factual
circumstances upon which the appointing authority relied in
finding a violation.
(2) Within five days after the Mayor has imposed the suspension,
removal or reduction in rank, a written statement of the charges
shall be delivered to the officer either by personal service or by
certified and registered mail. A copy of the statement of charges
shall also be served upon the members of the Civil Service
Commission.
B. Demand of hearing. Any police officer suspended, removed or reduced
in rank may file with the Commission a written demand for a formal
hearing with a taped or stenographic record, and right to examination
and cross-examination. Such written demand and any statement of
written answers to the charges made against the person accused shall
be filed no later than 10 calendar days from the date upon which the
statement of charges were personally serviced or received. Each such
hearing shall be open to the public.
C. Hearing on suspensions, removals and reductions.
§ A265-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-11
1:827
(1) The Commission shall grant a formal hearing at which witnesses
are examined and cross-examined and a transcript is made within
10 days of the request for such by the accused, provided that the
accused complies with the time frame specified in Subsection B.
The hearing may be continued by the Commission for good and
sufficient reason at the request of the Council or the accused. At
any such hearing the person against whom the charges are made
may be present in person and represented prior to the hearing by
counsel. The suspension, removal or reduction in rank will remain
in effect, pending the determination of the charges against the
accused. In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of
review shall be to determine whether sufficient evidence has been
presented to support the statutory reason for the disciplinary
action. In the event the Commission fails to uphold the charges,
then the person sought to be suspended, removed or demoted shall
be reinstated with full pay for the period during which he/she was
suspended, removed or demoted and no charges shall be officially
recorded against his/her record.
(2) The aggrieved party shall have immediate right of appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County, and/or the
Commonwealth Court, and the case shall therefore be taken within
30 days from the date of entry by the Commission of its final order
and shall be by petition. The Council and the person sought to be
suspended, removed or demoted shall at all times have the right to
employ counsel before the Commission and upon appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas, and/or the Commonwealth Court.
(a) Notice of hearing. Notice of the date, time and place for each
hearing shall be given in the following manner:
[1] Either by personal service, certified mail and if desired one
or more of the following: e-mail or facsimile to each of the
principals involved in the case; and
[2] By mailing, e-mailing or sending by facsimile a notice to all
other parties who have stated an interest in the hearing to
the Chair of the Civil Service Commission provided that
any failure to give notice required by this subsection shall
not invalidate any subsequent action taken by the
Commission.
(b) Oaths. All testimony shall be given under oath. The
Chairperson, or in his/her absence the Vice Chairperson, shall
administer all oaths.
(c) Subpoenas. The Chairperson, or in his/her absence the Vice
Chairperson, may compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of records, documents, and papers pertaining to
any hearing. However, upon the written request by the accused
or by the person making charges, the Chairperson, or in his/
§ A265-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-11
1:828
her absence, the Vice Chairperson, additionally shall order the
attendance of pertinent witnesses or the production of relevant
documents, provided that such a written request is filed with
the Secretary within five days from the date appearing on the
notice of the hearing.
(d) Hearing procedure.
[1] Each hearing shall be conducted in the following manner:
[a] The Chairperson shall state the general purpose of the
hearing;
[b] The Secretary, upon direction of the Chairperson,
shall read the written charges or circumstances
against the accused together with the record of action
taken against such officer;
[c] The Secretary shall read any written reply of the
accused;
[d] The Chairperson shall afford each person making
charges, or his/her counsel, an opportunity to make
further statement in support of the charges and to
produce any witnesses;
[e] The Chairperson shall afford the accused, or his/her
counsel, an opportunity to question or cross-examine
the person making charges and to question or crossexamine
any witness produced by such person;
[f] The Chairperson shall afford each person making
charges or his/her counsel an opportunity to examine
the person accused;
[g] The Chairperson shall permit each person making
charges, or his/her counsel, to make a summation;
[h] The Chairperson shall afford the accused, or his/her
counsel, an opportunity to produce any witness and to
sum up the defense;
[i] The Chairperson shall afford each person making
charges, or his/her counsel, an opportunity to question
or cross-examine the witnesses produced by the
person accused;
[j] The Commission shall be the judge of admissible
evidence and procedure and shall not be bound by
technical rules of evidence.
[2] A stenographic transcript of proceedings shall be made
and filed in the Commission archives along with all other
§ A265-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-11
1:829
§ A265-12. Inspection.
records pertinent to the case. Such records shall be sealed
and not open to public inspection.
[3] The Commission, at any time during the course of the
hearing, may question or cross-examine the person
making charges, the accused and any witnesses.
D. Decision of the Commission. Within 30 days after the later of the
conclusion of the hearing and receipt of the hearing transcript, the
Commission shall issue its decision in the form of a written order
approved by at least two members of the Commission. The written
order shall include all findings of fact. If, during the public hearing,
opposing facts are presented, the Commission shall include in the
written order a decision as to what it considers to be the correct facts.
The findings and decision of the Commission shall be certified to the
person making charges, to the accused officer and to the Borough
Council.
E. Conflict of interest.
(1) Should any Commission member be of relations to, or possess
information of any facts of persons and/or cases which may
prejudice his/her vote, full disclosure of such knowledge shall be
made to all other members of the Commission. At that time:
(a) The member in question may elect to refrain from participation
in the hearing process; or
(b) The other Commission members may vote upon whether or not
the biasing value of the knowledge is such to warrant the
exclusion of member's vote.
(2) If a conflict of interest does occur, and the member's vote is
disqualified, it is imperative that the votes of the two remaining
Commission members be in agreement or else the issue being is
not upheld. If a conflict of interest has occurred, has not been
reported and is then discovered at a later date, the biased vote will
be disqualified, and the decision will rest upon the votes of the
remaining two Commission members.
(3) In the event of multiple recusals in the same case, the Commission
shall appoint an unbiased hearing examiner to preside over the
hearing and make the determination.
A. Inspection in general. Except as otherwise provided in § 265-11C(2)(d)
or other parts of this chapter, all of the records of the Commission shall
be open to the public and available for inspection during normal
business hours. A member of the Commission or any person who may,
from time to time, be designated by the Commission, shall be present at
all times during any inspection of any record of the Commission. The
§ A265-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-12
1:830
§ A265-13. Commission forms.
Commission shall take appropriate steps to protect the privacy of
identifier information, such as address, social security number, home
telephone number and any health care information related to
employees.
B. Character reports. All reports of investigation and inquiries into the
character of applicants shall not be open to general public inspection.
C. Inspection of examination materials.
(1) Any examined applicant may inspect his/her written examination
papers, provided that:
(a) He/she makes a written request to the Commission within
seven days from the date of mailing of the written notice of his/
her grade;
(b) He/she receives the written consent of the Commission to
inspect the examination papers;
(c) He/she makes the inspection within five calendar days from the
date of the mailing of the consent of the Commission.
(2) The Commission shall not consent to the request of any examined
applicant to inspect any written examination paper which may be
used in a subsequent written examination. If the Commission
consents to an inspection of any of the written examination papers
to a previously examined applicant, it shall state in its letter of
consent the specific examination papers that may be inspected.
Before any member of the Commission, or any person designated
by the Commission, permits any inspection of examination papers,
he/she shall require the examined applicant to produce the letter
indicating the consent of the Commission and shall limit the
inspection by the examined applicant to only those examination
papers indicated in the letter of consent. No examined applicant
shall be permitted to inspect any examination papers other than
his/her own, nor shall be/she be permitted to make any written
notes while inspecting any examination paper.
A. Use of forms. The Commission may adopt and use various types of
forms to perform their official functions, copies of which may be
obtained from the Secretary of the Commission.
B. Forms. The following numbered forms and their titles become the
official forms of the Commission and a part of the rules and regulations
of the Commission, a copy of which may be obtained from the Secretary
of the Commission:
(1) Application for examination used by the Commission or any of its
authorized agents;
§ A265-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A265-13
1:831
§ A265-14. Amendments.
The Borough Council upon its own motion or upon recommendation of the
Commission, may from time to time amend any part of these rules and
regulations insofar as such amendments do not conflict with the Borough
Code or other applicable law.
§ A265-15. Conflicts.
§ A265-16. Authority.
The Borough Council of Middletown adopts these civil service regulations
in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code appearing at 53 P.S.
§ 46171 et seq.,224 allowing for the appointment of police and fire employees
through the Civil Service system. The Commission of the Borough shall have
any and all powers established in that authority.
(2) Certificate of medical examination;
(3) Confidential inquiry letter;
(4) Confidential inquiry form;
(5) Notice of medical examination;
(6) Certification notice;
(7) Personal service record;
(8) Service rating Police Department; and
(9) Authorization of FCRA investigation.
A. Conflict with collective bargaining agreement.
(1) The Commission recognizes that certain members of the police
force are covered by a collective bargaining agreement (CBA) or
internal arbitration award (IAA). In the event that the provisions of
the CBA or IAA are more favorable to the police officer, the CBA or
IAA shall control.
(2) To the extent that any issue arises for which the CBA or IAA
controls, the officer shall utilize the grievance and arbitration
procedures of the CBA or IAA, rather than the hearing provision of
these regulations.
B. Conflict with state or federal law. To the extent that any provisions of
these regulations conflicts with state or federal law or constitutional
protection, the provision of these regulations shall be suspended.
224. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1171 et seq.
§ A265-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § A265-16
1:832
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1171 3-1-2004 Withdrawal from PRMS;
nonuniform employees
pension plan
See Ch. 55, Art. III
1172 3-1-2004 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
storage and collection
amendment
Ch. 164, Art. I
1173 3-1-2004 Sewers amendment; water
connections amendment
Ch. 226; Ch. 256,
Art. I
1174 3-1-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1175 4-5-2004 Fire Department: Complaint
Board amendment
Ch. 23, Art. III
1176 5-3-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 238
1177 5-3-2004 Uniform Construction Code Ch. 114
1178 5-3-2004 Amend various fees;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 127; Ch. 148;
Ch. 153; Ch. 210
(repealed by Ord.
No. 1332)
1179 7-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1180 7-12-2004 Noise: construction noise Ch. 185, Art. III
1181 7-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1182 9-7-2004 Earned income tax
amendment
Ch. 243, Art. IV
1183 9-7-2004 Various department and
employee amendments
Ch. 3; Ch. 66
(repealed by Ord.
No. 1288); Ch. 80;
Ch. 127
1184 9-7-2004 Sewers: sewer use
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. II
1185 9-21-2004 Authorization of lease
termination agreement
NCM
§ A265-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:833
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1186 9-21-2004 Incurrence of debt NCM
1187 10-4-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1188 12-6-2004 2005 police equipment fund NCM
1189 12-15-2004 Tax rate for 2005 NCM
1190 12-15-2004 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1191 12-15-2004 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
1192 12-29-2004 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 243, Art. V
1193 5-2-2005 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
1194 7-11-2005 Uniform Construction Code
references
Ch. 113 (repealed
by Ord. No. 1330);
Ch. 114; Ch. 127;
Ch. 142 (repealed
by Ord. No. 1330);
Ch. 144; Ch. 155;
Ch. 182; Ch. 203;
Ch. 210 (repealed
by Ord. No. 1332);
Ch. 226; Ch. 252;
Ch. 256, Art. I
1195 8-1-2005 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 127
1196 8-1-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1197 12-5-2005 Tax rate for 2006 NCM
1198 12-5-2005 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
1199 12-5-2005 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1200 12-5-2005 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1201 12-5-2005 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1202 12-5-2005 Continuation of special fund NCM
1203 12-5-2005 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
1:834
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1204 1-3-2006 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. IV
1205 2-6-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1206 2-6-2006 School District Liquid Asset
Fund
Ch. 41
1207 4-3-2006 Authorization to execute
agreements with other
municipalities for joint
provision of mutual aid
during times of power
emergencies
NCM
1208 6-5-2006 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1209 6-5-2006 Wards amendment Ch. 88
1210 8-7-2006 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. IV
1211 8-7-2006 Pensions: retirement system
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. III
1212 8-7-2006 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment; sewer use
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I;
Ch. 226, Art. II
1213 9-5-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1332
1214 9-20-2006 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1215 10-2-2006 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
1216 12-4-2006 Tax rate for 2007 NCM
1217 12-4-2006 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
1218 12-4-2006 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
1219 12-4-2006 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1220 12-4-2006 2007 police equipment fund NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:835
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1221 4-2-2007 Fire Department:
establishment and
organization amendment;
Public Safety Department
amendment; Fire Marshal
amendment
Ch. 23, Art. I; Ch.
64; Ch. 155, Art.
III
1222 5-7-2007 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 195
1223 5-16-2007 Bonds NCM
1224 6-4-2007 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
1225 9-18-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1226 10-1-2007 Uniform Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 114
1227 12-3-2007 Tax rate for 2008 NCM
1228 12-3-2007 Uniform construction code
amendment; sewers: sewer
connections amendment
Ch. 114; Ch. 226,
Art. I
1229 12-3-2007 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
1230 12-3-2007 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
amendment (local services
tax)
Ch. 243, Art. V
1231 12-3-2007 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1232 12-3-2007 2008 police equipment fund NCM
1233 3-11-2008 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
1234 3-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
3-14-2008 Civil service rules and
regulations
Ch. A265
1235 4-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1236 6-3-2008 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1237 7-8-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 148
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
1:836
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1238 8-12-2008 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
1239 9-9-2008 Homestead Loan Program Ch. 168
1240 10-14-2008 Cable franchise agreement Ch. A264
1241 11-18-2008 General obligation note NCM
1242 11-18-2008 Street vacation NCM
1243 11-18-2008 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
recycling amendment
Ch. 164, Art. IV
1244 12-9-2008 Tax rate for 2009 NCM
1245 12-9-2008 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1246 12-9-2008 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
1247 12-9-2008 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1248 12-9-2008 2009 police equipment fund NCM
1249 12-9-2008 Nonuniform Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
1250 1-6-2009 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
recycling amendment
Ch. 164, Art. IV
1251 4-7-2009 Retiree Benefits Plan See Ch. 55, Art. III
(footnote only)
1252 6-9-2009 Sex offender residency
restrictions
Ch. 227
1253 6-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1254 7-14-2009 Street vacation NCM
1255 7-29-2009 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1256 7-29-2009 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1257 11-17-2009 Bonds NCM
1258 11-17-2009 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1259 12-8-2009 Tax rate for 2010 NCM
1260 12-8-2009 Sewers: sewer connections
amendment
Ch. 226, Art. I
1261 12-8-2009 Water connections
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:837
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1262 12-8-2009 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
1263 12-8-2009 Electric service amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1320
1264 12-8-2009 2010 police equipment fund NCM
1265 4-13-2010 Electric service amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1320
1266 4-13-2010 Pensions: retirement system
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. III
1267 7-13-2010 Electric service amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1320
1268 8-10-2010 Stormwater management Ch. 236
1269 8-10-2010 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1270 9-14-2010 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1271 11-16-2010 Bond NCM
1272 12-14-2010 Police equipment fund NCM
1273 12-14-2010 Electric service amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1320
1274 12-14-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
1275 12-14-2010 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
1276 2-8-2011 Cable franchise agreement
amendment
Ch. A264
1277 3-8-2011 Borough Manager
amendment; residency
requirement amendment
Ch. 43; Ch. 73
1278 3-8-2011 Electric service amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1320
1279 11-15-2011 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1280 12-20-2011 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
1281 2-6-2012 Electric service amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1320
1282 2-6-2012 Pensions: Nonuniform
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
1283 2-6-2012 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. IV
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
1:838
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1284 6-18-2012 Borough Manager
amendment
Ch. 43
1285 7-30-2012 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 158
1286 9-17-2012 Planning Commission
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1321
1287 10-1-2012 Library amendment Ch. 37
1288 10-2-2012 Department of Public Works Ch. 66
1289 11-5-2012 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 60
1290 Tax rate for 2013 Not adopted
1291 3-19-2013 Pensions: Compliance with
state procurement standards
Not adopted
1292 Electric service amendment Not adopted
1293 8-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1294 Civil service rules and
regulations
Not adopted
1295 11-1-2013 Accepting early intervention
report and adopting multiyear
plan
NCM
1296 10-22-2013 Police Policy and Procedures
Manual; Civil Service Rules
and Regulations
See Ch. A265
1297 12-2-2013 Zoning Ch. 260
1298 12-3-2013 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. IV
1299 12-17-2013 Emergency management
amendment
Ch. 16
1300 12-17-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
1301 12-17-2013 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
garbage and refuse service
charge amendment
Ch. 164, Art. II
1302 Not adopted
1303 8-18-2014 Sewers: sewers connections
amendment; water
connections amendment
Ch. 226; Art. I;
Ch. 256, Art. I
1304 5-5-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:839
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1305 4-21-2014 Nonelectoral debt NCM
1306 7-21-2014 Nonelectoral debt NCM
1307 8-18-2014 Lease rental debt NCM
1308 9-29-2014 Lease agreement NCM
1309 12-1-2014 Water rates, service charges
and fees established as
provided in lease agreement
NCM
1310 12-29-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
1311 Number not used
1312 3-2-2015 Trees repealer Ch. 247, reference
only
1313 5-4-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1332
1314 4-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
1315 5-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1316 7-20-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 235
1317 Number not used
1318 Number not used
1319 2-9-2016 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
1320 3-1-2016 Electric service amendment Ch. 144
1321 4-5-2016 Planning Commission Ch. 58
1322 5-3-2016 Pensions: Nonuniform
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
1323 5-3-2016 Borough Manager
amendment
Ch. 43
1324 7-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1325 7-5-2016 Pensions: Nonuniform
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
1326 7-19-2016 Records: disposition of
records
Ch. 71, Art. I
1327 7-19-2016 Wells: connection to Borough
water supply amendment
Ch. 257, Art. I
1328 9-6-2016 Wards; Borough Council Ch. 88
1329 10-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
1:840
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1330 11-1-2016 Building construction
repealer; uniform
construction codes
amendment; code
enforcement amendment;
electrical standards repealer
Ch. 113 (reference
only); Ch. 114; Ch.
127; Ch. 142
(reference only)
1331 11-1-2016 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 127
1332 11-1-2016 Nuisances repealer;
numbering of buildings
repealer; property
maintenance; vector control
repealer
Ch. 188 (reference
only); Ch. 190
(reference only);
Ch. 210; Ch. 250
(reference only)
1333 12-6-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
1334 12-6-2016 Nonelectoral debt NCM
1335 1-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1336 2-7-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
1337 3-21-2017 Civil Service Rules and
Regulations amendment
See Ch. A265
1338 4-4-2017 Drug paraphernalia
amendment
Ch. 138
1339 5-2-2017 Pensions: Nonuniform
Pension Plan amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. III
1340 5-2-2017 Pensions: Retiree Benefits
Plan
See Ch. 55, Art. III
(footnote only)
1341 6-6-2017 Human Relations
Commission amendment
Ch. 33
1342 6-20-2017 Civil Service Rules and
Regulations amendment
See Ch. A265
1343 8-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
1344 10-3-2017 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 195
1345 10-3-2017 Borough Manager
amendment
Ch. 43
1346 12-20-2017 Tax rate for 2018 NCM
1347 2-6-2018 Taxation: Tax Certifications Ch. 243, Art. VI
1348 4-3-2018 Fire Prevention: Fire
Marshal Amendment
Ch. 155, Art. III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:841
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1349 5-1-2018 Historical Restoration
Commission Amendment
Ch. 30
1350 7-9-2018 Alcoholic Beverages: Open
Containers Amendment
Ch. 98, Art. II
1351 7-9-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Sidewalk Obstructions
Ch. 235, Art. IX
1352 7-9-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
1353 9-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 252
1354 9-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 252
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1355 11-7-2018 Electric Service
Amendment
Ch. 144 2
1356 12-4-2018 Tax Rate for 2019 NCM 2
1357 1-2-2019 Pensions:
Nonuniform Pension
Plan Amendment
See Ch. 55,
Art. III
2
1358 3-5-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks: Street
Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 235,
Art. V
2
1359 3-5-2019 Fire Department:
Establishment and
Organization
Amendment
Ch. 23, Art.
I
2
1360 4-2-2019 Stabilization Fund:
Establishment and
Administration
Ch. 84, Art.
I
2
1361 3-19-2019 Alcoholic Beverages:
Open Containers
Amendment
Ch. 98, Art.
II
2
1362 5-8-2019 Civil Service Rules
and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. A265 2
1363 6-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 252 2
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
1:842
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1364 8-16-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 252 2
1365 10-1-2019 Garbage, Rubbish
and Refuse: Open
Burning Amendment
Ch. 164,
Art. III
2
1366 11-6-2019 Fireworks Ch. 157 2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:843