The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
C:1

ARTICLE I
Name and Powers
SECTION 101. Name.
Middletown Township shall continue to be known as Middletown Township
under this Home Rule Charter. The structure of government and the general
authority of municipal officials shall be as set forth herein.
SECTION 102. General powers.
The Township shall have and may exercise any powers and perform any
functions not specifically denied by or inconsistent with the Constitution
of Pennsylvania, the Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or this
Charter.
SECTION 103. Continuation.
All powers and functions contained in any or all ordinances and resolutions
which are in force on the effective date of this Charter, and not inconsistent
herewith, shall continue in force until amended or repealed.
SECTION 104. Interpretation.
The powers of the Township shall be liberally construed in favor of the
Township in order to provide the Township with the greatest possible power
of self-government.
SECTION 101 CHARTER SECTION 104
C:3

ARTICLE II
Township Council
SECTION 201. General towers and duties.
All powers of the Township of Middletown shall be vested in the Township
Council of Council Members (hereafter called "the Council"), except as
otherwise provided by law or this Charter, and the Council shall provide for
the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations
imposed on the Township by law.
SECTION 202. Composition.
There shall be a Township Council consisting of seven members. Three shall
be nominated and elected by the qualified electors of the Township at large,
and four shall be nominated and elected by the qualified electors of the four
voting districts as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 203. Eligibility.
SECTION 204. Election and term.
The regular terms of Council Members shall be four years beginning at 8:00
p.m. on the first Monday of January, or the next day following which is a
non-holiday, following the year in which they are elected, except for the first
Council to serve under this Charter, the members of which will serve for
staggered terms as provided hereinafter.
SECTION 205. Districts.
The Township shall consist of four districts which shall contain as nearly
as possible equal numbers of residents as determined by the latest official
census of the U.S. Bureau of Census. No district shall vary by more than
15% from the average of all of the districts at the time of reapportionment.
A district shall be contiguous and shall follow natural geographic
boundaries to the extent possible consistent with the principle of equal
population.
A. Only qualified electors of the Township of Middletown shall be eligible
to be nominated and to hold the office of Council Member.
B. For the position of Council Member to be elected from a district, as set
forth in this Charter, only qualified electors residing in that election
district shall be eligible to be nominated and to hold the office of
Council Member from that district.
SECTION 201 CHARTER SECTION 206
C:5
SECTION 206. Establishment of districts. [Amended 8-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 630]
The establishment of the first districts, to be known as the First, Second,
Third, and Fourth Districts, shall be by this Charter. The boundaries of said
districts shall be as follows:
VOTING DISTRICT NO. 1: BEGINNING at a point of intersection of the
center line of Dutton Mill Road with the center line of Chester Creek; thence
northeasterly along the southeastern border of Middletown Township to the
center line of Ridley Creek; thence, northwesterly along the southeastern
border of the Township to the point of intersection of the center line of
Ridley Creek with the center line Bortondale Road; thence, southwesterly
along the center line of Bortondale Road to its intersection with the center
line of South Old Middletown Road; thence, south along the center line of
South Old Middletown Road to its intersection with the common boundary
line of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and property located at 454
South Old Middletown Road; thence, southwesterly along that common
boundary line extended to a point in the center line of South New
Middletown Road; thence, south along the center line of South New
Middletown Road to its point of intersection with the common property line
of property of Indian Orchard Park and property located at 5 Copes Lane;
thence, following the southern property line of Indian Orchard Park to its
intersection with the rear property lines of lots on Cricket Lane thence
southeasterly along the rear common boundary line of property at 490 and
500 Cricket Lane and property at 27 and 35 Copes Lane to the point of
intersection of the common boundary line of properties on Cricket Lane and
the Hidden Hollow Swim Club; thence, southwesterly along this common
boundary line to a point representing the rear common boundary corner
of a lot at 495 Cricket Lane and a lot at 441 Mount Alverno Road; thence,
extending in a northwesterly direction along the common boundary line
of the lot at 441 Mount Alverno Road and various properties located on
Cricket Lane between 180 and 190 Hidden Hills Lane to the center line
of Hidden Hills Lane; thence, westerly along the center line of Hidden
Hills Lane to the center line of its intersection with Mount Alverno Road;
thence, northwesterly along the center line of Mount Alverno Road until
its intersection with the common property line of Alverno Valley Farms
and properties located on Willowgate Lane; thence, generally southerly
and westerly following the common boundary line of Alverno Valley Farms
and properties on Willowgate Lane and Olde House Lane to the point of
intersection of the common boundary line of grounds of Alverno Valley
Farms with property at 350 Howarth Road; thence, northwesterly along the
common boundary line of lots at 350 Howarth Road and 424 Olde House
Lane to the point of intersection with the common boundary line of lots
at 350 Howarth Road and 311 Howarth Road; thence, southwesterly along
the northern property line of the lot at 350 Howarth Road to a point of
intersection representing the common property corner at the rear of lots at
336 Howarth Road and 350 Howarth Road; thence, westerly from this point
along a line 1,200 feet more or less to a point in the center of Chester Creek
which constitutes the Township line adjoining Aston Township; thence,
SECTION 206 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 206
C:6
southeasterly along the center line of the Chester Creek which constitutes
the Township line between Middletown Township and Aston Township to the
first mentioned point and place of beginning.
VOTING DISTRICT NO. 2: BEGINNING at a point of intersection of the
center line of Bortondale Road with the center line of Ridley Creek; thence,
northwesterly along said creek forming the boundary line between
Middletown Township and Upper Providence Township to the center line of
U.S. Route 1; thence, southwesterly along the center line of U.S. Route 1
to a point of intersection with an extension of the common boundary line
dividing properties located on South Heilbron Drive and property now or
late of the Elwyn Institute located to the north of the Media By-Pass; thence,
southwesterly along this common property line to a point of intersection
of the common property lines of 592 South Heilbron Drive and 24 Penn
Charter Drive; thence, northwesterly along the common property lines of
592 and 585 South Heilbron Drive and properties at 24 and 26 Penn Charter
Drive and 113 Blackhorse Lane to the point of intersection of the rear of
lots at 585 South Heilbron Drive and 113 Blackhorse Lane with property
at 740 West Rose Tree Road; thence, southwesterly along the common
property line of 740 West Rose Tree Road and properties on Blackhorse
Drive extended to its intersection with the center line of North Middletown
Road; thence, southeasterly along the center line of North Middletown
Road to its intersection with the center line of Baltimore Pike; thence,
westerly along the center line of Baltimore Pike to its intersection with the
common property line of Riddle Glen Condominiums and Riddle Memorial
Hospital; thence, southeasterly along the common property line of Riddle
Memorial Hospital with the Riddle Glen Condominiums and properties on
South Middletown Road to the common boundary line at the rear of Riddle
Memorial Hospital with Williamson Trade School; thence, southwesterly
along the common boundary line of Williamson Trade School with Riddle
Memorial Hospital and Granite Run Townhouses extending to the
intersection with the center line of the Chrome Run; thence, southeasterly
along the Chrome Run to the center line of the right-of-way of the SEPTA
Rail Lines; thence, along the center line of the SEPTA right-of-way in a
southwesterly direction to a point of intersection in the center line of South
Pennell Road; thence, southeasterly along the center line of South Pennell
Road to the center line of Chester Creek; thence, in a southerly direction
along the center line of the Chester Creek 1,600 feet more or less to a point
in the Chester Creek due west of a point of intersection representing the
common property corner at the rear of lots at 336 Howarth Road and 350
Howarth Road; thence, easterly along this line 1,200 feet more or less to
the common property corner at the rear of lots at 336 Howarth Road and
350 Howarth Road; thence, northeasterly along the northern property line
of the lot at 350 and 340 Howarth Road to its point of intersection with
the rear boundary of a lot at 424 Olde House Lane; thence, southeasterly
along the common boundary line of lots at 350 Howarth Road and 424
and 425 Olde House Lane to the point of intersection with the boundary
of property of Alverno Valley Farms; thence, generally in a northerly and
easterly direction along the common boundary line of Alverno Valley Farms
with properties on Olde House Lane and Willowgate Lane to the center
SECTION 206 CHARTER SECTION 206
C:7
line of Mount Alverno Road; thence, southeasterly along the center line of
Mount Alverno Road to the center line of its intersection with Hidden Hills
Lane; thence, easterly along the center line of Hidden Hills Lane to the
common boundary line between property at 190 and 180 Hidden Hills Lane;
thence, southeasterly along this common boundary line extending to a point
representing the common rear lot corner of 441 Mount Alverno Road and
495 Cricket Lane; thence, northeasterly along the common boundary line of
properties on Cricket Lane and the Hidden Hollow Swim Club to the point
of intersection of property at 27 and 35 Copes Lane and property at 500
Cricket Lane; thence, northwest along the property at 500 and 490 Cricket
Lane to the point of intersection of the southeastern property line of Indian
Orchard Park; thence, following the southeastern property line of Indian
Orchard Park north and east to its intersection with the common property
line of Indian Orchard Park and South New Middletown Road; thence, north
from a point in the center line of South New Middletown Road to the
common boundary line of Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and 425 South
New Middletown Road; thence, northeasterly along the common boundary
line of Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and properties at 464 and 452 South
Old Middletown Road to the center line of South Old Middletown Road;
thence, north along the center line of South Old Middletown Road to its
intersection with the center line of Bortondale Road; thence, northeasterly
along the center line of Bortondale Road to its intersection with the first
mentioned point and place of beginning.
VOTING DISTRICT NO. 3: BEGINNING at a point of intersection of the
center line of West Baltimore Pike at its point of intersection with the
common property line of Riddle Glen Condominiums and Riddle Memorial
Hospital; thence, southeasterly along the common property line of Riddle
Memorial Hospital with the Riddle Glen Condominiums and properties on
South Middletown Road to the common boundary line at the rear of Riddle
Memorial Hospital with Williamson Trade School; thence, southwesterly
along the common boundary line of Williamson Trade School with Riddle
Memorial Hospital and Granite Run Townhouses extending to the
intersection with the center line of the Chrome Run; thence, southeasterly
along the Chrome Run to the center line of the right-of-way of the SEPTA
Rail Lines; thence, along the center line of the SEPTA right-of-way in a
southwesterly direction to a point of intersection in the center line of
South Pennell Road; thence, southeasterly along the center line of South
Pennell Road to the center line of Chester Creek; thence, in a generally
northwesterly direction along the center line of Chester Creek, being the
Township line dividing Middletown Township, Aston Township, the Borough
of Chester Heights, and Thornbury Township to a point of intersection
with the northwestern property line of the Middletown Township Darlington
Tract; thence, northeasterly along this common property line with the
Darlington Tract and the Darlington Valley PRD to its point of intersection
with the rear property line of 275 New Darlington Road; thence
northwesterly and northeasterly along the common property line of 275
New Darlington Road and the Darlington Valley PRD to its point of
intersection with the common property line dividing properties on Paul Lane
from properties on New Darlington Road; thence, extending northeasterly
SECTION 206 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 206
C:8
along this common boundary line to its point of intersection with the
southern property line of 351 New Darlington Road; thence, continuing
northeasterly along this property line to its intersection with the center
line of New Darlington Road; thence, northerly along the center line of
New Darlington Road to its intersection with the center line of Valley
Road; thence southeasterly along the center line of Valley Road to its
intersection with the center line of Darlington Road; thence, northeasterly
along the center line of Darlington Road to its intersection with the common
property line separating property at 300 Darlington Road and property of
Delaware County at Fair Acres; thence, generally south and east following
the property line of property of Delaware County at Fair Acres to its point
of intersection with the southernmost property line of the Middletown
Crossing Townhouses; thence, southeasterly along the common property
line separating the Middletown Crossing Townhouses and the rear of
property at 1263 West Baltimore Pike to its intersection with the common
property line dividing the Middletown Crossing Townhouses and the Pennell
Place Townhouses; thence, northeasterly along the common boundary line
separating the Middletown Crossing Townhouses and the Pennell Place
Townhouses to its point of intersection with the rear property line of 60
North Pennell Road; thence, southerly and easterly following this common
property line dividing the Pennell Place Townhouses from property at 60
and 56 North Pennell Road to the center line of North Pennell Road; thence,
northerly along the center line of North Pennell Road approximately 150
feet to its point of intersection with the common property line dividing
properties at 57, 55, and 59 North Pennell Road from properties at 61 North
Middletown Road and the rear of lots on North Middletown Road; thence,
easterly along this common property line to its point of intersection with
the common property line of property at 218 North Middletown Road and
the rear of property at 34 Oriole Avenue; thence, north along the common
property line of 218 North Middletown Road and the rear of lots on Oriole
Avenue to the intersection with the property line at the rear of 52 Oriole
Avenue and 206 North Middletown Road; thence, east along the common
property line of 52 Oriole Avenue and 206 North Middletown Road to the
center line of Oriole Avenue; thence, north along the center line of Oriole
Avenue to its intersection with the northern property line of a lot at 57
Oriole Avenue; thence, southeasterly along this property line to the rear
of properties located on Oriole Avenue; thence, southerly along the rear of
lots on Oriole Avenue and property 1067 West Baltimore Pike (Granite Run
Mall) to the southern property line of a lot at 29 Oriole Avenue; thence,
along this southern property line to its intersection with the center line of
Oriole Avenue; thence, south along the center line of Oriole Avenue to its
intersection with the center line of West Baltimore Pike; thence, easterly
along the center line of West Baltimore Pike to the first mentioned point and
place of beginning.
VOTING DISTRICT NO. 4: BEGINNING at a point of intersection of the
center line of U.S. Route 1 with the center line of the Ridley Creek; thence,
in a northwesterly direction along the center line of Ridley Creek, being
the Township dividing line dividing Middletown Township and Upper
Providence Township to its intersection with the Township line dividing
SECTION 206 CHARTER SECTION 206
C:9
Middletown Township and the Townships of Edgmont and Thornbury;
thence, along said Township line in a southwesterly direction to the center
line of the Chester Creek; thence, southeasterly along the center line of the
Chester Creek being the Township line dividing Middletown Township and
Thornbury Township to its intersection with the northwestern property line
of the Middletown Township Darlington Tract; thence, northeasterly along
this common property line with the Darlington Tract and the Darlington
Valley PRD to its point of intersection with the rear property line of 275
New Darlington Road; thence, northwesterly and northeasterly along the
common property line of 275 New Darlington Road and the Darlington
Valley PRD to its point of intersection with the common property line
dividing properties on Paul Lane from properties on New Darlington Road;
thence, extending northeasterly along this common boundary line to its
point of intersection with the southern property line of 351 New Darlington
Road; thence, continuing northeasterly along this property line to its
intersection with the center line of New Darlington Road; thence, northerly
along the center line of New Darlington Road to its intersection with the
center line of Valley Road; thence, southeasterly along the center line of
Valley Road to its intersection with the center line of Darlington Road;
thence, northeasterly along the center line of Darlington Road to its
intersection with the common property line separating property at 300
Darlington Road and property of Delaware County at Fair Acres; thence,
generally south and east following the property line of property of Delaware
County at Fair Acres to its point of intersection with the southernmost
property line of the Middletown Crossing Townhouses; thence,
southeasterly along the common property line separating the Middletown
Crossing Townhouses and the rear of property at 1263 West Baltimore Pike
to its intersection with the common property line dividing the Middletown
Crossing Townhouses and the Pennell Place Townhouses; thence,
northeasterly along the common boundary line separating the Middletown
Crossing Townhouses and the Pennell Place Townhouses to its point of
intersection with the rear property line of 60 North Pennell Road; thence,
southerly and easterly following this common property line dividing the
Pennell Place Townhouses from property at 60 and 56 North Pennell Road
to the center line of North Pennell Road; thence, northerly along the center
line of North Pennell Road approximately 150 feet to its point of intersection
with the common property line dividing properties at 57, 55, and 59 North
Pennell Road from properties at 61 North Middletown Road and the rear
of lots on North Middletown Road; thence, easterly along this common
property line to its point of intersection with the common property line
of property at 218 North Middletown Road and the rear of property at
34 Oriole Avenue; thence, north along the common property line of 218
North Middletown Road and the rear of lots on Oriole Avenue to the
intersection with the property line at the rear of 52 Oriole Avenue and 206
North Middletown Road; thence, east along the common property line of
52 Oriole Avenue and 206 North Middletown Road to the center line of
Oriole Avenue; thence, north along the center line of Oriole Avenue to its
intersection with the northern property line of a lot at 57 Oriole Avenue;
thence, southeasterly along this property line to the rear of properties
SECTION 206 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 206
C:10
located on Oriole Avenue; thence, southerly along the rear of lots on Oriole
Avenue and property 1067 West Baltimore Pike (Granite Run Mall) to the
southern property line of a lot at 29 Oriole Avenue; thence, along this
southern property line to its intersection with the center line of Oriole
Avenue; thence, south along the center line of Oriole Avenue to its
intersection with the center line of West Baltimore Pike; thence, easterly
along the center line of West Baltimore Pike to its intersection with the
center line of North Middletown Road; thence, northwesterly along the
center line of North Middletown Road to its intersection with the northern
property line of 17 North Middletown Road; thence, northeasterly along
the common property line of properties at 25 North Middletown Road and
240 West Rose Tree Road and properties on Blackhorse Drive to the point
of intersection of the rear of lots at 585 South Heilbron Drive and 113
Blackhorse Lane; thence, southeasterly along the common property lines of
585 and 592 South Heilbron Drive and properties at 113 Blackhorse Lane
and 26 and 24 Penn Charter Drive to its intersection with common boundary
line between properties located on South Heilbron Drive and property now
or late of the Elwyn Institute; thence, northeasterly along this common
property line extended to a point in the center line of U.S. Route 1; thence,
northeasterly along the center line of U.S. Route 1 to the first mentioned
point and place of beginning.
Reapportionment of Council Members to Districts thereafter shall be by
ordinance and shall occur only in the following circumstances:
SECTION 207. Compensation.
A. Within the year following the year in which the Decennial U.S. Census
Reports are officially certified, the Council shall reapportion the
districts in accordance with this Charter.
B. At such other times as may be necessary after the effective date of this
Charter, upon showing that a district varies in population by more than
15% from the average of all the districts, the Council shall reapportion
the districts in accordance with this Charter.
If an existing Council Member is removed from his district by any such
reapportionment, he shall continue to represent said district until the
end of his term.
A. Council Members shall receive compensation at the rate of $1,000 per
annum for the performance of their duties. At a time no less than two
years after the effective date of this Charter, and at any subsequent
time, the rate and basis of compensation for Council Members may be
changed by Ordinance of Council, provided such Ordinance be
approved by the Township electors at a referendum.
B. Council Members shall receive no other compensation, direct or
indirect, for the performance of their duties. They shall, however, be
entitled to actual reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
SECTION 206 CHARTER SECTION 208
C:11
SECTION 208. Prohibitions.
SECTION 209. Vacancies: forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies.
A. Holding other office. No Council Member shall hold any other Township
office or Township employment during the term for which he was
elected or appointed to the Council. No former Council Member shall
hold within two years after leaving office any compensated appointive
Township office created during his term as Council Member, nor shall
any Council Member benefit from any increase in the compensation for
an existing office other than Council Member, which increase was voted
during his term as Council Member.
B. Appointments and removals. The Council may express its views, and
fully and freely discuss with the Manager anything pertaining to
appointment and removal of administrative personnel and employees of
the Township; but neither the Council nor any of its members shall in
any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any administrative
personnel or employees whom the Manager or any of his subordinates
are empowered to appoint.
C. Administrative offices. All Township personnel who are subject to the
direction and supervision of the Manager shall be answerable to the
Manager, and neither the Council nor any of its members shall, either
publicly or privately, give orders to any such personnel, but to the
contrary shall deal with said personnel solely through the Manager or
his designate.
A. Vacancies. The office of Council Member shall become vacant upon his
death, resignation, legal certification of mental incapacity, removal
from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of this office.
B. Forfeiture of office. A Council Member shall forfeit his office if he:
(1) Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications for the
office prescribed by this Charter or by law.
(2) Violates any express prohibition of this Charter.
(3) Is convicted of a felony, or convicted of theft as described by the
Pennsylvania Penal Code or is convicted of a crime constituting
crimen falsi, or
(4) Fails to attend four consecutive regular monthly meetings of the
Council unless such absences are excused by a vote of 2/3
membership of the Council.
C. Filling of vacancies. Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of Council
Member, the vacancy shall be filled under the following procedures:
(1) A special election to fill the vacancy for the balance of the
unexpired term will be held at the next election, general,
municipal, or primary, which takes place 60 days or more after such
SECTION 208 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 209
C:12
SECTION 210. Organization; procedures.
vacancy occurs. The special election shall be conducted in
accordance with the election laws of this Commonwealth. The
person elected to fill the vacancy shall assume the office at the
first meeting of the Council following certification of the election
results.
(2) The Council shall, at its first regular or special public meeting after
the vacancy occurs, give notice that a vacancy exists and shall state
that it will make an interim appointment to fill the vacancy at its
next public meeting which occurs not less than 30 days from the
meeting at which the vacancy is announced. Following such notice,
the Council, by a majority of its remaining membership, shall
appoint a qualified elector of the Township, and in the case of a
vacancy in the office of a Council Member elected from a district, a
qualified elector of the district in which the vacancy exists, to fill
the vacancy until a duly elected successor is sworn into office.
(3) If the Council shall fail to fill the vacancy within 60 days after the
vacancy occurs, the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County,
upon petition of any individual Council Member, or upon petition of
five or more qualified electors of the Township, shall make an
interim appointment to fill the vacancy until a duly elected
successor is sworn into office.
(4) In the event that sufficient vacancies exist so that the Council lacks
a quorum necessary to do business, the remaining members of the
Council shall immediately make an interim appointment or
appointments to fill sufficient vacancies in the position of Council
Member to form a quorum. Thereafter, the remaining vacancies
shall be filled as otherwise provided herein.
(5) In the event that all the positions on the Council shall become
vacant, the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County shall
immediately, upon petition of the Township Manager or five or
more registered voters of the Township, make interim
appointments of as many Council Members as is necessary in order
to form a quorum to do business. Thereafter, the remaining
vacancies shall be filled as otherwise provided herein.
A. Organization.
(1) The Council shall organize at 8:00 p.m. the first Monday of January
of each year by electing one of their members as Chairman and one
of their members as Vice-Chairman, who shall hold such office at
the pleasure of the Council. If the first Monday is a legal holiday,
the organization meeting shall be held on the first day following
which is not a legal holiday.
SECTION 209 CHARTER SECTION 210
C:13
SECTION 211. Form of action by the Council.
Except as provided in Section 209C(4), the Council may take no official
action except at an open meeting in the presence of a quorum, consisting of
a majority of the total membership. All actions of the Council shall be taken
by the adoption of an ordinance, resolution, or motion. All legislation shall
be enacted by the adoption of ordinance. All ordinances and resolutions
must be in written form. Voting, except on procedural matters, shall be by
roll call vote, and the vote of each member of the Council shall be entered
in the record of the meeting. A majority vote of all members of the Council
shall be required to adopt an ordinance. Resolutions or motions shall be
adopted by a majority vote of all the members of the Council present, except
as otherwise provided herein.
SECTION 212. Actions requiring ordinances.
In addition to legislation or other acts required by law or by specific
provision of this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the Council
shall be by ordinance which:
(2) The Chairman, or in the Chairman's absence, the Vice-Chairman,
shall preside at Council Meetings, shall provide notice of all
Council meetings to its members and the public, and shall carry out
such duties as prescribed elsewhere in this Charter, Administrative
Code,1 or other ordinance.
B. Procedures.
(1) The Council shall meet regularly at least once every month at such
time and place as the Council may prescribe by resolution. Special
meetings may be held on the call of the Chairman or a majority of
Council Members with at least 12 hours notice to each Council
Member.
(2) All meetings shall be open to the public with notice to the public of
such meetings to be posted at the Township Building at least 12
hours in advance.
(3) (a) The Council shall establish rules for procedure for the conduct
of business at its meetings and shall provide for a public record
of its proceedings.
(b) The Council shall cause to be prepared in advance of each
meeting an agenda of matters to be considered by the Council
at the meeting and shall include in the agenda all items to
receive final action by the Council at that meeting. The agenda
shall be available at least eight hours prior to the start of the
meeting and shall be distributed to the public at the start of the
meeting.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Administration of Government.
SECTION 210 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 212
C:14
SECTION 213. Ordinances in general.
A. Adopt or amend an Administrative Code;
B. Establish, alter or abolish any Township department, office or agency;
C. Establish, levy and collect taxes, and increase or decrease the rate of
existing taxes;
D. Authorize the borrowing of money except for revenue anticipation or
emergency loans;
E. Exercise the power of eminent domain;
F. Provide for a fine or other penalty, or establish a rule or regulation for
violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed;
G. Grant, renew, or extend a franchise;
H. Purchase, convey, lease, or authorize the purchase, conveyance, or
lease of any real property;
I. Establish, alter, or amend any zoning ordinance, subdivision procedure,
land development, land use, or building regulation;
J. Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted.
A. Form. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in
the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more
than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. Any
ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall clearly
indicate the matter to be omitted or added.
B. Procedure. An ordinance may be introduced by any Council Member at
any regular or special public meeting of the Council. Except where
specifically provided otherwise in this Charter, an ordinance shall be
processed in the following manner:
(1) The proposed ordinance shall be given to the Manager and placed
on the agenda of the Council for introduction and initial
consideration at the next meeting of the Council.
(2) If approved initially by the Council, the Manager shall cause said
proposed ordinance to be posted in the Township Building in the
place set aside for the posting of ordinances, and an abstract of the
ordinance shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation,
at least seven days before the meeting at which the ordinance will
receive further action by the Council. Copies of any ordinance shall
be made available to the public at cost.
(3) The Council may thereafter adopt the proposed ordinance or it may
postpone action until a later meeting. The Council may amend a
proposed ordinance before final adoption, but any amended
ordinance must be again posted as set forth above and no final
SECTION 212 CHARTER SECTION 213
C:15
action may be taken until the amended ordinance has been posted
in accordance with this section.
(4) An ordinance finally adopted by the Council shall become effective
upon the 31st day following its enactment, except as otherwise
provided by this Charter, unless a referendum petition has been
filed during this period. During this period the ordinance shall be
posted in full in the Township Building in the place set aside for the
posting of ordinances.
C. Emergency ordinances. Notwithstanding the provisions of the
foregoing section, the Council may, in the event of a substantial public
emergency affecting the life, health, property and peace of the citizens
of the Township, adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but said
ordinances shall not levy taxes or authorize the borrowing of money
except as provided elsewhere in this Charter. An emergency ordinance
shall be introduced in the form required and shall be so designated and
shall clearly state the nature of the emergency in specific terms. No
prior posting of an emergency ordinance shall be required and the
Council may adopt an emergency ordinance at any public meeting in
which it is introduced. An emergency ordinance shall become effective
immediately, shall automatically stand repealed as of the 31st day
following the date of its adoption, but may be reenacted as provided
herein if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also
be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner
specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. An
emergency ordinance shall be posted as soon as possible after the date
at which it is enacted as shall any ordinance repealing an emergency
ordinance.
SECTION 213 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 213
C:16
ARTICLE III
Township Manager
SECTION 301. Appointment: qualifications; compensation.
The Council shall by a majority of its membership appoint a Township
Manager for an indefinite term and fix his compensation. The Manager
shall be selected on the basis of his administrative training, professional
qualifications, and experience. Council shall review the performance of the
Manager annually.
SECTION 302. Removal.
The Council may remove the Manager from office in accordance with the
following procedures:
SECTION 303. Powers and duties of the Township Manager.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township. He
shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all Township
affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. He shall have the
following powers and duties:
A. The Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its
members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for
removal and may suspend the Manager from duty for a period not to
exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to
the Manager.
B. Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the
Manager, he may file with the Council a written request for a public
hearing. This hearing shall be held at a Council meeting not earlier than
15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The Manager
may file with the Council a written reply not later than five days before
the hearing.
C. The council may adopt a final resolution of removal which may be made
effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its
members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the
preliminary resolution was delivered to the Manager, if he has not
requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he
has requested one. The Manager shall continue to receive his salary
until the effective date of a final resolution of removal.
A. He shall appoint and for cause suspend or discharge all Township
employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or
under this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter.
B. He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments and
offices of the Township, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or
by law.
SECTION 301 CHARTER SECTION 303
C:17
SECTION 304. Acting manager.
The Manager shall designate in writing, subject to approval of the Council,
an employee of the Township to exercise the powers and duties of the
Manager during his absence or disability. During such absence or disability,
the Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another
employee of the Township to serve until the Manager shall return or his
disability shall cease. In the event of a vacancy, the Council shall appoint an
employee of the Township to serve as Acting Manager until the vacancy is
filled.
C. He shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take
part in discussion but may not vote.
D. He shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the
Council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his
direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
E. He shall be responsible for the preparation of the annual budget and
submit it to the Council.
F. He shall submit to the Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
Township as of the end of each fiscal year.
G. He shall make such other reports as the Council may require
concerning the operations of the Township departments and offices
subject to his direction and supervision.
H. He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and
future needs of the Township and make recommendations to the
Council concerning the affairs of the Township.
I. He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or
may be required by the Council.
SECTION 303 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 304
C:18
ARTICLE IV
Financial Procedures
SECTION 401. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the Township shall begin on the first day of January and
end on the last day of December unless otherwise provided by law.
SECTION 402. Fiscal organization.
The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the Township
finances including the collection of taxes and payment of obligations. The
Council may provide for the appointment by the Manager, with the approval
by the Council, of a Finance Director who shall be directly responsible to
the Manager, who shall exercise the control functions in the management of
the Township finances.
SECTION 403. Submission of budget and budget message.
On or before the 45th day before the end of each fiscal year, the Manager
shall submit to the Council a budget for the ensuing year with an
accompanying message.
SECTION 404. Budget message.
The Manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in
terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies
of the Township for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features
of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial
policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such
changes, summarize the Township's debt position and include such other
material as the Manager deems desirable.
SECTION 405. Budget.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all Township funds
and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law
or this Charter, shall be in such form as the Manager deems desirable
or the Council may require. In organizing the budget, the Manager shall
utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classifications by fund,
organization unit, program, purpose or activity, and object. It shall begin
with a clear general summary of its contents; shall show in detail all
estimated income, indicating any proposed tax levy, and all proposed
expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall
be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated
income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. It shall indicate in
separate sections:
A. Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies as outlined in the
SECTION 401 CHARTER SECTION 405
C:19
SECTION 406. Capital program.
The Manager shall prepare and submit to the Council Members a minimum
of a three-year capital program at least two months prior to the final date
for the submission of the budget. The capital program shall include at least
the following:
SECTION 407. Council members' action on budget.
Administrative Code2 in terms of their respective work programs, and
the method of financing such expenditures;
B. Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed
by offices, departments and agencies when practicable, and the
proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure. The total
of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total estimated income
and available surplus.
A. A clear summary of its contents.
B. A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken
during the three fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting
information as to the necessity for such improvements;
C. Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules
for each such improvement; and
D. The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities or
equipment to be constructed or acquired. The above information may
be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements
still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition.
A. Notice and hearing. The Council shall cause to be posted the budget
and budget message in the Township Building in the place set aside for
the posting of ordinances, at least two weeks prior to the scheduled
public presentation of the budget. Notice of the availability of the
proposed budget and time and location of its public presentation shall
be placed in a newspaper of general Township circulation at the time of
its posting. Copies of the budget and budget message shall be open for
inspection and available at cost to the public during this time.
B. Amendment before adoption. At a meeting no less than one week after
the public presentation, the Council may adopt the budget with or
without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase
programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or
amounts except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for
estimated cash deficit, provided no amendment to the budget shall
increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the
total estimated income.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Administration of Government.
SECTION 405 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 407
C:20
SECTION 408. Public records.
Copies of the budget and capital program as adopted shall be public records
and shall be made available to the public at the Township Building during
normal business hours.
SECTION 409. Amendments after adoption.
C. Adoption. The Council shall adopt the budget on or before the last day
of the fiscal year currently ending. If it fails to adopt the budget by this
date, the amounts appropriated for current operations for the current
fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a
month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such
time as the Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts
specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall
constitute a levy of the taxes therein proposed.
A. Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the Manager
certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of
those estimated in the budget, the Council by ordinance may make
supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such
excess.
B. Emergency appropriations. In the event of a genuine emergency,
unanticipated at the time the operating budget was adopted, the
Council may make supplemental appropriations to meet the emergency.
To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to
meet the emergency, the Council may authorize the issuance of
temporary notes which shall constitute unfunded debt to be funded and
repaid in accordance with the Local Government Unit Debt Act (Act 185
of 1972)3. It is the intent of this Charter that operating expenses shall
neither be appropriated nor paid out of loan funds except to meet
genuine emergencies.
C. Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the Manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the
Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit,
any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any
other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action
as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that
purpose it may, by ordinance, reduce one or more appropriations.
D. Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the
Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation
balance among programs within a department, office or agency and,
upon written request by the Manager, the Council may by ordinance
3. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 8001 et seq.
SECTION 407 CHARTER SECTION 409
C:21
SECTION 410. Lapse of appropriations.
Every appropriation shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent
that it has not been expended or encumbered.
SECTION 411. Administration of budget.
At such times as the Manager shall specify, each department, office or
agency shall submit work programs for the ensuing fiscal year showing the
requested allotments of its appropriation by periods within the year. The
Manager shall review and authorize such allotments of its appropriations
by periods with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year.
He may revise such allotments during the year if he deems it desirable and
shall revise them to accord with any supplemental, emergency, reduced or
transferred appropriations made pursuant to Section 409.
SECTION 412. Limitations of tax rates.
Rates of taxation may not be increased by the Council beyond the maximum
rate that may be levied by Second Class Townships in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania as that rate is from time to time established by the General
Assembly, except by referendum.
SECTION 413. Debt limit.
The Township shall continue to be limited by the Local Unit Debt Act (Act
185).4
SECTION 414. Contracts.
The Manager may make contracts for lawful purposes, subject to general
law or this Charter. No contract shall be made or obligation incurred
unless there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in an appropriation
and that sufficient monies therefrom are or will be available to cover the
claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any officer
authorizing or permitting any contract to be made in violation of this
provision shall be subject to removal from office and liable to the Township
transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from
one department, office or agency to another.
E. Limitations: effective date. No appropriation for existing debt service
may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced
below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than
the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental
and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of
appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective
immediately upon adoption.
4. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 8001 et seq.
SECTION 409 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 414
C:22
for any loss incurred as a result of such action. The Council shall provide
in the Administrative Code5 the procedures for letting contracts which shall
not be inconsistent with general law or this Charter, and shall include as a
minimum the following provisions:
A. All contracts of the Township involving sums in excess of an amount
specified by Council by ordinance shall be in writing. The Manager shall
execute all contracts on behalf of the Township. Authorization for
contracts for the purchase, sale, lease or use of real estate, or for the
construction of public capital improvements shall be given by ordinance
and such contracts shall be signed by the presiding officer of Council as
well as the Manager. Any officer authorized to execute a written
contract shall submit the form of contract to the Township Solicitor for
approval before executing the contract.
B. The Council shall, by ordinance, establish a procedure for competitive
bidding to include definitions of amounts, publication and notice
requirements, deposit and bond requirements, conditions, terms, rules,
regulations, waiver and exceptions, as it shall from time to time deem
advisable and in accordance with general law and this Charter.
Competitive bidding shall not be required for:
(1) Labor or services rendered by any Township officer or employee;
(2) Contracts for labor, materials, supplies or services aggregating less
than the amount specified by the Council;
(3) Contracts relating to the acquisition or use of real property;
(4) Contracts for professional or unique services or supplies;
(5) Contracts for insurance and surety company bonds, except that the
use of competitive bidding for such items shall be encouraged
where practicable;
(6) Contracts for emergency repairs; and
(7) Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies
or political subdivisions.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no contract for materials,
supplies, labor, franchise or other valuable consideration, to be
furnished to or by the Township, shall be authorized on behalf of the
Township except with the lowest responsible bidder after competitive
bidding.
D. No person shall evade the provisions of this section of the Charter by
purchasing or contracting for materials, supplies, or services piecemeal
which transactions would, in the exercise of reasonable discretion and
prudence, be considered as one transaction amounting to more than the
amount as specified by the Council.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Administration of Government.
SECTION 414 CHARTER SECTION 414
C:23
E. The terms of contracts for the purchase of materials and supplies shall
not exceed two years.
SECTION 414 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 414
C:24
ARTICLE V
Township Administration
SECTION 501. General provisions.
The Council may by ordinance create Township departments, offices,
boards, and commissions and prescribe their organization and function. The
Council shall, by a majority vote of all Council Members, appoint members
of such boards and commissions that it creates.
SECTION 502. Administrative Code.
The Council shall adopt by ordinance an Administrative Code which shall
provide for administrative procedures not specifically enumerated in this
Charter or general law. This Code shall include, but not be limited to, the
following topics:
SECTION 503. Personnel practices.
The personnel practices section of the Administrative Code shall specify
that all appointments and promotions of Township officers and employees
shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by
examination or other evidence of competence. The Township Manager shall
be responsible for the administration of the personnel practices of the
Township. The personnel practices section, as a minimum, shall provide for:
SECTION 504. Township Solicitor.
A. Purchasing procedures.
B. Borrowing procedures.
C. Classification of accounts.
D. Tax collection procedures.
E. Personnel practices.
A. The classification of all Township positions, based on the duties,
authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate provision
for reclassification of any position whenever warranted by changed
circumstances.
B. Methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for
appointment or promotion.
C. Policies regulating disciplinary action, grievance procedures, reduction
in force, and removal of employees.
A. The Council shall appoint to serve at its pleasure a Township Solicitor
on the first meeting in January or as soon thereafter as practicable and
fix the compensation. He shall be a member of the Bar of the Supreme
Court of Pennsylvania and experienced in municipal law.
SECTION 501 CHARTER SECTION 504
C:25
SECTION 505. Township Engineer.
B. It shall be the duty of the Township Solicitor to:
(1) Serve as the legal advisor to the Council, the Manager, and other
Township officers, departments, and agencies. It is the intent of this
Charter that only one person shall be the legal adviser of the
Township, but the Council may authorize temporary assistants for
special purposes from time to time.
(2) Represent the Township in legal proceedings or hearings.
(3) Perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter or by
ordinance or general law, or as directed by the Council.
A. The Manager shall appoint a Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer, or engineering firm, to carry out the duties of Township
Engineer as needed. The compensation is to be fixed by the Council.
B. The Township Engineer, under the direction and supervision of the
Manager, shall supervise all engineering and other matters of the
Township as specified in this Charter or by ordinance.
SECTION 504 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 505
C:26
ARTICLE VI
Auditors
SECTION 601. Elected auditors.
SECTION 602. Powers and duties.
A. Composition. There shall be a Township committee of elected Auditors
consisting of three members who shall be nominated and elected by the
qualified electors of the Township at large.
B. Election and term. The terms of Auditors shall be four years beginning
at 8:00 p.m. on the first Monday of January following the year in which
they are elected, except for the first Auditors to serve under this
Charter who will serve for terms as provided hereinafter.
C. Eligibility. Only qualified voters of the Township of Middletown shall be
eligible to be nominated and to hold the office of Auditor. No Auditor
shall hold any other Township office or Township employment during
the term for which he was elected or appointed as Auditor.
D. Vacancies. Vacancies in the position of elected Auditor shall be filled by
the remaining members of the Committee of Auditors who shall appoint
an eligible person to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. If no
appointment is made within 30 days after the vacancy occurs, the
Council shall fill the vacancy.
A. The Auditors shall meet on the first Tuesday following the first Monday
of January of each year and organize by the election of a Chairman and
a secretary.
B. The Auditors shall audit, adjust, and settle the accounts of all offices of
the Township and may also audit, adjust, and settle the accounts of any
person, corporation, association or other entity receiving or expending
Township funds. They shall then prepare a report thereof, which shall
contain an audit of the accounts of the last fiscal year, and shall show a
complete statement of the financial condition of the Township showing
in detail the actual indebtedness of the Township, the evaluation of
Taxable property therein, the assets of the Township with the character
and value thereof, and the date of maturity of the respective forms of
funded debt thereof. This report shall be prepared within 90 days after
the close of the fiscal year and a copy filed with the Manager for
presentation to the Council at its next regular meeting, and shall be
made available to the public by request.
C. Any auditor refusing or willfully neglecting to aid in preparing and filing
the aforesaid report shall be subject to removal by the majority of the
entire membership of the Council.
SECTION 601 CHARTER SECTION 603
C:27
SECTION 603. Quorum.
A majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum necessary to carry
out the duties required herein.
SECTION 604. Irregularities.
The amount of any balance or shortage or of any prohibited or otherwise
unlawful expenditure which causes a financial loss to the Township shall
constitute a surcharge against any officer against whom such balance or
shortage shall appear, or who by vote, act, or neglect, has permitted or
approved such expenditure, to the extent of the actual financial loss
sustained by the Township. Any such surcharge shall, if no appeal is taken,
or after an appeal is finally determined, be entered by the Prothonotary
of Delaware County as a judgment against such officer and in favor of the
Township.
SECTION 605. Appeals from audit.
It shall be lawful for the Township or any taxpayer thereof, on its behalf,
or any officer whose account is settled or audited to appeal from the
settlement or audit as shown in the Auditor's report, to the Court of
Common Pleas of Delaware County, not later than 40 days from the date of
the presentation of the Report to the Council.
SECTION 606. Compensation.
An elected Auditor shall be compensated for work actually performed at
a rate of $4 per hour subject to an annual maximum of $800; provided
that the Council may, after the effective date of this Charter, provide by
ordinance for a different rate to apply to elected Auditors elected after the
expiration of the term of office of those in office at the time the ordinance is
enacted, and provided that the maximum annual amount may be exceeded
if authorized by 2/3 of the Council in the event that the Council desires to
have the Committee conduct any special detailed audits or investigations
beyond the normal duties of the position enumerated in this Article.
SECTION 607. Attendance of witness.
The Auditors of the Township, or a majority of them, shall have power to
issue subpoenas to obtain the attendance of the officers whose accounts
they are required to adjust, their executors, and administrators, and of any
person whom it may be necessary to examine as witnesses and to compel
their attendance. If any person shall refuse or neglect to appear or testify,
the Auditors shall petition the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County
to issue a subpoena to such a person and to require him to appear and to
testify before the auditors.
SECTION 603 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 608
C:28
SECTION 608. Auditors may administer oaths.
The Auditors, or a majority of them, shall have power to administer oaths
and affirmations to all persons brought or appearing before them; and all
persons guilty of swearing or affirming falsely shall be liable to indictment
and punishment for perjury as provided by law.
SECTION 609. Attorney to auditors.
The Auditors may employ an attorney whenever the same is deemed
advisable by a majority of the Auditors. The compensation of such attorney
shall be fixed by the Auditors and shall not exceed the sum payable to one
Auditor for the annual undertaking of his duties as set forth herein; unless
a larger compensation shall be allowed by the Council or shall be specially
allowed by a Court in connection with any proceedings before such Court,
and said compensation shall be payable by the Township out of its general
funds.
SECTION 610. Independent audit.
The Council may, if it deems necessary, provide for an independent audit of
all Township accounts by a certified public accountant who has no personal
interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Township or of its
elected or appointed officers. The Council may provide for more frequent
audits as it deems necessary. Copies of any such audits or financial report
shall be available for inspection by the public.
SECTION 608 CHARTER SECTION 610
C:29

ARTICLE VII
Initiative and Referendum
SECTION 701. General authority.
SECTION 702. Commencement of proceedings, petitioners'
committee: affidavit.
Any five qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the Manager an affidavit stating they will
constitute the Petitioners' Committee and be responsible for circulating the
petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses
and specifying the address to which all notices to the Committee are to
be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing
the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit of
the Petitioner's Committee is filed, the Manager shall have issued the
appropriate petition blanks to the Petitioners' Committee.
SECTION 703. Petitions.
A. Initiative. The qualified voters of the Township shall have power to
propose ordinances to the Council. If the Council fails to adopt without
any change in substance an ordinance so proposed, the electorate shall
have the opportunity to adopt or reject it at an election. Such power
shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance
relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of Township
officers or employees.
B. Referendum. The qualified voters of the Township shall have power to
require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance and, if
the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or
reject it at an election, provided that such power shall not extend to the
budget or capital program or ordinances relating to appropriation of
money or levy of taxes.
A. Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by qualified voters of the Township in number to at least 10% of
the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular
Township election.
B. Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and
style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each
signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be
followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or
have attached thereto throughout their circulation the ordinance
proposed or the title and a summary of the ordinance sought to be
reconsidered.
C. Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it
when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he
personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that
SECTION 701 CHARTER SECTION 703
C:31
SECTION 704. Procedure after filing.
Within 25 days after the petition is filed, the Manager shall complete a
certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars
wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate
to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail. A petition certified
insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be
amended once if the Petitioners' Committee files a notice of intention to
amend it with the Manager within two days after receiving the copy of his
certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within
10 days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary
petition shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C of
Section 703, and within five days after it is filed, the Manager shall
complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended
and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the Petitioners' Committee
by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or
amended petition is certified insufficient and the Petitioners' Committee
does not elect to amend it in the time required, the Manager shall promptly
present his certificate to the Council and the certificate shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
SECTION 705. Referendum petitions: suspension of effect of
ordinance.
When a referendum petition is received by the Manager, he shall so notify
the Council and the ordinance specified in the petition shall not become
effective until the sufficiency of the petition has been determined. If the
petition is finally determined to be insufficient under Section 704, the
ordinance shall become effective upon certification to the Council of this
insufficiency or 31 days after enactment of the ordinance, whichever is
later. If the petition is certified sufficient, the ordinance shall be placed in
suspension and shall not become effective unless or until the suspension is
removed. Such suspension shall terminate when the results of the election
on the ordinance in question are certified, or the Council repeals the
ordinance.
SECTION 706. Action on petitions.
When an initiative or referendum petition has been certified, the Council
shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner
provided in this Charter or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its
all signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be
genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be, and
that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text
of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
D. Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be
filed within 30 days after adoption by Council of the ordinance sought to
be reconsidered.
SECTION 703 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 706
C:32
repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without
any change in substance within 30 days or fails to repeal the referred
ordinance within 30 days after the date the petition was finally determined
sufficient, the Manager shall file the ordinance with the County Election
Board to be submitted to the voters of the Township at the next election,
primary, municipal or general, occurring not less than 90 days after the
petition is certified. If the Council adopts the initiative ordinance without
change in substance further proceedings may, be halted by filing with the
Manager a concurrence signed by at least four members of the Petitioners'
Committee.
A. Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in
the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the
Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the
one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall prevail to
the extent of such conflict.
B. Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred
ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
SECTION 706 CHARTER SECTION 706
C:33

ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
SECTION 801. Personal financial interest.
SECTION 802. Conduct of officers.
No candidate for office, appointment, or employment and no officer,
appointee or employee of the Township shall, directly or indirectly, give or
promise any person any office, position, employment, benefit or anything of
value for the purpose of influencing or obtaining the political support, aid or
vote of any person, under the penalty of being disqualified to hold the office
or employment to which he may be or may have been elected or appointed.
SECTION 803. Severability.
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the
Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of this Charter
A. Any Township officer or employee shall, within 30 days of taking office
and by March First each year of service, file with the Manager, as a
public record, a notarized full disclosure statement setting forth all real
estate located within the Township owned at the present time or within
the past two years, by himself or by any member of his immediate
family, or any ownership of, interest in, or employment by any business
interest located within the Township by himself or any members of his
immediate family at present or within the past two years; or ownership
of, interest in or employment by any business interest or corporation
which has done business to any appreciable degree with the Township
within the past five years.
B. In any case where a Township officer or official, elected or appointed,
knows or by the exercise of reasonable diligence could know that he is
interested to any appreciable degree, either directly or indirectly, in any
contract for the sale or furnishing of any personal property for the use
of the Township of more than $300 in any year, he shall notify the
Council thereof, and any such contract shall not be passed and
approved by the Council except by an affirmative vote of at least 3/4 of
the members thereof. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
cases where such officer or official is an employee of the person, firm or
corporation to which money is to be paid in a capacity with no possible
influence on the transaction and in which he cannot possibly be
benefited thereby, either financially or in any other material manner.
Any officer or officials who shall knowingly violate the provisions of this
section shall be liable to the Township upon his bond, if any, or
personally, to the extent of the damage shown to be sustained thereby
by the Township, to ouster from office, and shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine not exceeding $500, or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or
both.
SECTION 801 CHARTER SECTION 803
C:35
or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 804. Gender.
At all places in this Charter words used in a masculine gender shall include
the feminine.
SECTION 805. Bonding officers and employees.
The Council shall provide in the Administrative Code for the bonding of
all officers and employees who are responsible for the handling and/or
authorization of receipts, disbursements, goods and supplies. The premiums
for such bonds shall be paid by the Township.
SECTION 806. Effective date.
This Charter shall become effective on the second day of January 1978,
except as otherwise stated herein, and except for the transitional provisions
of Article IX which shall become effective upon certification of the adoption
of this Charter.
SECTION 803 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 806
C:36
ARTICLE IX
Transitional Provisions
SECTION 901. Council members.
SECTION 902. Officers and employees.
SECTION 903. Auditors.
The two Auditors in office whose terms extend past 1977 will continue in
office until the expiration of the terms for which they were elected, in which
case the remaining terms under this Charter shall be four years for one
Auditor and two years for the other Auditor. At the municipal elections in
1977, one Auditor shall be elected for a four-year term. At the expiration of
the terms of office of the Auditors under this Charter, their successors shall
serve for four-year terms.
SECTION 904. Departments, offices, boards and commissions.
A. Those two present Supervisors whose terms extend past 1977, and
those two Supervisors to be elected in 1975, whose terms will extend
past 1977, will remain in office as Council Members at Large until the
expiration of the terms for which they were elected. The first vacancy to
occur in the office of Council Member at Large after January 1, 1978,
shall not be filled and shall result in that office being extinguished. Any
vacancy occurring thereafter shall be filled as provided for by this
Charter. If by January 1, 1981, a vacancy has not occurred in the office
of Council Member at Large thereby causing that office to be
extinguished as set forth herein, then only one Council Member at
Large shall be elected in the municipal elections of 1981.
B. At the municipal election in 1977, a Council Member shall be elected
from each of the four districts established by this Charter. The Council
Members from odd-numbered districts shall be elected for terms of two
years. The Council Members from even-numbered districts shall be
elected for terms of four years. At the expiration of the terms of office of
the first Council Members from districts under this Charter, then their
successors shall serve for four-year terms.
A. Nothing in this Charter except as otherwise specifically provided shall
affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are Township
officers or employees at the time of the adoption of this Charter. An
employee holding Township position at the time this Charter takes full
effect, who was serving in the same or comparable position at the time
of adoption, shall not be subject to competitive tests as a condition of
continuance in the same position, but in all other respects shall be
subject to those personnel requirements in this Charter or as may be
required by the Administrative Code.6
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Administration of Government.
SECTION 901 CHARTER SECTION 904
C:37
SECTION 905. Continuance.
All actions and proceedings of a legislative, executive, or judicial character
which are pending upon the effective date of this Charter shall be
maintained, carried on, or dealt with by the Township department or office
appropriate under this Charter.
SECTION 906. Transition committee.
SECTION 907. Budget for calendar year 1978.
The Committee as provided for in Section 906 may assist the 1977 Board of
Supervisors in preparing the budget for the year 1978 in accordance with
the organizational structure and the uniform classification of accounts and
accounting codes to be provided in accordance with Section 502.
A. At the effective date of this Charter, January 2, 1978, all appointive
offices previously existing, except those listed in Subsection B hereof,
shall be abolished and the terms of all appointed officers shall
immediately cease and terminate. However, nothing in this section shall
be construed to abolish the office or terminate the terms of office of any
official or employee protected by a tenure of office law, and it is the
intent of this Charter that qualified officers and employees be
reappointed to the same or similar positions in the organization to be
set forth in the Administrative Code.
B. All appointed members of Boards, Commissions, Authorities and
Committees shall continue in office with the same or similar bodies for
the balance of the term of their original appointment. However, nothing
in this section shall be construed to limit the right of the Council to
create, modify, or abolish Boards, Commissions, Authorities, or other
Agencies and special Committees as provided in this Charter.
A. Within 40 days after certification of the adoption of this Charter, the
Township Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Committee to draft the
Administrative Code. The Administrative Code shall be adopted by
ordinance within 12 months after the certification of the adoption of
this Charter. It shall become effective upon the effective date of this
Charter as set forth in Section 806. Thereafter, it may be amended by
the normal procedures for the enactment of ordinance.
B. The said Committee shall consist of no less than seven or more than 11
members; and shall include the Township Manager, at least two
members of the Board of Supervisors, and at least three members of the
Government Study Commission. The Committee may also include other
electors of the Township.
SECTION 904 MIDDLETOWN CODE SECTION 907
C:38
The Code
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 907 CHARTER SECTION 907
C:39

ARTICLE I
Enforcement
[Adopted as Ch. X, Art. 1, of the 1976 Ordinance Book]
§ 1-1. Prosecution of ordinance violators; disposition of fines,
penalties and costs. [Amended 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 362]
Any violation or failure to comply with any provision of any Township
ordinance shall constitute a summary offense end the prosecution for every
such offense shall be according to Chapter 50 of the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. All fines, penalties and costs imposed when collected
shall forthwith be payable to the Treasurer of the Township.
§ 1-2. Arrests for violations of ordinances. [Amended 12-10-1984 by
Ord. No. 362]
Any person arrested for a violation of any ordinance of the Township shall
be entitled to give bail for his appearance, according to Chapter 50 and
Chapter 4000 of the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
§ 1-3. Commencement of proceedings. [Amended 12-10-1984 by
Ord. No. 362]
All proceedings for the violations of Township ordinances and for the
collection of fines and penalties imposed thereby may be commenced by
citation in accordance with Rule 51 of the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure.
§ 1-4. Enforcement officers. [Amended 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 362]
Summary prosecution for the violation of any ordinance of the Township
may be commenced by any member of a regularly constituted police
department or by any enforcement agent of the Township, including but not
limited to a dog officer, a dog catcher, a building officer, a zoning officer and
fire marshal.
§ 1-5. Arrests on view; complaints.
When any person is arrested on view, a complaint, on oath or affirmation,
shall be made immediately, whereupon like proceedings shall be had as
provided in the preceding section.
§ 1-6. Commitments pending hearings.
Any person arrested for the violation of a Township ordinance may be
committed to a lockup specified by the Township Supervisors, pending a
hearing or trial, but in case there is no suitable lockup in which to detain
prisoners, the person arrested may be committed to the County Jail.
§ 1-1 CHARTER § 1-7
C:41
§ 1-7. Commitments after hearing.
Upon judgement against any person by summary conviction, or by
proceedings by summons, on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to a
suitable lockup for a period not exceeding 10 days, or to the County Jail or
workhouse for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-8. General penalty.
If the fine or penalty for violation of a Township ordinance is not specified
in the ordinance or by the Laws of the Commonwealth, the fine shall be $10
for each offense.
§ 1-9. Collection of penalties.
In case the defendant has goods or property of any kind whatsoever out
of which the judgement and costs can be collected by execution or other
process, the Township may elect to collect the judgement and costs by such
proceedings.
§ 1-10. Payment of costs by Township.
When a prisoner shall be committed to any County Jail or workhouse
either for the nonpayment of a fine or penalty imposed for the violation
of any Township ordinance, the costs of the proceedings and the expense
of maintaining such prisoner during his confinement shall be paid by the
Township and the county shall not be liable for any such maintenance or to
any person for any costs in such proceedings.
§ 1-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-10
C:42
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 708]
§ 1-11. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 213 of the Township of Middletown Home Rule Charter,
the codification of a complete body of legislation for the Township of
Middletown, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 275, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance
of the Township of Middletown, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of the Township of Middletown," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-12. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Township Council of the Township of Middletown, and it is
the intention of said Township Council that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said
Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-13
below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-16 below,
shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as
provided in § 1-25 below.
§ 1-13. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Middletown and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-25 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-14. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-13 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-11 CHARTER § 1-14
C:43
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 6-23-2008.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-14
C:44
§ 1-15. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-14A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-16. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Township Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the
desired policies of the Township Council, and it is the intent of the
Township Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the legislation so changed had previously formally amended to
read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in
effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-25.7
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, references to the following
agencies or officials are updated as indicated:
7. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-16B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-28-2009 by Ord. No.
708." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-14 CHARTER § 1-16
C:45
§ 1-17. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-18. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-19. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Manager and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Township Manager, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Manager, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-20. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Township Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
(1) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(2) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department of
Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(3) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District Justice" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(4) "Soil Conservation Service" or "SCS" to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service" or "NRCS."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-16 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-20
C:46
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-21. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Manager for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and
all legislation adopted by the Township Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Township Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-22. Publication of notices.
The Township Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-23. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial
District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-20 CHARTER § 1-24
C:47
§ 1-24. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Township Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-25. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
31 days after September 28, 2009.
§ 1-24 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 1-25
C:48
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-25 CHARTER § 1-25
C:49

ARTICLE I
Township Organization8
§ 4-1. General framework.
The general framework of the Township government shall be as specified in
the Home Rule Charter of Middletown Township, hereinafter referred to as
the "Charter." This is summarized as follows:
§ 4-2. Self-executing provisions of Charter incorporated.
The self-executing provisions of the Charter are incorporated in this chapter
by reference with the same effect as if they were written herein.
§ 4-3. Discretionary powers implemented.
The discretionary powers of Council under the Charter with respect to
organization and procedures are implemented in the sections of this chapter
to follow.
§ 4-4. Compensation of elected officials.
The compensation of future elected officials (Council members and
Auditors) shall be set as provided in the Charter, Sections 207 and 606,
subject to the following supplemental provisions:
A. The Township Council, consisting of seven members, four elected from
representative districts and three elected from the Township at large
for four-year terms.
B. The elected auditors, consisting of three members elected from the
Township at large for four-year terms.
C. The Township Manager, appointed by majority vote of the members of
Township Council for an indefinite term.
D. The Township Solicitor, appointed annually by a majority vote of the
Township Council for an indefinite term.
E. The Township Engineer, appointed by the Township Manager, after
consultation with the Council, for an indefinite term. An engineering
firm or a qualified individual may be appointed Township Engineer.
F. Other officers, boards, and commissions may be established by the
Council, at its discretion, by ordinance and provided for in the
Administrative Code. Such positions are provided for in Articles III and
IV below.
A. Reimbursement of expenses. Council members desiring reimbursement
for expenses shall submit an expense statement in the form required by
Council, itemizing each item for which reimbursement is requested,
8. Editor's Note: See also the Organizational Chart at the end of this chapter.
§ 4-1 CHARTER § 4-4
C:51
and, except for mileage allowances for authorized travel, shall attach
to such statement an itemized receipt or receipts for the items for
which reimbursement is requested. All expense reimbursements shall
be within the appropriations made by Council for such purposes and
shall be subject to audit in accordance with the Charter, Section 604.
§ 4-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-4
C:52
ARTICLE II
Meetings of Council
§ 4-5. Organization meeting.
In accordance with the Charter, Section 210A, the Council shall organize at
8:00 p.m. the first Monday of January of each year, except that if the first
Monday is a legal holiday, the organization meeting shall be held on the
first day following which is not a legal holiday. The Chairman or the Vice
Chairman of the previous year's Council, if still in office, shall preside at
the organization meeting until new officers are elected as provided in the
Charter. Should neither the Chairman nor the Vice Chairman of the previous
year continue as a Council member, or not attend the organizational
meeting, the Township Manager shall serve as temporary Chairman for the
election of officers. The order of business shall be as follows:
§ 4-6. Failure to organize.
Should the Council be unable to organize at the annual organization
meeting for lack of a quorum, only essential business shall be conducted
until Council has been organized in accordance with the Charter.
A. An oath of office shall be required by newly elected officials and the
swearing in of new Council members should be the first order of
business.
B. The Chairman for the current year shall be elected by a majority vote of
Council members present, provided that a quorum is in attendance. In
the event that a Chairman cannot be elected due to a tie vote, the
Chairman or Vice Chairman from the previous year shall continue as
Chairman, at the pleasure of Council.
C. A Vice Chairman shall likewise be elected.
D. The Township Manager shall serve as Secretary of the Council and keep
its minutes and other records, provided that the Manager may select a
member of the administrative staff to serve as Assistant Secretary of
the Council and perform the clerical functions of the office.
E. The Council shall adopt, by resolution, a schedule of regular meetings
for the year, which schedule shall be posted prominently at the
Township Building. Any changes in the schedule of meetings shall be
posted at the Township Building at least 12 hours in advance of any
meeting date changed in accordance with the Charter, Section 210B(2).
F. When the organizational matters enumerated above have been
completed, Council shall proceed with the regular business of the
meeting which shall be set forth in the agenda in accordance with the
Charter, Section 210B(3)(b).
§ 4-5 CHARTER § 4-7
C:53
§ 4-7. Regular meetings.
Council shall meet regularly, at least monthly, according to the schedule of
regular meetings adopted at the annual organization meeting as provided
in § 4-5D above.
§ 4-8. Special meetings.
Special meetings may be held on the call of the Chairman or petition
of a majority of the Council members, with at least 12 hours' notice in
advance of such meeting delivered to the home address of each Council
member. In addition, attempts should be made by telephone to contact
Council members. An agenda of the matters to be considered at such special
meeting will be included in the meeting notice, and the business of the
special meeting will be limited to the matters stated in the notice and
agenda. Should any member of Council, other than the Chairman, desire
to call a special meeting against the wishes of, or in the absence of, the
Chairman, such member shall obtain the signatures of a majority of the
Council members to petition for such special meeting, stating the subject
of the meeting, which petition shall be delivered to the Township Manager.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Manager shall cause a notice of the
meeting, with agenda, to be delivered to the home address of each Council
member and a copy of same to be duly posted at the Township Building. If
the purpose of the meeting is to adopt an emergency ordinance as set forth
in the Charter, Section 213C, the requirement of at least 12 hours' advance
notice may be waived, provided that advance notice is provided as quickly
as possible consistent with the nature of the emergency.
§ 4-9. Rules of procedure.
Council's rules of procedure shall be in such detail as the Council chooses to
provide but will include the following provisions consistent with the Charter
and normal good practice to expedite the conduct of business:
A. Open public meetings.
(1) All meetings of Council, except executive sessions for purposes
authorized by general law, shall be open to the public and
reasonable opportunity shall be given for the public to speak on any
matter on the agenda for official action before official action is
taken. Unless specifically provided in the rules of procedure, the
Chairman may limit the time each person may speak, announcing
in advance the rule to be followed on this point, and giving equal
time to all who want to be heard, except that when a group of
persons desires to address Council on the same subject matter, the
Chairman shall request that one spokesman be chosen by the group
to address the Council, and may limit the number of persons
addressing the Council on the same matter so as to avoid
unnecessary repetition, so long as all opposing points of view have
had opportunity to present their position.
§ 4-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-9
C:54
§ 4-10. Official action of Council.
All official actions of Council shall be by the adoption of an ordinance,
resolution, or motion at an open public meeting in the presence of a
quorum, in accordance with the Charter, Section 211. The self-executing
(2) Any citizen desiring to speak formally to the Council on any matter
shall be given an opportunity to be heard by notifying the Township
Manager in writing at least 24 hours in advance of the time of the
meeting of the subject on which such citizen desires to be heard,
and the Township Manager shall make provision early in the
meeting for including such item in the agenda for the meeting. The
Council may limit in the rules of procedure the amount of time
granted for such expression of views, but a reasonable amount of
time shall be granted for such citizen to present the point desired
to be expressed.
(3) Citizens attending meetings of Council will be expected to follow
reasonable rules of decorum. Any person making insulting,
threatening or other offensive remarks against any person or
against public order and security while at Council meetings shall be
denied by the presiding officer further audience at the meeting,
and should such disruption continue, shall be denied attendance at
the meeting. Any ruling of the presiding officer in this regard may
be reversed by a majority vote of the Council members present on
motion of any Council member.
B. Council member participation.
(1) The Chairman shall be responsible for the orderly conduct of
business at each Council meeting and shall preserve order and
decorum at such meetings. The Chairman shall announce all
decisions of Council and shall decide all questions of order without
debate, subject to an appeal by any Council member. Any ruling by
the Chairman may be overruled by a majority of the Council
members present.
(2) Every member of Council desiring to speak shall address the Chair
and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine
remarks to the question under debate, avoiding all indecorous
language or reference to personalities. When two or more members
request the floor at the same time, the Chairman shall name the
one entitled to speak. A member of the Council, once recognized by
the Chairman, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is
for the purpose of calling such person to order. If a member of the
Council, while speaking, is called to order, that person shall cease
speaking until the question of order is determined.
(3) The roll of members shall be called alphabetically, except that the
Chairman shall be called last.
§ 4-9 CHARTER § 4-10
C:55
provisions of the Charter, Section 213, shall govern the consideration and
adoption of ordinances.
§ 4-11. Agenda for meetings.
A. In accordance with the Charter, Section 210B(3)(a), every public
meeting of Council, except a meeting to enact an emergency ordinance,
shall be conducted in the order of an agenda prepared in advance of the
meeting and which is available to the public at least eight hours prior to
the start of the meeting, and copies of which shall be distributed to the
public in attendance at the meeting. The Chairman, with consent of a
majority of the Council members present, may change the order of
business upon request or by his own initiative in order to expedite the
meeting or accommodate any parties participating in the meeting.
B. The Chairman of Council, or his designee, shall be responsible for
preparing the agenda for meetings. Council members desiring to have
items included in the agenda shall advise the Township Manager of
such desire at least two working days in advance of the time of the
meeting. No items shall be added to the announced agenda for the
meeting except by an affirmative vote of a majority of the total Council
members. The order of business for each regular meeting shall be as
follows:
(1) If no quorum is present, the Chairman shall declare a recess for a
period no longer than one hour, and if a quorum has not developed
by that time, the Chairman shall declare the meeting adjourned.
(2) Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
(3) Hearing from the public on any matters not included in the agenda
for the meeting on which any citizen has expressed a desire to be
heard.
(4) Reports of municipal officials, committees or advisory groups, the
order to be specified in the agenda.
(5) Unfinished business, with each item specified in order in the
agenda.
(6) New business, with each item specified in order in the agenda.
(7) Adjournment.
§ 4-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-11
C:56
ARTICLE III
Executive Organization
§ 4-12. Township Manager.
The Township Manager shall be the chief executive officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all
Township affairs placed in his charge. The Manager shall appoint and, for
cause, suspend or discharge all Township employees and appointive officers
provided by or under the Charter, except as otherwise provided by law
or the Charter, and shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments and offices of the Township, except as otherwise provided by
the Charter or by law. The Manager shall also carry out all duties specified
in the Charter, this chapter or other ordinance, and as Council may direct.
§ 4-13. Township departments. [Amended 7-27-1981 by Ord. No.
285; 1-25-1982 by Ord. No. 305; 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 484]
The following Township departments and department heads are hereby
established, with the functions and duties described in subsequent sections
below:
§ 4-14. Departmental organization.
A. Department of Administration and Finance: Director of Finance.
B. Department of Engineering: Township Engineer.
C. Department of Health: Health Officer.
D. Department of Recreation: Director of Recreation.
E. Department of Planning and Development: Director of Planning and
Development. [Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
A. Department heads shall be appointed by the Township Manager on a
basis of their qualifications to administer the functions and duties of
their respective departments. The Manager, after consultation with
Council, shall appoint such assistants and employees as are authorized
by formal action of Council of a formal Manning Table of authorized
positions.
B. Personnel actions. The appointment, training, promotion, conditions of
employment, disciplinary actions and other action dealing with
personnel administration shall be provided in Article VI of this chapter
and the Township of Middletown Personnel Manual (the "Personnel
Manual"). Adoption and subsequent updates of the Personnel Manual
shall be approved by resolution of Township Council. [Amended
2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
C. Code of Departmental Regulations. The departmental regulations shall
be consistent with the Charter, this chapter and other ordinances of
§ 4-12 CHARTER § 4-14
C:57
§ 4-15. Duties of department heads. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 800]
Department heads, under the direction of the Township Manager, shall
perform all necessary tasks relevant to their position; reasonable assigned
tasks by the Township Manager to fulfill Township goals and/or mission;
and provide all reports, documents and materials required to support the
completion of daily services.
§ 4-16. Department of Administration and Finance.
§ 4-17. Department of Engineering. [Amended 7-27-1981 by Ord.
No. 285; 1-25-1982 by Ord. No. 305; 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
Council, and general law. These regulations are subject to approval by
Council and detailed in the Personnel Manual. [Amended 2-11-2019
by Ord. No. 800]
A. The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the Township Manager on
the basis of qualifications for performing the duties of the office.
B. The duties of the Department Director shall include:
(1) Serving as purchasing officer according to the Charter, Section
414, and as provided in Article V of this chapter.
(2) Serving as budget officer and finance officer according to the
Charter, Article IV, and provided in Article V of this chapter.
(3) Serving as Tax Collector for the Township according to the Charter,
Section 402.
C. In performing the functions of Tax Collector, the Director of Finance
shall negotiate with the County Council of Delaware County, the Board
of School Directors of the Rose Tree-Media School District, banking and
other private agencies, as appropriate, the most efficient and least
costly method of handling the billing, collecting, and accounting for
taxes levied on the citizens and properties in the Township. The
procedural requirements of the Local Tax Collection Law for real estate
taxes9 and of Act 511, the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965,10 or of other
general laws of Pennsylvania will be followed to the extent that they are
not in conflict with the organizational arrangements established by the
Charter, Section 402, and this chapter.
A. The Township Engineer shall be appointed by the Township Manager, or
Township Council if the position is not filled by a merit, in-house staff
employee, on the basis of qualifications for performing the duties of the
office in accordance with Section 505 of the Home Rule Charter.
9. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 4-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-17
C:58
§ 4-18. Department of Health. [Amended 2-11-1991 by Ord. No.
484]
B. Within the Department of Engineering shall be a position designated as
"Fire Marshal," who shall be selected by the Township Manager. The
duties of the Fire Marshal shall include:
(1) Investigate and determine the cause of all fires in the Township.
(2) Initiate, with the appropriate law enforcement officials,
investigation and action on any suspicious fire with which criminal
activity may reasonably be suspected.
(3) Maintain records of all fire alarms and fire calls, organized by
classifications of types and location.
(4) Prepare and submit to the Township Manager, on a standardized
reporting form, a monthly report on all fires, investigations,
inspections and other activities of the office, which report shall
contain such data as required by the Township Engineer and
Manager.
(5) Completion of other fire safety projects and studies assigned
through the Engineer.
(6) The person designated to serve as the Fire Marshal shall also be
assigned to building and code enforcement duties as directed by
the Director of Planning and Development.
(7) Conduct fire prevention programs for community groups and
public education programs, including the publication and
dissemination of informational pamphlets, news releases and
articles within the appropriations available for such purposes.
(8) Maintain liaison with the officers of the Township volunteer fire
companies and encourage cooperative programs for the prevention
of fires and protective actions to be taken in the event fires should
occur.
(9) Such other duties as may be assigned to the Department by
Township ordinances or other laws, or as may be directed by the
Township Manager.
C. Within the Department of Engineering shall be a position designated as
"Road Superintendent," who shall be appointed by the Township
Manager on the basis of qualifications. The duties of the Road
Superintendent shall be defined by the Township Manager and
reviewed, assessed and established annually through the performance
review process.
A. The head of the Department of Health (the Department) shall be the
Health Officer, who shall be appointed by the Township Manager, or
Township Council if the position is not filled by a merit, in-house staff
§ 4-17 CHARTER § 4-18
C:59
employee, on the basis of his or her qualifications for the duties of
the office as set forth in this chapter and/or in requirements adopted
in accordance with this chapter. The Health Officer shall be certified
by the Pennsylvania Department of Health. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 800]
B. The duties of the Department shall include:
(1) Enforcing the health and sanitation ordinances and regulations of
the Township and general health and sanitation laws which are
applicable in the Township.
(2) Issuing, suspending and/or revoking permits and licenses pursuant
to such ordinances, regulations or other laws.
(3) Making such inspections of properties and places as are necessary
to enforce the health and sanitation ordinances and regulations of
the Township and other applicable health and sanitation laws, for
which purposes authorized Department employees are hereby
empowered to enter upon all property in accordance with
applicable law as may be necessary.
(4) Initiating such notices and legal actions which are authorized by
Township ordinances, regulations and/or other laws and which are
necessary to carry out the duties of the Department.
(5) Making recommendations and providing advice on formulating and
modifying Township ordinances and regulations relating to health
and sanitation matters either independently or when requested by
the Township Manager, the Township Council or the Township
Board of Health.
(6) Coordinating planning and enforcement activities with other
municipal jurisdictions and with related Township, county and
commonwealth agencies, including but not limited to the
Pennsylvania Department of Health and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, and providing such
reports and information as may be required from time to time by
such agencies.
(7) Maintaining files and records of all enforcement and regulatory
activities of the Department, and maintaining such other
recordkeeping as may be required for proper management and
direction of the Department.
(8) Preparing and submitting to the Township Manager and Township
Board of Health a monthly report on all investigations, inspections
and other activities of the Department containing any such
information and data as may be required by the Township Manager
or Township Council, or requested by the Township Board of
Health.
§ 4-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-18
C:60
§ 4-19. Department of Recreation. [Amended 1-25-1982 by Ord. No.
305; 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 565]
§ 4-20. Administration of functions other than by Township
departments. [Amended 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 285]
(9) Conducting public education programs for community groups and
organizations, including but not limited to publishing and
disseminating information pamphlets, news releases and articles,
within the budgetary appropriation available for such purposes.
(10) Overseeing activities of the animal control officer and coordinating
rabies control activities as required.
(11) Completing other such duties as may be assigned to the
Department by Township ordinances or otherwise, or as may be
directed by the Township Manager.
C. The Department shall be organized into such subunits and shall consist
of such supporting personnel as will provide for and permit the most
efficient and effective performance of the duties of the Department,
consistent with the personnel authorized by Council in the Township
Manning Table and within the appropriations made by Council. The
detailed organization of the Department and the assignment of specific
functions and duties to employees of the Department shall be provided
in the departmental regulations adopted in accordance with § 4-14 of
this chapter.
D. The expenses of the Department of Health shall be provided for in the
annual budget of the Township in the same manner as appropriations
for Township departments and subject to the financial regulations
specified in Article V of this chapter.
A. The head of the Department of Recreation shall be the Director of
Recreation, who shall be appointed by the Township Manager on the
basis of qualifications for the duties of the position.
B. The duties of the Department of Recreation shall be defined by the
Township Manager and reviewed, assessed and established annually
through the performance review process. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 800]
A. Township Engineer. The Township Engineer, appointed by the Manager,
shall be responsible for the supervision of engineering and related
matters of the Township and shall be responsible for general
supervision of the Department of Engineering of the Township,
including the review of development plans, road maintenance and
construction plans, code enforcement fire prevention and such other
matters as directed by the Township Manager or required by Township
ordinances or other laws. The above shall only apply if the position of
§ 4-18 CHARTER § 4-20
C:61
the Township Engineer is filled by an in-house, merit employee.
[Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
B. Township Solicitor. The Township Solicitor, appointed by Council, shall
serve as the legal advisor of Council, the Township Manager, all
department heads and all boards, commissions and agencies except as
may otherwise be required by law. It is the intent of Council that only
one legal representative shall serve as the legal officer of the Township
and all of its officers and agencies, except as may otherwise be required
by law and in cases where any individual officer or agency may be in a
position of adverse interest to the interest of the Township. Council may
authorize the employment of special counsel for special purposes from
time to time as needed.
C. Fire protection. The functions of fire protection in the Township shall be
the responsibility of the following fire companies: Rocky Run Fire
Company and Middletown Fire Company No. 1. Council may provide, in
a separate fire protection ordinance, regulations pertaining to the
operations of the volunteer fire companies which apply to the firefighting
services in the Township. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
800]
D. Boards and committees. The duties of Township boards, committees
and similar agencies as they affect the administration of Township
affairs are provided in Article IV below.
E. Parking enforcement officers. Parking enforcement officers shall be
appointed by the Township Manager pursuant to the provisions of §
4-12 and are hereby granted full law enforcement powers to enforce the
provisions of any Township ordinances regulating the parking of
vehicles, the institution of criminal proceedings through the filing of
citations, and the participation in any summary proceedings or appeals
involved in the enforcement of the provisions of any Township
ordinances regulating the parking of vehicles. [Added 11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 699]
§ 4-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-20
C:62
ARTICLE IV
Boards, Commissions and Similar Agencies
§ 4-21. Establishment by Council.
In accordance with the Charter, Section 501, Council may, by ordinance,
create Township boards and commissions and prescribe their organization
and function, consistent with any general laws that may apply to such
boards and commissions. The Council shall, by a majority vote of all
members, appoint members of such boards and commissions as it creates.
The establishment of boards and commissions required by general law, and
any established to provide administrative services or administer functions
of the Township government shall be provided in this chapter. Certain
boards, commissions, and related agencies are established in separate
sections of this article below.
§ 4-22. Temporary boards, commissions or committees.
Council, by resolution, may create, establish and appoint the membership
of temporary boards, commissions or committees made up of members of
Council and/or such other individuals as Council may choose to select, for
the purpose of making an investigation or advising Council on any matter
of concern. The resolution creating such temporary boards, commissions
or committees shall state the purpose for which same was created and
the anticipated date of termination. Members of such temporary boards,
commissions or committees shall serve without compensation for such
service and may authorize no expenditures except as may be specifically
authorized by Council for the purpose of engaging technical assistance and
publishing reports. Upon completion of the purpose for which established
or at the date set for termination, whichever comes first, unless the date
is specifically extended by resolution of Council, such temporary board,
commission or committee shall automatically be terminated.
§ 4-23. Limitations on membership. [Amended 9-24-1990 by Ord.
No. 476]
Except as may specifically be required by general law, no individual may
serve on more than one Council, Board, Commission or Committee, except
that two members of Council may be appointed to the Fire Apparatus
Committee. No member serving as a member of these bodies shall also
serve as solicitor for these bodies.
§ 4-24. Solicitors for Township boards, committees or similar
agencies.
Unless specifically authorized by Council or required by general law, no
commission or board may appoint an independent solicitor, but shall use
the services of the Township Solicitor. Council may authorize and set the
compensation of a separate solicitor for such agencies for special purposes
from time to time as circumstances may require.
§ 4-21 CHARTER § 4-25
C:63
§ 4-25. Township Planning Commission.
§ 4-26. Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 3-26-1990 by Ord. No.
464]
A. The Township Planning Commission shall consist of seven registered
voters of the Township appointed by a majority vote of the Council
members for overlapping four-year terms. The terms of the initial
members to be appointed shall be arranged so that no more than two
shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year. A
person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the balance of the
unexpired term of the member whose seat was vacated.
B. The Township Planning Commission shall be responsible for the
creation and modification of a long-range Comprehensive Plan for the
development of the Township subject to and as such Comprehensive
Plan may be amended and adopted by Council. The Commission shall
review all proposed changes in zoning and subdivision laws for
conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and shall make
recommendations concerning same to Council.
C. The Planning Commission, with the assistance of the Township
Manager, shall design administrative regulations for the conduct of its
business, which regulations shall be reviewed by Council, and, if
approved by Council, shall be included in the Code of Departmental
Regulations described in § 4-14 above.
D. The Township Manager, or an employee of his designation, shall serve
as Secretary to the Planning Commission and shall keep minutes and
other records of the Commission's proceedings, which shall be kept on
file at the Township office and available for public inspection at any
time during normal office hours.
E. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall
be entitled to reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance
of their official duties according to the schedule of reimbursed expenses
authorized to Council in accordance with § 4-4A above.
F. The Planning Commission may employ no personnel nor incur any
expenses other than authorized by Council. Employees authorized for
the Planning Commission shall be included in the authorized Manning
Table of Township positions and subject to the rules of personnel
administration contained in Article VI of this chapter. The expenses of
the Planning Commission shall be provided for in the annual budget of
the Township in the same manner as appropriations for Township
departments and subject to the financial regulations specified in Article
V below.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, Act 247 of
1968, as amended and reenacted, the Council, by a resolution, shall
appoint a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of five residents of the
§ 4-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-26
C:64
Township, appointed to overlapping terms of five years in such a
manner that the term of one member shall expire every year; provided,
however, that if a three-member Board is changed to a five-member
Board, the members of the existing three -member Board shall continue
in office until their term of office would expire under their current
appointment and Council shall appoint two additional members to the
Board with terms scheduled to expire in accordance with the provisions
of this section. A member appointed to fill a vacancy, which shall
be done promptly whenever a vacancy occurs, shall serve for the
unexpired portion of the member whose seat was vacated. Members
of the Board shall hold no other office in the Township. [Amended
3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 621]
B. Township Council may, by resolution, appoint at least one but no more
than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate members of
the Board in accordance with § 275-39B and D(5) of Chapter 275,
Zoning, of the Code of the Township of Middletown, which are
incorporated herein by reference.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be responsible for conducting hearings
and making decisions on appeals in zoning matters and on challenges to
the validity of any provisions of Chapter 275, Zoning, and on requests
for variances and special exceptions from the requirements of Chapter
275, Zoning, in accordance with provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.11
D. The Zoning Hearing Board, with the assistance of the Township
Manager, shall design administrative regulations for the conduct of its
business, which regulations shall not be inconsistent with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.12
E. The Township Manager, or an employee of his designation, may serve as
Secretary to the Zoning Hearing Board and keep minutes and other
records of the Board's proceedings, which shall be kept on file at the
Township office and available for public inspection at any time during
normal office hours.
F. Members and alternate members of the Board shall be compensated in
accordance with the annual schedule of salaries and wages adopted
each year by Township Council in the budget. In addition, members and
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be authorized
reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of their
official duties according to the schedule of reimbursed expenses
authorized by Council.
G. Council shall provide appropriations and authorize the employment of
personnel in such amounts and numbers as Council deems sufficient to
enable the Board to carry out its duties. To the extent possible, the
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 4-26 CHARTER § 4-26
C:65
§ 4-27. Park and Recreation Committee. [Amended 3-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 565; 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 604; 7-10-2000 by Ord. No.
604]
administrative and clerical duties of the Board shall be conducted by
regular employees of the Township government assigned to the Board
by the Township Manager. Any full-time employees authorized by the
Board shall be included in the official Manning Table of Township
positions authorized by Council and shall be subject to the personnel
administration policies set forth in Article VI. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall, during its first meeting in January of each year, appoint a
solicitor.
A. The Council, by a majority of the total members, shall annually appoint,
for a term of one year, a Park and Recreation Committee consisting of
seven members.
B. The duties of the Committee shall be to provide advice and
recommendations to the Township Council, Township Manager, and
Director of Recreation on park locations, acquisitions, layouts,
construction and operations, and on recreational programming
services. In the event of a vacancy in the position of Director of
Recreation, Council may authorize specific recreation programs and
delegate to the Park and Recreation Committee the supervision of
personnel and recreation programs within the appropriations
authorized by Council, and pursuant to the overall direction of
departmental staff and functions by the Township Manager. Any fulltime
employees authorized by the Council shall be included in the
official Manning Table of Township positions authorized by Council. Any
and all revenues derived from park and recreational activities of the
Township shall be remitted promptly to the Township Finance Office
and deposited in Township accounts as designated from time to time by
Township Council. All expenditures shall be handled in the manner
provided for general Township moneys in Article V below.
C. Members of the Park and Recreation Committee shall serve without
compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement of reasonable
expenses necessary in the conduct of their official duties according to
the schedule of reimbursed expenses authorized to members of Council
in accordance with § 4-4A above.
D. The Park and Recreation Committee may assist the Township Manager
and Director of Recreation in developing administrative regulations for
the conduct of park and recreational activities of the Township and for
the conduct of the business of the Committee, which regulations shall
be approved by Council and included in the Code of Departmental
Regulations described in § 4-14 above. For purposes of conducting
Committee business, a minimum of three members must be present,
and, in the event that only three members are present, any formal
recommendation of the Committee would require a unanimous vote. In
§ 4-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-27
C:66
§ 4-28. Library representatives.
§ 4-29. Sewer Authority.
the event that a quorum is present, any formal recommendation would
require a majority vote of the quorum present.
A. The Council, by a majority vote of the members, shall, on an annual
basis, appoint two Township residents to serve a term of one year on the
Board of Directors of the Middletown Free Library.
B. The duties of the library representatives shall be to serve as liaison
between the Council and the Middletown Free Library.
C. Library representatives shall serve without compensation but may be
authorized reimbursement of expenses necessary in the performance of
their official duties in accordance with the schedule of reimbursed
expenses authorized to members of Council in accordance with § 4-4A
above.
A. The Council, by a majority vote of the total members, shall, at the times
provided by law, appoint the five Township residents to serve as
members of the Middletown Township Sewer Authority, who are
appointed for overlapping five-year terms.
B. As an independent corporation, the Sewer Authority shall organize and
conduct its affairs according to the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945, as amended,13 and, with respect to the operation
of Middletown Township sewer facilities, in accordance with the lease
agreement with the Township and such rules and regulations as Council
may prescribe in connection with such lease agreement.
C. Under the annual operating agreement between the Authority and the
Township by which the sewerage facilities owned by the Authority have
been leased back to the Township but continue to be operated by the
Authority for the Township in accordance with the operating
agreement, the Authority shall be responsible for managing the sewer
system of the Township, including inspection and maintenance of the
system, billing for charges, collecting moneys due from sewer fees,
ensuring compliance with requirements for sewer connections, making
periodic review of the financial status of the system, and making
recommendations to Council for revisions of sewer rates, and capital
improvements when necessary.
D. The members of the Sewer Authority, as an independent corporation
under state law, shall receive no compensation from the Township but
may be compensated by the Authority in accordance with law.
E. The Sewer Authority is requested to assist the Township Manager in
developing administrative regulations pertaining to the operation and
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 4-27 CHARTER § 4-29
C:67
§ 4-30. Civil Defense Director.
§ 4-31. Environmental Advisory Committee.
maintenance of the sewerage facilities of the Township, which
regulations shall be approved by Council and included in the Code of
Departmental Regulations described in § 4-14 above.
F. The Sewer Authority is requested to maintain a Manning Table of fulltime
positions authorized to be employed in the administration,
operation, and maintenance of the Township sewerage facilities. Such
Manning Table, and all changes as they occur, shall be provided to the
Township Manager and included as an annex to the official Manning
Table of the Township government.
G. The Sewer Authority is requested to maintain statistical data on all
operations of the sewerage facilities of the Township which will be
useful in the analysis and management of the sewerage facilities. The
Authority shall provide monthly report to the Township Manager
presenting in a standardized format pertinent statistical data for the
month just ended, the year-to-date, and comparable data for the month
and year-to-date of the previous year. Such monthly report shall be
included with the monthly reports of Township departments in the
monthly reports to Council.
A. The Township Council, by a majority vote of the total members, shall
recommend to the State Council of Civil Defense a Township resident
for appointment as Civil Defense Director.
B. The appointment of a Civil Defense Director will remain in effect until
such time as a vacancy in the position may occur.
C. The Civil Defense Director shall be granted the powers to carry out the
duties of this office, as provided in the regulations of the State Council
of Civil Defense and the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency.
D. The Civil Defense Director shall receive no compensation for his
services but may be reimbursed for the expenses actually and
necessarily incurred in the performance of his duties.
E. The Township Council may, from time to time, appropriate funds for
expenditures to support the civil defense activities.
F. The Civil Defense Director shall prepare incident reports for Township
Council as they occur.
A. The Environmental Advisory Committee shall be composed of seven
residents of the Township of Middletown and shall be appointed in
accordance with the following procedure:
(1) All Committee members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
total members of Council.
§ 4-29 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-31
C:68
§ 4-32. Senior Citizens' Advisory Committee. [Amended 3-24-1980
by Ord. No. 244]
(2) Committee members' terms of office shall expire on the first
Monday in January following the last year of their term of office.
(3) Duly appointed Committee members shall serve a term of three
years, except that the initial appointment shall be so staggered that
the terms of approximately 1/3 of the membership shall expire each
year.14
B. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services,
but may be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily
incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
C. The Committee is to be advisory to and shall coordinate its activities
with the state officials, Planning Commission and other similar local
government agencies.
D. The Committee shall elect a member to serve as Chairman and a
member to serve as Secretary.
E. The Committee shall have the following powers:
(1) Identify environmental problems.
(2) Recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies for
the promotion and conservation of the natural resources and for
the protection and improvement of the quality of the environment
within the area of the Township.
(3) Make recommendations as to the possible use of open land areas of
the Township.
(4) Promote a community environmental program.
(5) Maintain an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including but not limited to flood-prone areas, swamps and other
unique natural areas.
(6) Advise the Township Council and other Township agencies with
regard to the acquisition of property, both real and personal.
(7) Undertake such environmental tasks as requested by the Township
Council.
F. The Committee shall keep and publish minutes of its meetings and
activities and shall prepare an annual report to the Township Council.
G. The Township Council may, from time to time, appropriate funds for
expenditures to support the functions of the Committee.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 4-31 CHARTER § 4-32
C:69
§ 4-33. Fire Apparatus Committee. [Added 9-24-1990 by Ord. No.
476]
A. The Senior Citizens' Advisory Committee shall be composed of seven
residents of the Township of Middletown and shall be appointed in
accordance with the following procedure:
(1) All Committee members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
total members of Council.
(2) Committee members shall be appointed annually, and their terms
shall expire on the first Monday in January following the year they
are appointed.
B. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services
but may be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily
incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
C. The Committee is to be advisory to and shall coordinate its activities
with the Township Council, Delaware County Council, appropriate
federal and state officials and other similar local government agencies.
D. The Committee shall advise the Township Council on the needs and
problems of the senior citizens in Middletown Township.
E. The Committee shall submit an annual report on its activities to
Township Council.
F. The Township Council may, from time to time, appropriate funds for
expenditures to support the activities of the Committee.
A. The Fire Apparatus Committee shall be composed of eight members
and shall be appointed in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) All committee members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
total members of Council.
(2) Committee members shall be appointed annually, and their terms
shall expire on the first Monday in January following the year they
were appointed.
(3) Three members of the Committee shall be appointed from the
public at large, two members of the Committee shall be appointed
from the Township Council, and one member shall be appointed
from each of the three fire companies serving Middletown
Township, upon recommendation of their respective company.
B. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services
but may be reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily
incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
C. The Committee is to be advisory to and shall coordinate its activities
with the Middletown Township Council, the three Township fire
§ 4-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-33
C:70
§ 4-34. Board of Health. [Added 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 484]
companies and appropriate county and state emergency management
organizations as may be necessary.
D. The Committee shall elect a member to serve as Chairman and a
member to serve as Secretary.
E. The Committee shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Develop and recommend for Township Council adoption a longrange
fire apparatus replacement schedule based on an equipment
mix projected to meet the needs of the Township.
(2) Conduct an ongoing review of financial resources available for
funding apparatus replacement and recommend a financing
strategy to meet the adopted replacement schedule.
(3) Annually review the adopted replacement schedule and financing
strategy and recommend adjustments where necessary.
(4) Review all proposed fire apparatus acquisitions to determine
conformance with the adopted replacement schedule and financing
plan.
(5) Serve as a formal liaison between the Township and its fire
companies to promote discussion and review of significant issues
concerning community fire protection services.
F. The Committee shall prepare and keep for public review minutes of its
meetings and activities and shall, through its Council members, provide
an annual report on its activities to the Township Council.
G. The Township Council may, from time to time, appropriate funds for
expenditures to support the functions of the Committee.
H. The Township Manager and Township Fire Marshal shall, ex officio,
serve as nonvoting members of the Committee.
A. Appointment of Board. The Board of Health (the Board) shall be
composed of seven members, at least one of whom shall be a reputable
physician with not less than two years' experience in the practice of the
profession. The members of the Board shall be appointed by a majority
vote of the Township Council for overlapping three-year terms, except
that at the first appointment, two members shall be appointed to serve
for one year, two for two years and three for three years. A person
appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the balance of the unexpired
term of the member whose seat was vacated. The members of the Board
of Health shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of their
official duties according to a schedule of reimbursed expenses
authorized by Council. The Board shall annually organize by electing a
Chairman and a Secretary from among the members of the Board.
§ 4-33 CHARTER § 4-34
C:71
B. Duties of Board.
(1) The Board of Health shall monitor the enforcement in the Township
of the laws of the commonwealth, the regulations of the State
Department of Health, the ordinances of the Township and any
other law, regulation or ordinance relating to health. The Board
shall make recommendations to the Township Council concerning
the adoption and enforcement of such additional ordinances, rules
and regulations as it may deem necessary to prevent the
introduction and spread of infectious or contagious diseases, to
abate and remove all nuisances which it shall deem prejudicial to
the public health and to preserve the public health. The Board may
recommend rules for the construction and maintenance of house
drains, wash pipes, soil pipes and on-site sewage systems and may
recommend all such other rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary for the preservation of the public health. The Board shall
have such other powers relating to health as may be delegated to
the Board by the Township Council.
(2) The Board shall also monitor the performance of the Department of
Health and shall provide recommendations and guidelines to the
Township Council, the Township Manager, and the Health Officer
with respect to the duties and functions of the Department of
Health in order to ensure that the following points of a
comprehensive public health program are being considered and
addressed in the Township:
(a) Assessment of community health needs, involving the
collection, review and interpretation of data to identify
community health needs; and coordination of services to meet
the identified health needs of the population in an effective and
efficient manner.
(b) Conduct of a comprehensive food service program, including
inspections of food establishments and training of and
consultation with operators and personnel of food
establishments, designed to prevent food-borne illness.
(c) Investigation and follow-up of public health complaints,
involving responding to requests for services which have
public health significance, providing consultation and taking
actions to eliminate conditions found to be health hazards.
(d) Communicable disease investigation and reporting, involving
serving as a liaison between the medical community and the
public health system for reporting purposes; preventing
disease transmission through timely, effective and efficient
control measures; and participating in epidemiological
investigations.
(e) Health information provision and referral, involving providing
information to the community to have the residents assume a
§ 4-34 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-34
C:72
§ 4-35. Cable Television Advisory Committee; community TV
workshops.15 [Added 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 708]
greater responsibility for disease prevention and health
promotion; utilizing community health services and resources
appropriately; and participating in community health decisionmaking.
C. Administration. The Secretary of the Board shall keep minutes of the
meetings of the Board. The Board may not employ any personnel or
incur any expenses other than those authorized by Council. Employees
authorized for the purpose of conducting a municipal health program
shall be included in the authorized Manning Table of Township
positions, and such employees and their appointment shall be subject to
the rules of personnel administration contained within the Home Rule
Charter and Article VI of this chapter. The expenses of the Board of
Health shall be provided for in the annual budget of the Township in the
same manner as appropriations for Township departments and subject
to the financial regulations specified in Article V of this chapter.
A. The Township Council shall form a committee to be known as the Cable
Television Advisory Committee (CTAC). The CTAC shall consist of seven
members appointed by the majority vote of the Township Council.
Members of the CTAC shall be appointed for terms of four years except
at the time of the first appointments, at which time three shall be
appointed to serve for a two-year term, two shall be appointed to serve
for a three-year term, and two shall be appointed to serve for a fouryear
term.
B. In an advisory capacity, the CTAC shall endeavor to promote and
develop the best use by the community of the cable television and
communications services offered by the franchisee under this chapter,
and in particular the CTAC shall seek to stimulate the use of the public,
governmental, and educational access channels.
C. From time to time, on its own initiative or upon certification by the
chairman of the CTAC that sufficient demand therefor exists, the
franchisee shall, at its expense, organize community television
workshops for the purpose of providing members of the community
with training in the use of television equipment.
D. The CTAC may, from time to time, appoint such temporary
subcommittees as it deems advisable. Members of subcommittees need
not be members of the CTAC.
15.Editor's Note: This section, which was enacted 4-23-1981 by Ord. No. 273 and amended
2-22-1982 by Ord. No. 307, formerly appeared as Section 311 of Chapter III (see Ch. 81,
Cable Television).
§ 4-34 CHARTER § 4-35
C:73

ARTICLE V
Financial Management
§ 4-36. Responsibility of Director of Finance. [Amended 2-11-2019
by Ord. No. 800]
The Director of Finance shall be responsible for all functions of financial
management in accordance with the Charter, Article IV, this chapter and
other ordinances and resolutions of Council not inconsistent therewith,
and as may be required by general law. Responsibilities and reasonable
assignment of additional required tasks shall be established by the
Township Manager annually through the performance review process.
§ 4-37. Duties of Director of Finance. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 800]
The duties of the Director of Finance shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
A. Maintain accounting and related records in the form required by
Council and general law.
B. Prepare the annual budgets and financial programs of the Township in
the form required by Council and general law.
C. Provide for the proper recording of all financial transactions and
related activities of the Township and be responsible for the
preservation of financial records.
D. Serve as purchasing officer of the Township and certify the availability
of funds on all contracts, and approve no contract or expenditure which
would exceed the unencumbered balance of appropriations in any
account on which expenditure controls are maintained.
E. Authorize disbursement of Township moneys only when it has been
determined that goods and services to be paid for have been properly
received or performed, and countersign all orders of disbursement.
F. Receive, give receipt for, and deposit to the proper funds and accounts
of the Township all moneys due and paid to the Township.
G. Prepare periodic financial reports, at least monthly, which will show
receipts by major sources and expenditures and encumbrances by
major objects of expense for each department and operating unit of the
Township government. Such reports still show such receipts,
expenditures and encumbrances, in relation to the budgeted estimates
and appropriations, as originally enacted and as amended to date, and
in relation to a pro rata distribution for the year-to-date on a basis of
estimated cash flow.
§ 4-36 CHARTER § 4-37
C:75
§ 4-38. Operational procedures provided in departmental
regulations.
The Township Manager shall provide for the delegation of specific functions
and duties to such subordinate personnel as are authorized by Council,
in such manner as to make the most efficient use of personnel and other
resources available and in a manner which delegates to different personnel
or units functions of financial management which should be separated in
maintaining sound financial controls and good principles of management.
Detailed operating procedures, consistent with the Charter, this chapter or
other ordinance, and general law, shall be provided in the departmental
regulations.
§ 4-39. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the Township shall be the calendar year.
§ 4-40. Classification of accounts.
The classification of accounts used in the Township accounting system
shall be in accordance with the principles and in reasonable conformity
to the classification in the Accounting Manual prepared and provided by
the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development in
order to facilitate the preparation of annual budgets and financial reports in
the form required by law. Such classification shall be followed in all monthly,
quarterly and annual reports prepared for Council, with such supplemental
details as Council may require.
§ 4-41. Appropriations.
H. Provide, in conjunction with monthly financial reports, a statement of
cash flow on a monthly basis through the month currently ended and as
projected for the succeeding three months.
I. Monitor Township revenues and expenditures in relation to budget
estimates and recommend to Council supplementary appropriations or
reductions of appropriations when it appears that actual circumstances
permit or require modifications of appropriations to maintain a
balanced budget and adequate appropriations to the appropriate
accounts to meet anticipated expenditures and changes in program.
J. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Charter, this
chapter or other ordinance, by law, or as may be directed by Council.
A. All appropriations in the annual budget as originally adopted and
amended shall be made and controlled in lump sum amounts according
to the following objects of expenditure for each department, major
operating unit, office, board or commission of the Township:
(1) Personal services.
(2) Contractual services.
§ 4-37 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-41
C:76
§ 4-42. Annual budget and capital program.
The annual budget and capital program of the Township shall be prepared,
advertised, adopted and executed in conformance with the Charter, Article
IV, which is self-executing except for the supplemental details provided
in §§ 4-40 and 4-41 above. The Township Manager shall provide, in the
departmental regulations for the Department of Administration and
Finance, the detailed procedures, assignments of duties and forms to be
used in budget preparation and execution.
§ 4-43. Encumbrance accounting.
The Director of Finance shall establish and maintain a system for
accounting for encumbrances. The monthly financial reports of the
Township shall show the encumbrances as well as expenditures charged
against appropriations, and the unencumbered as well as the unexpended
balances. All encumbrances will be closed out at the end of the fiscal
year, sufficient amounts appropriated to the proper accounts in the budget
of the succeeding year to cover encumbrances carried over, and the
encumbrances to the appropriate appropriations shall be set up when
opening the books for the succeeding fiscal year.
§ 4-44. Accounting for receipts.
The Director of Finance shall be responsible, directly or through such
subordinate employees as may be specified in the departmental regulations,
for receipt of all moneys received by the Township. Such receipts shall be
deposited promptly to the credit of the appropriate fund of the Township
in such depositories as shall be designated by Council. Council shall by
resolution designate the depositories to serve as custodian of Township
(3) Materials, supplies, and equipment.
(4) Debt service.
(5) Capital outlay.
B. The annual budget and financial reports shall document the estimated
and actual expenditures of the detailed items composing the major
object classifications above, but appropriations shall be made and
controlled by the major objects. The Township Manager and Director of
Finance shall maintain administrative controls over the detailed items
within the major objects but shall recommend to Council formal
amendment of the budget when such is necessary to authorize an
increase or decrease in any of the major objects for any department,
major operating unit, office, board or commission of the Township.
C. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year, but sufficient
appropriation shall be provided in the budget for the following year to
provide for the completion of or payment for projects and
encumbrances carried over to the following fiscal year.
§ 4-41 CHARTER § 4-44
C:77
funds. Receipts shall be prepared at least in duplicate and shall indicate
the source and name of the party or agency from whom the moneys were
received and the account code and title to which the receipt is to be credited
in the accounting records of the Township.
§ 4-45. Contracts. [Amended 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 437]
A. In accordance with the Charter, Article IV, Section 414, the Township
Manager shall execute all contracts on behalf of the Township.
B. Contracts involving the purchase, sale, lease or use of real estate or for
the construction of public capital improvements shall be authorized by
ordinance of Council, and such contracts shall be signed by the
Chairman of Council as well as the Manager.
C. Contracts requiring competitive bidding shall be handled in accordance
with the provisions of § 4-46 below.
D. Administration of contracting, other than that requiring competitive
bidding as provided in § 4-46 below, shall be handled in accordance
with the following procedures:
(1) The Finance Director shall serve as purchasing officer for the
Township, directly or through such subordinates as may be
provided in the departmental regulations established for the
Department of Administration and Finance.
(2) The Township Manager shall provide, in the departmental
regulations, detailed procedures for the processing of purchases
and the assignment of duties and forms relative thereto to
appropriate personnel.
(3) No contract shall be made or obligation incurred unless there is a
sufficient unencumbered balance in the appropriate appropriation
to which the expenditure will be properly charged. The Director of
Finance will certify on all contracts and purchase orders that
sufficient unencumbered balance is available. If a contract and/or
purchase order is submitted to the Finance Director for which
sufficient unencumbered balance is not available, approval will be
withheld until Council has formally amended the budget to provide
a sufficient appropriation.
(4) All contracts for the employment of personnel shall be made by the
Manager in accordance with the official Manning Table approved
by the Township Council.
(5) Contracts in writing.
(a) All contracts for the purchase of materials, equipment and
supplies or for maintenance, repairs or construction shall be in
writing and reflected in the issuance of a purchase order.
Purchases for items or projects which do not exceed in total
§ 4-44 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-45
C:78
§ 4-46. Competitive bidding. [Amended 1-25-1982 by Ord. No. 304;
4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 437; 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 728; 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 802]
All contracts for the purchase of materials, equipment and supplies or for
maintenance, repairs or construction, the total cost of which exceeds a base
amount of $18,500, subject to adjustment in accordance with adjustments
authorized under the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 68102(b.1),
except those for which competitive bidding shall not be required in
accordance with the Charter, Article IV, Section 414B, shall be made only
to the lowest responsible bidder after receipt of one or more sealed bids in
accordance with the following procedures:
$10,000 may be authorized by the Manager without formality
other than provided herein, so long as the purchase is for
lawful purposes and within the appropriations for such
purposes provided by Council. Purchases in amounts in excess
of $10,000, and not requiring competitive bidding shall be
made by the Township Manager only after solicitation of two
or more written quotations, which quotations shall be retained
in the records of the Township in relation to the purchase
order for the contract which is eventually let, and after formal
approval of Township Council at a public meeting, which
approval shall be noted in the minutes of the meeting.
[Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 728]
(b) All other contracts, including those contracts for professional
or unique services, shall be in writing.
(6) The terms of contracts for the purchase of materials and supplies
shall not exceed two years.
(7) Any officer authorized to execute a written contract shall submit
the form of contract to the Township Solicitor for approval before
executing the contract. For routine purchases for the normal
services of the Township, approval of the form of purchase order
shall be considered compliance with this requirement of the
Charter, Section 414A.
(8) No person shall evade the provisions of this section, nor the
competitive bidding requirements in § 4-46 below, by purchasing or
contracting for materials, supplies or services piecemeal, which
transaction would, in the exercise of reasonable discretion and
prudence, be considered one transaction amounting to more than
the amount as specified by Township Council.
A. Bidders list. The Township Manager shall establish and maintain, by
categories of products or services, a bidders list containing those
contractors who have expressed a potential desire to compete or who
by past performance demonstrated such capability. The Manager shall
include in the departmental regulations the procedure for maintaining
§ 4-45 CHARTER § 4-46
C:79
the list current. A copy of bid solicitations as advertised shall be mailed
to each contractor providing such products or services at the time
advertisements for bids are placed.
B. Filing of specifications. Specifications and, where applicable, plans
required for execution of the contract shall be complete and available in
the Township Building preceding and during advertising for bids.
C. Advertising. Advertising for bids on all contracts for which competitive
bidding is required shall be processed according to the following
procedures:
(1) Appropriate advertising shall be placed at least once in a regularly
published newspaper in general circulation in the Township.
Advertising may also be published in additional general circulation
newspapers or trade journals as may be warranted by the nature of
the contract. Advertising may also be placed more than once. The
Township Manager shall determine the additional advertising as
may be warranted by the contract.
(2) Advertising shall appear no later than 15 days prior to the day of
bid opening for contracts for supply of materials which are
standard commercial or catalog items. For contracts which require
the design, development, fabrication or installation of nonstandard
items, the bid advertising shall appear at least 45 days prior to bid
opening.
(3) The advertisement shall specify as a minimum:
(a) Location of the available specifications.
(b) Bonding requirements for bidders.
(c) Location and timing for delivery of sealed bids.
(d) Location and timing for bid opening.
D. General requirements for bidders. The following general requirements
will be established for bidders:
(1) Familiarity with proposed work. Before submitting a proposal, the
bidder shall carefully examine drawings and specifications, visit
the site when applicable, be cognizant of all laws, ordinances and
regulations, wage rates and labor conditions in the area of
operation affecting the contract or the work and shall include in the
proposal form a sum to cover the cost of all items, implied or
required, to attain the completed conditions required by the
contract.
(2) Laws and ordinances. All regulations and ordinances of
Middletown Township and laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States of America shall be observed by
the contractor as far as they apply to the contract. The contractor
§ 4-46 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-46
C:80
shall file for necessary Township permits, but the fee for required
Township permits may be waived by the Township as a condition of
the contract.
(3) Preparation of proposals. All bids must be submitted on forms
prepared by the Township and shall be subject to all requirements
and specifications, drawings, where applicable, and the
information and other instructions to bidders.
(4) Bids in force for 60 days. All bids must remain in force for 60 days
after the date of the opening of bids and may be accepted or
rejected at any time prior to the expiration of this period.
E. Bonds required. The following bonds are required for a bidder and
subsequently of the successful bidder:
(1) Bid bond. Each sealed bid shall be accompanied by a certified
check, bank cashier's or treasurer's check or a bid bond with
corporate surety satisfactory to the Township, in an amount equal
to not less than 10% of the bid. In the case of any materials,
equipment or supplies to be acquired by the Township by chattel
mortgage, bailment lease, conditional sale contract or other
security agreement, the total cost shall be the total amount payable
pursuant thereto throughout the term thereof. No bid will be
considered unless it is so guaranteed. The bid guarantee shall
insure the execution of the contract by the bidder, and only bid
bonds which are made on the regular bid bond form will be
accepted, all as required by the specifications.
(2) Performance, maintenance and labor and material payment bonds.
(a) The successful bidder must deliver to Middletown Township, in
exchange for the bid security, the following bonds:
[1] In the case of contracts for maintenance, repairs or
construction, the total cost of which exceeds $18,500, a
performance bond executed by one or more surety
companies satisfactory to the Council and authorized to do
business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, at 100%
of the contract price for faithful performance of the
contract, and 10% of the contract price for maintenance of
the work performed under the contract for a period of one
year from the date of completion and acceptance of the
work performed under the contract.
(b) Such bonds shall be in the form of bonds included in the
specifications and shall bear the same date as the date of the
contract. The failure of any successful bidder to execute
required bonds within 20 days after the prescribed forms are
presented for signature, or within such extended period as the
Township Council may grant, shall constitute a default, and the
Township Council may either award the contract to the next
§ 4-46 CHARTER § 4-46
C:81
responsible bidder or readvertise for bids and may charge
against the bidder the difference between the amount of this
bid and the amount for which a contract for the work is
subsequently executed, irrespective of whether the amount
thus due exceeds the amount of the bid guaranty.
F. Bid opening. The following procedures apply to the receipt, opening
and acceptance or rejection of bids:
(1) Time for receiving bids. Bids received prior to the time of opening
will be securely kept, unopened. Township officials whose duty it is
to open them will decide when the specified time has arrived, and
no bid received thereafter will be considered. No responsibility will
attach to Township officials for the premature opening of a bid not
properly addressed and identified.
(2) Receipt of bids. Sealed bids will be received by Middletown
Township at the office of the Township Manager until the date and
time specified for the contract. No bid may be considered if
received after that time, nor may any bid be modified or withdrawn
after that time except as provided below. The award of bids shall be
made only by public announcement at the meeting at which bids
are received, or at a subsequent meeting, the time and place of
which shall be publicly announced when bids are received. If for
any reason one or both of the above meetings shall not be held, the
same business may be transacted at any subsequent meeting if at
least five days' notice thereof shall be published in a newspaper
published or circulating generally in the Township, the meeting
date is properly posted at the Township office, and if each bidder
has been notified by mail of the change of date.
(3) Rejection of bids.
(a) In accordance with the Charter, Section 414C, the award shall
be made to the lowest responsible bidder. "Responsible" shall
be interpreted to signify that the following conditions are met:
the bonding requirements have been met; all imposed general
requirements have been met; the bidder has demonstrated
competence for performing the work; and the submitted bid is
compliant with the proposed statement of work.
(b) If none of the bidders meet the above requirements, the
Township may reject all bids and reinitiate the bidding process.
The Township officials evaluating the bids shall interpret the
above conditions and shall include the results of this evaluation
in their recommendation to Council.
G. Withdrawal of bids. A bidder may withdraw his bid under the following
conditions:
(1) If the bidder or his authorized representative shall present a
written request not later than the hour set for the opening of bids,
§ 4-46 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-46
C:82
§ 4-47. Sale of Township property. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
801]
the bid shall be withdrawn and, at the time of opening proposals,
the bid will be returned to him unread.
(2) If after opening of bids a low bidder submits credible evidence that
the low bid was the result of an unintentional and substantial
arithmetical error or unintentional omission of required work
elements, the bidder may request permission to withdraw the bid,
and such request will be processed by the Township in accordance
with the Public Contracts, Bids, Withdrawal Law, Act No. 4 of 1974
as amended,16 or other general law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Township Manager shall include in the
departmental regulations the procedures to be followed in
processing a request for withdrawal of a bid under these
conditions.
H. Discrimination in employment. All contracts executed by the Township,
or officer thereof, which involve the construction or doing of any work
involving the employment of labor, shall contain a provision that the
contractor shall accept and adhere to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act.17
I. Workers' compensation. All contracts executed by the Township, or an
officer thereof, which involve the construction or doing of any work
involving the employment of labor shall contain a provision that the
contractor shall accept, insofar as the work covered by any such
contract is concerned, the provisions of the Pennsylvania Workers'
Compensation Act,18 and said contractor will insure his liability
thereunder or file with the Township with which the contract is made a
certificate of exemption from insurance from the Bureau of Workers'
Compensation of the Department of Labor and Industry.
J. Interest of Township officials in contracts. In accordance with the
Charter, Article VIII, Section 801B, in any case where a Township
officer or official, elected or appointed, knows or by the exercise of
reasonable diligence could know that he is interested to any
appreciable degree, either directly or indirectly, in any contract for the
sale or furnishing of any personal property for the use of the Township
of more than $300 in any year, he shall notify the Council thereof, and
no such contract shall be passed and approved by Council except by an
affirmative vote of at least 3/4 of the total number of members of
Council.
A. The Township Manager is authorized to sell, on behalf of the Township,
excess or unneeded personal property of the Township when the value
16.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 1601 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
18.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 4-46 CHARTER § 4-47
C:83
§ 4-48. Gifts to Township.
No gift of real estate, or any interest in real estate, to the Township may be
accepted without specific approval of a majority vote of the total members
of Council.
§ 4-49. Disbursements.
All disbursements, except those from petty cash, shall be by check drawn
on the proper account of the Township. Each check shall be signed by
two officers, including the Township Manager or his designee and the
Finance Director or his designee. The Finance Director shall authorize
disbursement of Township moneys only after determining that all goods and
services contracted for have actually been received or performed, and that a
sufficient unexpended balance exists in the appropriation account to which
the disbursement is to be charged.
of the personal property as estimated by the Township Manager is
less than $5,000. Sale of excess or unneeded personal property of the
Township estimated by the Township Manager to have a value equal to
or exceeding $5,000 shall receive prior authorization by the Council at
a public meeting.
B. All excess or unneeded personal property of the Township shall be sold
by auction, including by and through online auction websites, made
available to the public and awarded to the highest bidder. Payment shall
be made in accordance to the rules and policies of the auctioneer or
auction website. The Township shall at least once in January of each
year, in a newspaper generally circulated in the Township, provide
notice of the online auction website to be used for sales hereunder. For
each auction held, the Township shall prominently post in the Township
building and on its website notice of the auction and a summary of the
items to be sold.
C. All sales of real property shall be made only to the highest bidder after
receipt of one or more sealed bids received after notice. Notice shall be
published at least once in one or more newspapers generally circulated
in the Township, between seven and 30 days before the date established
for the opening of sealed offers. Each sealed offer shall be accompanied
by a certified check or bank cashier's or treasurer's check in an amount
equal to not less than 10% of the offer.
D. The Council may sell or transfer real or personal property to a
municipal authority, a school district, another municipality, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or a nonprofit corporation engaged in
community industrial development on such terms as may be negotiated.
Competitive bidding will not be required for such sales or transfer of
property.
§ 4-47 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-50
C:84
§ 4-50. Annual audit by elected auditors.
The elected auditors of the Township shall make the annual audit of
Township financial affairs and prepare the annual audit report as required
by the Charter, Article VI, which is self-executing and incorporated in this
chapter by reference.
§ 4-51. Independent audit.
The Council shall, as it deems necessary, provide for an independent audit
of all Township accounts by a certified public accountant who has no
personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the Township or
of its elected and appointed officers. Copies of any such audits or financial
reports shall be available for inspection by the public.
§ 4-52. Bonding of officers and employees.
The Township Manager shall arrange for blanket bonds covering all officers
and employees of the Township who are responsible for the handling and/
or authorization of receipts, disbursements, materials and supplies. Such
bonds shall be subscribed by a surety company or companies authorized to
do business in Pennsylvania and shall be designed to provide the Township
the greatest protection at the least cost, under a blanket position bond or
by a per-occurrence fidelity bond. The Council shall approve the bonding
contracts on behalf of all Township officers and employees. The amount
of the bond or bonds shall be determined annually by Council to ensure
adequate protection of the Township interests. The costs of such bonding
shall be paid by the Township.
§ 4-53. Limitations on tax rates and debt.
A. Limitations on tax rates and debts shall be as provided in the Charter,
Sections 412 and 413. The Township shall follow the provisions of the
Local Government Unit Debt Act, as amended,19 or other general law of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with respect to authorizing and
incurring debt.
B. Should the Council find it necessary or desirable to levy real estate
taxes at higher rates than authorized to Second Class Townships in
Pennsylvania, the Council shall by ordinance submit, for referendum of
the registered voters of the Township, any proposed new rate limit to be
established, which new rate limit shall continue until further changed
by referendum unless superseded by higher rates authorized to Second
Class Townships generally or by rates authorized by the General
Assembly which apply to municipalities with home rule charters.
19.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 8001 et seq.
§ 4-50 CHARTER § 4-53
C:85

ARTICLE VI
Personnel Regulations
[Amended 8-25-1980 by Ord. No. 256]
§ 4-54. Purpose; applicability; administration. [Amended 2-11-2019
by Ord. No. 800]
§ 4-55. Employment process. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Personnel Manual, as adopted by Township
Council, is to establish personnel principles and policies, which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Employment in the Township government, including appointments,
promotions and other personnel actions, shall be based on merit.
(2) Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment.
(3) Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of these regulations consistent with the best
interests of the public and the Township.
B. Coverage. The Personnel Manual shall apply to all employees of the
Township. The regulations shall not apply to elected officials, members
of the citizen boards, commissions and authorities, Township
Solicitor(s) and Township Engineer(s) who may serve on a consulting
basis.
C. Administration. The Township Manager shall have the responsibility for
the administration of the Personnel Manual as provided for in Sections
303A and 503 of the Charter. This responsibility shall include
appointing and disciplining all employees covered by these regulations
and, upon approval of the Township Council, establishing whatever
detailed rules as may be necessary to carry out the regulations or to
implement personnel policies.
A. General. The Personnel Manual shall include, but not be limited to,
defining fair and objective employment practices and its process, to
include job postings, hirings, promotions, required examinations,
probationary terms for new hires and promotion of all state and federal
requirements for public employment.
B. Examinations. The examination process for all employees shall be set
forth in the Personnel Manual and shall consist of whatever written,
oral, medical, performance or other examinations and evaluations that
are necessary to determine an applicant's fitness or competency for
Township employment.
C. Introductory Period and permanent employment. Policies related to
hires for Township employment shall be set forth in the Personnel
Manual. In addition, the following shall apply:
§ 4-54 CHARTER § 4-55
C:87
§ 4-56. Organization chart.
The Township Manager shall prepare and the Township Council shall adopt,
as part of the annual budget, an organization chart which shall show
the class titles and number of all permanent and temporary positions in
each department or unit of the Township. Any proposed change in this
organization chart which would cause the appropriation for personal
services in any department or unit to be exceeded shall be accompanied by
a budget amendment or transfer.
§ 4-57. Classification Plan.
(1) Length of introductory period. A newly hired employee shall serve
an introductory period of six months ("Introductory Period") during
which time the Township will have the opportunity to monitor the
quality and value of the employee's performance and make any
necessary adjustments in the employee's assigned job tasks based
on their performance. The employee's Introductory Period may be
adjusted as deemed appropriate by management and the Township
Manager and supported by a written probationary review.
Completion of the Introductory Period does not imply guaranteed
or continued employment with the Township.
(2) Removal of Introductory Period employee. An employee serving the
Introductory Period of employment may be removed from his or her
position at any time during the Introductory Period at the
discretion of the Township Manager and having reviewed the
employee's performance with the department head, if applicable.
Introductory Period employees shall not have recourse to appeal.
(3) Conditions of permanent employment. An Introductory Period
employee may, at the discretion of the management of the
Township, become a permanent employee upon the successful
completion of the Introductory Period, the favorable written
recommendation of the department head and the approval of the
Township Manager.
A. General. The class titles and class specifications which are approved by
the Township Council shall constitute the Classification Plan.
B. Administration. The Classification Plan shall be administered and
maintained by the Township Manager, and employees shall be allocated
by the Manager to classes which best describe their duties.
C. Reclassification. A request for reclassification to a different
classification may be originated by an employee or by a supervisor.
Such requests may be initiated if it is felt that the existing classification
does not reasonably describe the duties and responsibilities of work
actually being performed. Such requests must be in writing and detail
the reasons why the reclassification is considered to be justified.
§ 4-55 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-57
C:88
§ 4-58. Pay Plan. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Township Council shall establish the Pay Plan covering all employees
and may amend the plan from time to time after receiving recommendations
from the Township Manager. The Pay Plan will be reexamined periodically
with consideration given to the changes in living costs. Any change in the
plan from this type of a review shall be known as an "economic adjustment"
and shall become effective when designated by the enabling legislation,
and effective for all employees. Pay Plan changes made based on position
assessment, reclassifications and noneconomic adjustment shall not cause
an immediate adjustment to an employee's wage. The Personnel Manual
shall include policies and procedures related to, among other things, pay
ranges, merit step growth, salary minimum and maximum ranges and
promotional wage growth.
§ 4-59. Performance ratings. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Township Manager shall implement a performance rating system for all
employees as outlined in the Personnel Manual.
§ 4-60. Promotion, demotion and transfer. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 800]
The specific policies and procedures relating to the promotion, demotion
and transfer of Township employees shall be set forth in the Personnel
Manual.
Requests of this nature are to be submitted to the Township Manager
through the employee's department head.
A. Promotion policy. Promotions will be made from within the Township
only when the most qualified candidate is available. Promotions are
made on an equal opportunity basis according to employees possessing
the needed skills, education, experience and other qualifications that
are required for the job.
B. Promotional Introductory Period. All employees promoted into a new
job position will be subject to an Introductory Period as set forth in
Article VI of this chapter. After the Introductory Period, an employee
may be transferred back to his/her original position at the discretion of
the management of the Township upon consideration of the employee's
performance and suitability for the position.
C. Transfers. Township employees may be transferred to a new position
within the Township so as to best meet the business needs of the
Township, as determined by the management of the Township. All
transfers must be approved by the Township Manager.
§ 4-57 CHARTER § 4-61
C:89
§ 4-61. Hours of work. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures for defined
scope of hours worked among the employee groups.
§ 4-62. Vacation leave. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures for vacation
leave time for eligible employees.
§ 4-63. Sick leave. [Amended 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 611; 4-8-2002
by Ord. No. 625; 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 695; 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures for sick leave
for eligible employees.
§ 4-64. Injury leave. [Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 695;
2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures for, injury leave
for eligible employees.
§ 4-65. Other forms of leave. [Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 694;
2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures of other forms
of leave, including, but not limited to leave of absence with and without pay,
bereavement leave, military leave, leave under the federal and Maternity
Leave Act20 and other applicable state and federal law, and jury duty.
§ 4-66. Holidays and personal days. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures for designated
Township holidays and personal days.
§ 4-67. Overtime and compensatory time off. [Amended 2-11-2019
by Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures regarding
eligibility for overtime and compensatory time pay for exempt and
nonexempt employees.
§ 4-68. (Reserved)21
20.Editor's Note: See the Family and Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
21.Editor’s Note: Former § 4-68, Suggestion system, was repealed 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800.
§ 4-61 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-69
C:90
§ 4-69. Political activity.
Employees shall have the right to be members of and support a political
party, to vote as they choose, to express opinions privately on all political
subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality, and to attend
political meetings. However, employees may not be an officer of a political
party, hold political office while employed, or solicit political contributions
or services from another Township employee.
§ 4-70. through § 4-71. (Reserved)22
§ 4-72. Layoffs. [Amended 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 287]
At such times as it may be necessary to reduce the number of employees,
the criteria to be followed shall be length of service and quality of job
performance. The last employee laid off within a class will be the first to
be offered reemployment, should a position within the class subsequently
become available. Any employee laid off within a class title shall be
permitted the option of acquiring the position of a less-senior employee
in a related class title with the same pay grade if able to meet the job
qualification requirements of the related class title; or, in the alternative,
the employee shall be permitted to acquire the position of a less senior
employee in a related class title in a lower pay grade. These employee
options shall be permitted only should such related class titles and positions
exist at the time of the layoff.
§ 4-73. Resignations and reinstatement. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures regarding
employee resignations and reinstatements.
§ 4-74. Discipline. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The specific policies and procedures relating to discipline, labor relations
and grievance process practices of the Township shall be set forth in the
Personnel Manual and shall be compliant with applicable State and Federal
law related to public employment.
A. General. Violation of Township policies and procedures may result in
disciplinary action, including, but not limited to, demotion, transfer,
leave without pay or termination of employment. The Township
encourages, but is not bound to, a system of progressive discipline as
the situation may require; however, the Township is not required to
engage in progressive discipline and may discipline or terminate
employees who violate Township policies, procedures and other rules of
conduct, or who fail to meet the expectations of their employment. The
Township policies and practices related to discipline, and application
22.Editor’s Note: Former § 4-70, Outside employment, and § 4-71, Training, were repealed
2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800.
§ 4-69 CHARTER § 4-74
C:91
§ 4-75. Appeals and grievances. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
800]
The specific policies and procedures relating to public sector employment
appeals and grievances shall be set forth in the Personnel Manual.
§ 4-76. Sexual harassment. [Added 9-25-1995 by Ord. No. 557;
amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures regarding
harassment of all kinds, including, but not limited to, the procedures for
reporting such claims to management of the Township.
§ 4-77. Drug and alcohol policy. [Added 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 568;
amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
The Personnel Manual shall include a comprehensive drug and alcohol
policy for all employees, including, but not limited to, CDL and non-CDL
drivers.
thereof, shall not modify the at-will employment status of Township
employees.
B. Warnings. Under appropriate circumstances and based upon
performance and facts, an employee shall be provided a verbal or
written warning prior to suspension. A copy of either notice shall be
made a part of the employee's personnel record. The policy regarding
issuance of warnings shall be set forth in the Personnel Manual.
C. Suspensions, demotions and dismissal. The Township may, for
disciplinary reasons, suspend, demote or dismiss an employee at any
time. When an employee is suspended, they shall be given a written
statement of the reasons for the action, and a copy of such notice shall
be made a part of the employee's personnel record. The policy
regarding suspensions and demotions shall be set forth in the Personnel
Manual.
D. Right to hearing. Whenever the Township Manager determines that it is
appropriate to suspend without pay, demote or dismiss an employee,
the employee shall, when required under state of federal law, be
afforded the right to a hearing or other opportunity to be heard. The
hearing process shall be set forth in the Personnel Manual. The
Township policies and practices related to hearings shall not modify the
at-will employment status of Township employees and is not intended to
create any personal or property interest related to employment status.
§ 4-74 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-77
C:92
ARTICLE VII
Ethical Practices
[Added 8-25-1980 by Ord. No. 256]
§ 4-78. Ethical practices enumerated.
A. All employees, appointed officials and elected officials, when providing
service to the public, shall do so without special favor or privilege to
anyone and shall not accept remuneration, favors or benefit other than
that provided by the Township.
B. No employee, appointed official or elected official shall engage in
business with the Township either directly or indirectly. Information
obtained confidentially in the performance of official duties shall not be
used for private gain.
C. All employees shall report corruption or dishonesty of which they
become aware and shall enter into no private agreement adverse to the
public interest.
D. No employee or appointed official shall be required to resign his or her
position should a member of his or her immediate family be elected to a
Township office.
§ 4-78 CHARTER § 4-78
C:93

ARTICLE VIII
Insurance and Related Matters
[Added 6-10-1985 by Ord. No. 372]
§ 4-79. Township insurance.
§ 4-80. Township responsibilities for claims.
A. The Township Manager shall be responsible for, in connection with
advice from the Township Solicitor, recommending insurance coverage
to Township Council for all Township employees, elected officials,
Township boards, committees and agencies, including the fire
companies, to provide insurance coverage for liability claims, property
damage claims, personal injury claims, worker's compensation and any
other coverage deemed appropriate. The Personnel Manual shall
maintain policies and procedures for all applicable insurance
coverages. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
(1) Emergency/Fire Services shall comply with Township policies
regarding insurance; any references to 'employee' shall be viewed
as any eligible member of a fire company. So long as the Township
provides insurance coverage each company shall comply with all
required insurance terms, policies and regulations.
B. The Township Manager shall present to the Township Solicitor all
insurance coverage which the Township Manager deems appropriate
and shall obtain from the Township Solicitor a written opinion with
regard to the appropriateness and amount of the coverage.
C. The Township Manager shall present to the Finance and Administration
Committee a recommendation and the written opinion of the Solicitor
with regard to insurance coverage or changes thereof prior to
presenting said recommendation or recommendations to Township
Council.
A. The Township shall pay the deductible or uninsured portion of any
claim, including legal fees, as a result of any claim against the
Township, a Township elected official or officials, Township employees,
members of Township boards, commissions or agencies, or members of
the fire company where insurance coverage is applicable and the
Township insurance company has assumed the defense of the claim.
B. In all claims where insurance coverage is not available or applicable
and a Township elected official, a Township employee, a member of a
Township board, agency or commission or a fire company member is
sued and where such official, employee, member of a board,
commission or agency or fire company member was acting on Township
business or in a Township capacity at the time of the incident giving rise
to the claim, the Township shall pay the cost of defense and any and all
judgments rendered against such official, employee, etc., subject to
Subsection D hereof.
§ 4-79 CHARTER § 4-80
C:95
§ 4-81. Agencies excluded.
The Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority shall not be
covered by this Article VIII of the Administrative Code.
C. The Township Council shall retain the right to designate counsel for the
defense of a claim against a Township official, employee, etc., where no
insurance coverage exists.
D. Township Council shall not be responsible to provide a defense or pay
any judgment arising out of any action on the part of any Township
elected official, employee, etc., which involves willful or wanton
negligence or a deliberate act clearly outside of the official or
employee's responsibility as a Township official or employee or member
of a board or commission or member of the fire company.
§ 4-80 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-81
C:96
ARTICLE IX
Driver Safety Policy
[Added 2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 682; amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No.
717; 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 800]
§ 4-82. Policy included.
The Personnel Manual shall include policies and procedures regarding the
Driver Safety Policy for employees and persons operating Township
vehicles.
§ 4-82 CHARTER § 4-82
C:97
Chapter 8
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 180. Water — See Ch. 242.
§ 4-82 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 4-82
C:98
ARTICLE I
Sewer Authority
[Adopted 7-6-1966 by Ord. No. 96 (Ch. I, Art. 2, Sec. 202, of the
1976 Ordinance Book); amended 8-9-1967 by Ord. No. 102]
§ 8-1. Creation.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Middletown, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, constituting the "Municipal Authority" of said Township as
defined in the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945 (the act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented23), hereby signifies its intention to
organize an Authority under the provisions of said Act.
§ 8-2. Title and Articles of Incorporation.24
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: In compliance with
the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
as amended and supplemented) the Township of Middletown, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to an ordinance duly enacted by the Board
of Supervisors of said Township authorizing and directing the formation of
an Authority under said Act, does hereby certify:
A. The name of the Authority shall be "Middletown Township, Delaware
County, Sewer Authority."
B. Said Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945.
C. No other Authority has been organized under the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945 or under the Act approved June 28, 1935, P. L.
463, or is in existence in and for the said Township of Middletown.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of
Middletown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, and the names and
addresses of its municipal authorities are as follows:
Names Titles Addresses
Wallace E. Arters Chairman 1163 W. Baltimore Pike, Lima,
Pennsylvania
William D. March Vice-Chairman 363 Mt. Alverno Road, Media,
Pennsylvania
John W. Kriebel Supervisor 224 S. Middletown Road,
Media, Pennsylvania
23.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L. 287; see now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et
seq.
24.Ordinance No. 748, adopted 7-14-2014, amended the Sewer Authority Articles of
Incorporation to state that its term of existence will be for a period of 50 years from the
date of approval of the amendment to the Articles of Incorporation. The full texts of this
and future amendments to the Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Township offices.
§ 8-1 CHARTER § 8-2
C:99
§ 8-3. Appointed members.
The first members of the Board of the Township of Middletown, Delaware
County, Sewer Authority, named in the aforesaid Articles of Incorporation,
hereby are specifically appointed members of said Board for the terms of
office set after their respective names, which terms shall commence on the
date of appointment and shall be computed from the sixth day of July 1966.
§ 8-4. Purpose and powers.
Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority shall be
organized for the purpose only to acquire, hold, construct, improve,
maintain, operate, own and lease, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee,
Names Titles Addresses
Clair R. Kephart Supervisor 21 Arrowhead Trail, Media,
Pennsylvania
David Van Ness Supervisor 121 Meadowburn Lane,
Media, Pennsylvania
E. The names addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of said Authority are as follows:
Name Address
Term of Office
(years)
James T. Fifer 11 Arrowhead Trail,
Media
1
Harvey Froehlich 27 Chipmunk Lane,
Media
2
Stephen P. Pahides 13 Spring House Lane,
Media
3
Lawrence T. Ramaika 79 Glen Riddle Road,
Media
4
Paul Restall 347 Mt. Alverno Road,
Elwyn
5
The term of office of the first members of the Board of said Authority
shall commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed
from the first Monday of January 1967.
F. Said Authority is organized for the purpose only to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own and lease, either in the
capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof,
sewerage treatment works, including works for treating and disposing
of industrial waste, in and for the Township of Middletown, and such
other territory as it may be authorized to serve, and shall exercise all of
the powers granted to an Authority organized for such purpose by the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 under which it is organized.
§ 8-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 8-4
C:100
sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof, sewerage treatment works,
including works for the treating and disposing of industrial waste, in and for
the Township of Middletown, Delaware County, and such other territory as
it may be authorized to serve, and shall exercise all of the powers granted
to an authority organized for such purpose by the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945 under which it is organized.
§ 8-5. Authorization.
The proper officers of the Township of Middletown, Delaware County,
hereby are authorized and directed to execute said Articles of Incorporation
on behalf of said Township, and the Secretary is authorized and directed
to affix thereto the seal of the Township and to attest the same, cause a
notice of intention to file said Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by law, and to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with a
certified copy of this ordinance and required proofs of publication, with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and to do, execute and
perform any and all acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect and
establish said Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority.
§ 8-4 CHARTER § 8-5
C:101
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 60
ALARMS AND ALARM DEVICES
§ 60-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electronically operated
instrument or system, composed of sensory apparatus, related hardware
and circuitry, which, when it detects a stimulus characteristic of fire, heat
or smoke, automatically transmits an alarm or signal, intended to result in
an emergency response by a fire department.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal, activated by an automatic protection
device, which causes the Fire Department to respond, but which is not the
result of a fire emergency and which is caused by a condition within the
control of the person in possession of the premises where the device is
located.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Lenni Heights Fire Company, the Lima Fire
Company, the Middletown Fire Company and Township Fire Marshal or
deputy, individually and collectively.
PERMIT — The annual permit, required by this chapter, for automatic
protection devices.
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, any other group acting as a unit, or an executor, administrator,
trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. In any
section of this chapter which prescribes a penalty, fine or service charge,
whenever the word "person" is used, as to partnerships or associations, the
word shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations,
shall mean the officer, agents or members thereof who are responsible for
any violation of such section.
TOWNSHIP — Middletown Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 60-2. Device permit required.
A. The person in possession of the premises where an automatic
protection device is in use must, each year, apply for and receive a
permit to operate the device.
B. The person in possession of the premises where an automatic
protection device is operated must apply for the annual permit no later
than January 30 of the year during which the device is to be operated.
C. Township Council shall, from time to time, set the permit and/or
application fee by resolution.
§ 8-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 60-3
C:102
§ 60-3. Penalty for failing to obtain permit.
Any person in possession of a premises where any automatic protection
device is operated who intentionally does not apply for the annual permit
required by § 60-2 hereof shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be
liable for a penalty of $50 for each such violation.
§ 60-4. Penalties for false alarms. [Amended 8-28-2000 by Ord. No.
606]
Any person that owns, uses or possesses an automatic protection device
shall not, after causing or permitting three false alarms to occur in a
consecutive twelve-month period, cause or permit a subsequent false alarm
to occur in the same consecutive twelve-month period. A person that
violates this section commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to a fine of not more than $300, which fine shall be made
payable to Middletown Township. In addition, the Township may refuse,
revoke or suspend the permit required by § 60-2 hereof for violation of this
section.
§ 60-5. Fire Department's authority to enter.
When the Fire Department responds to an alarm transmitted by an
automatic protection device, which alarm indicates a fire in a building or
premises where no one is available to provide access, the Fire Department
is hereby authorized to enter said building or premises by any means
reasonably necessary to conduct an investigation as to the cause of the
alarm.
§ 60-6. Automatic protection device operation.
§ 60-7. Licensing of installers. [Amended 8-28-2000 by Ord. No.
606]
No permit required by § 60-2 hereof will be issued unless the automatic
protection device is installed by a licensed electrical contractor who has
passed an examination in the National Electrical Code and any further
electrical code as may be established by the Township Council. Upon
discovery that a permit has been issued to a person whose automatic
protection device was not installed by a licensed electrical contractor as
A. The sensory mechanism of an automatic protection device shall be
equipped and adjusted so as to suppress false indications of fire and so
that the device will not be activated by impulses due to normal pressure
changes in water pipes, variations in voltage due to electrical storms
and power failures or any other forces not related to actual fire
conditions.
B. False alarms transmitted from automatic protection devices are
unlawful.
§ 60-3 CHARTER § 60-7
C:103
herein required, the Township may revoke or suspend the permit by written
notice to such person.
Chapter 63
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 161. Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 63-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat, or domestic farm animal.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any wild mammal, reptile or fowl which is not
naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which,
because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute
a danger to human life or property if it is not kept or maintained in a
safe manner or in secure quarters. The term shall also mean and include
any domestic mammal, reptile or fowl which, because of its size or vicious
propensity or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life
or property if it is not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure
quarters.
EXPIRATION DATE — The date designated or indicated in the vaccination
certificate as marking the end of the period of immunity from rabies
afforded by the vaccination.
OWNER — Any person owning an animal, having possession of an animal,
or who allows an animal to remain on his or her premises in Middletown
Township.
RABIES — A fatal, infectious disease of the brain caused by a specific virus
which occurs in saliva and is transmitted to new victims by the bite of the
afflicted animal.
VACCINATION — The practice of inoculations with a vaccine to afford
protection from rabies.
VACCINATION CERTIFICATE — A document signed by a qualified
veterinarian, indicating that the animal therein described has been
vaccinated against rabies, and containing the additional facts called for by
this chapter.
VACCINATION TAG — Metal or durable plastic tag stating the dates of
vaccination, the tag number and veterinarian's name. Such tag must be
affixed to the collar or harness and be worn by the animal at all times.
§ 60-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 63-1
C:104
VETERINARIAN — A graduate of an accredited school of veterinary
medicine, licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 63-2. Conditions for keeping animals.
No animal shall be kept, raised, maintained, pastured or sheltered in the
Township unless the conditions set forth below are met:
§ 63-3. Removal and disposal of dead animals.
A. All animals in the Township shall be kept, maintained or sheltered in
such a manner so that their health or well being is not endangered. No
person shall treat an animal in the Township in a cruel or inhumane
manner. Beating, underfeeding, overloading and abandoning animals
shall be considered cruel and inhumane treatment within the meaning
of this section.
B. Where an enclosed shelter is provided for an animal, such shelter shall
be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition and shall meet all
the front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
C. All areas where farm animals, including but not limited to, horses,
cattle, pigs, sheep, goats and chickens are permitted to move about,
including all grazing and pasture areas, shall be fenced so as to prevent
escape. Such areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. As an alternative to fencing, a farm animal may be restrained
by other means, provided the owner of such animal remains on the
premises and provides proper supervision during the period of time the
animal is restrained by such other means. No farm animal shall be left
tethered overnight.
D. All animals shall be kept, raised, maintained, pastured and sheltered in
such a manner so as not to:
(1) Emit noxious odors which are perceptible at lot boundaries;
(2) Emit unreasonable noise from the lot where such animal is kept,
raised, maintained, pastured or sheltered which causes
inconvenience or annoyance to the residents in the surrounding
neighborhood; or
(3) Constitute a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
E. Dangerous animals shall be kept or maintained in a safe manner and
confined securely at all times so that the keeping of such animals will
not constitute a danger to human life or the property of others.
A. It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner to provide for the
removal and disposal of any and all dead cats, dogs, and other animals
located on the owner's property.
§ 63-1 CHARTER § 63-3
C:105
§ 63-4. Dogs.
B. It shall be the duty of the Township to remove and dispose of all dead
cats, dogs and other animals from Township-owned streets, highways
and other public ways.
A. Compliance required. It shall be the duty of every owner of every dog
within the Township of Middletown to at all times comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania regulating the licensing and running of dogs.
B. Appointment of special officer. The Township Council shall have the
authority to appoint a Special Police Officer for Dog Law Enforcement
with full police powers to enforce the provisions of this chapter, issue
citations, and commit for hearing all persons known to be in violation
thereof. Such special officer or officers shall be under the jurisdiction of
the Township Council and be compensated at a rate of pay as shall be
set by resolution.
C. License required. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having
custody of any dog over six months of age within the Township of
Middletown must obtain a Pennsylvania state dog license for the
current year from the proper licensing authority as follows:
(1) Applications must be obtained and submitted by the owner to the
licensing authority, which is: County Treasurer, Delaware County
Court House, Media, PA 19063.
(2) The licensing authority will issue a durable tag, with identifying
number, which is to be fastened to the animal's collar. It must be
worn at all times.
(3) Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time
period specified in this section will be subject to the penalty as
provided in this chapter.
(4) It is not permitted to transfer a license or license tag issued for one
dog to another dog.
D. Restraint required. No owner shall permit any dog to go at large upon
any street, public place or private property other than the property of
the owner of the dog. All dogs using any street, public place or private
property of anyone other than the owner of the dog shall be:
(1) On a leash or such other device as to keep the dog under the
reasonable control of the person then handling such dog;
(2) In an enclosure from which it cannot escape;
(3) Firmly secured by means of a collar and chain or other device so
that it cannot stray beyond the premises on which it is secured; or
§ 63-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 63-4
C:106
(4) Under the reasonable control of the owner or accompanied by the
owner.
E. Impounding. Any dog found in the Township either without a Delaware
County license or running at large under conditions set forth in this
chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded as
hereinafter provided.
F. Place of detention. The Township Council shall be authorized to
designate a detention place for dogs seized under the terms hereof.
G. Detention fee. The owner of any dog so detained shall pay to the
Township the sum of the expenses incurred by the Township.
H. Notification of owner. Such officer or employee shall cause any dog so
seized and detained to be properly kept and fed and shall promptly
notify the person in whose name the dog's license is registered (if such
dog is licensed) either personally or by registered mail to claim such
dog within 10 days from the date of its seizure.
I. Unclaimed dogs. If, after 10 days from the giving of such notice, such
dog shall not have been claimed by its owner and the Township
reimbursed for expenses incurred in and about the detention of such
dog, the Township may authorize the disposal of such dog by sale or by
destruction in some humane manner; provided that no dog so caught
and detained shall be sold for the purpose of vivisection. The proceeds
of any such sale shall be turned over and paid to the Township.
J. Interference with officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere
with any officer in the performance of their duties under this chapter, to
attempt to prevent the officer from seizing or capturing, or to attempt
to liberate the dog in the custody and possession of said animal control
officer.
K. Damage caused by dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit
such dog to run at large or to cause any damage to any buildings, lawns,
shrubbery or any other real or personal property, or to cause any
annoyance to persons in the Township of Middletown. Failure of any
such owner to curb and restrain said dog shall subject the owner to
penalties provided by this chapter.
L. Noise disturbance. It shall be illegal within the Township of Middletown
for any owner to allow a dog to make any noise continuously and/or
incessantly for a period of 10 minutes, or to make such noise
intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person any
time of the day or night, regardless of whether the animal is physically
situated in or upon private property. Said noise shall be considered a
nuisance, provided that at the time the animal is making such noise no
person is attempting to trespass upon private property in which the
animal is situated.
§ 63-4 CHARTER § 63-4
C:107
§ 63-5. Cats.
§ 63-6. Rabies.
M. Animal defecation on public and private property and disposal of animal
feces. The owner of a dog shall be required to immediately remove any
feces from any surface upon which the dog may defecate, including but
not limited to, any lawn, gutter, street, driveway, alley, curb or sidewalk
in the Township of Middletown, upon the floors or stairways of any
building or place frequented by the public or used in common by the
tenants, or upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways, alleys, curbs
or stairways of any building abutting on a public street or park, or upon
the grounds of any public park or public area, or upon any private
property other than the property of the owner of such animal. Any feces
not immediately removed and placed in a nonleaking container for
deposit in a trash receptacle, or disposed of in a toilet shall be
considered a nuisance, and shall subject the owner to penalties
provided by this chapter. The owner of the animal shall abate and clean
his or her property of excrement so as not to present a public health
hazard and/or nuisance.
N. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection M above shall not apply to a
guide dog accompanying any blind persons, or to a dog used to assist
any other physically handicapped person.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner to have any cat that becomes a
nuisance in the Township. Acts of nuisance shall include, but are
expressly not restricted to, the following:
(1) The frequent raising of any disturbance between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, or at extended intervals at any
other time of the day, or both.
(2) Viciousness.
(3) Frequent digging into flower beds, lawns, children's sandboxes,
gardens or the depositing of feces or urine, and/or otherwise
damaging shrubbery, trees or lawns, on premises, personal
property or other property not belonging to the owner of the cat.
B. Any owner of a cat shall comply with and be current with rabies
vaccination requirements of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania with regard to cats.
C. All cats must be identified on the cat's collar with the owner's name and
address.
A. Report on animal having bitten person. It shall be the duty of any
person having knowledge that an animal has bitten or injured any
person in Middletown Township to immediately report the facts,
including (if known) the whereabouts of said animal, to the Health
Officer. It shall be the duty of the owner of said animal to confine it
§ 63-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 63-6
C:108
immediately for 10 days and comply with the directions of the Health
Officer. The animal shall be examined within 48 hours by a veterinarian,
and a written report of such examination shall be submitted by the
owner to the Health Officer who, in his discretion, may order the
owner to place it in a veterinary hospital or other approved location.
Immediate report shall be made to the Health Officer if the animal
becomes ill, escapes or dies. At the end of the ten-day confinement,
the animal shall again be examined by a veterinarian, and a written
report of findings shall be submitted to the Health Officer within 48
hours by the veterinarian or the owner. If such second report reveals no
symptoms of rabies, the animal may then be released from confinement.
B. Report on animal having been bitten by rabid animal.
(1) It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge that an animal
in Middletown Township has been bitten by or otherwise exposed
to an animal infected or suspected of being infected with rabies to
immediately report the facts, including (if known) the whereabouts
of the animal bitten, to the Health Officer. If such animal has not
been vaccinated, it shall be placed immediately in a veterinary
hospital or other approved location under the supervision of a
veterinarian.
(2) If the animal which was bitten or otherwise exposed to rabies had
theretofore been vaccinated in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, disposition may be either:
(a) Immediate revaccination of the bitten animal and confinement
for 30 days thereafter; or
(b) Confinement in strict isolation in an approved kennel for an
amount of time approved by a veterinarian; or
(c) If either of the above is not fulfilled, such bitten animal shall be
disposed of as directed by the Health Officer.
C. Report on animal infected with rabies. It shall be the duty of any person
having knowledge that an animal in Middletown Township is infected or
suspected of being infected with rabies to immediately report the facts,
including (if known) the whereabouts of such animal. The Health
Officer, after an investigation, may order the immediate confinement of
such animal in a veterinary hospital or other approved location, and
said animal shall not be released therefrom without the permission of
the Health Officer. Any animal found to be infected with rabies shall be
disposed of only as directed by the Health Officer.
D. Vaccination of animals against rabies.
(1) It shall be the duty of each owner of an animal in Middletown
Township, on or before the effective date of this chapter, to have his
or her animal vaccinated against rabies or to establish, by a valid
vaccination certificate, that such animal has heretofore been duly
§ 63-6 CHARTER § 63-6
C:109
§ 63-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs, for the first violation; $50 plus
costs for the second violation committed within a period of one year; $100
plus costs for the third violation committed within a period of one year; and
$200 plus costs for the fourth and subsequent violations committed within a
period of one year, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
vaccinated and that the period of immunity from rabies afforded
thereby has not expired. It shall be the duty of each such owner
to have the animal revaccinated at the interval of time and with
the specific vaccine licensed by the United States Department of
Agriculture for the particular type of animal.
(2) Unvaccinated animals acquired or moved into Middletown
Township shall be vaccinated within 30 days after arrival or, if
under five months of age, shall be vaccinated within 30 days after
reaching that age.
E. Duties of veterinarians.
(1) It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, at the time of vaccinating
any animal against rabies, to complete in duplicate a vaccination
certificate, the original for the owner and the duplicate to be
retained by the issuing veterinarian. Such certificate, over the
signature of the veterinarian, shall include the following
information:
(a) Owner's name and address.
(b) Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age).
(c) Date of vaccination.
(d) Rabies vaccination tag number.
(e) Type of vaccine administered and years of effective protection.
(f) Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
(g) Due date for booster.
(2) In addition to said certificate, the veterinarian shall furnish to the
owner, or affix to the animal's collar or harness, a metal or durable
plastic tag stating the date of vaccination, tag number and
veterinarian's name. The tag shall be worn by the animal at all
times.
F. Duties of owners. All costs of examination, vaccination, and/or
impoundment shall be paid by the owner.
§ 63-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 63-7
C:110
Chapter 67
BATHING PLACES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Food establishments — See Ch. 127.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Water — See Ch. 242.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 67-1. Definitions. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 562]
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIR GAP — The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or
sources other than the approved source.
CONTAMINATION — Any physical, chemical or biological substance
present in the pool water which may adversely affect the health or safety of
the bather. Swimming pool or wading pool contamination shall exist when
at least one of the conditions set forth in § 67-5G hereof exists. Spa pool
contamination shall exist when at least one of the conditions set forth in
§ 67-13F hereof exists.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement between
two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water
and the other steam, gas, a chemical or water of unknown or questionable
safety, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the
direction depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
DEPARTMENT — Middletown Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
Department of Health.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
GARBAGE — All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body waste,
including animal and vegetable offal.
LIFEGUARD — A person appointed by the owner, operator or manager of a
public bathing place to maintain surveillance over the bathers on the deck
or in the pool at a public bathing place and to supervise bather safety. The
lifeguard shall meet the training requirements of this chapter.
§ 63-7 CHARTER § 67-1
C:111
OWNER — Any person having a legal or equitable interest in a public
bathing place and who or which is responsible for the continual operation
and maintenance of such facility in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, agent, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity.
PUBLIC BATHING PLACE —
Any outdoor or indoor place open to the public used for amateur,
professional or recreative swimming, bathing or relaxation, including
a swimming pool, spa pool or wading pool, whether or not a fee is
charged for admission or for the use of such place or any part thereof.
A public bathing place shall not include a place used for swimming,
bathing or relaxation at a private, single-family residence which is
used solely by the owner of the residence, the owner's family and
their personal guests. Except with respect to the regulation of water
supply and content, hygiene, plumbing, electrical facilities and safety
equipment, a public bathing place shall not include a swimming pool,
spa pool, wading pool, lake or pond owned, operated and maintained
for the exclusive use and enjoyment of residents of a condominium or
cooperative, members of a property owners' association, the personal
guests of such residents or members or the residents or guests of a
lifecare retirement community, provided that, with respect to a lifecare
retirement community, the following conditions are imposed upon the
use of the swimming pool, spa pool, wading pool, lake or pond
(collectively, the pool facilities) by the owners or operators thereof:
Each user of the pool facilities must be in receipt of a physician's
release prior to his or her first use of the pool facilities, which
release shall be required at least annually.
(1)
All residents must attend an orientation session to acquaint them
with the pool facilities.
(2)
No persons under the age of 18 shall be permitted to use the pool
facilities.
(3)
No person shall be permitted to use the pool facilities without at
least one other person present.
(4)
The pool facilities must be continuously monitored by competent
personnel electronically or otherwise at two separate locations
whenever the pool facilities are in use. One of the locations in
which the monitoring will take place must be in reasonably close
proximity to the pool facilities. Monitoring must be conducted in
such a manner so as to permit activities within the pool facilities to
be both visible and audible.
(5)
All users of the pool facilities must register their use both before
and after using the pool facilities and must inform the person
manning at least one of the monitoring locations of the intended
(6)
A.
§ 67-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 67-1
C:112
REFUSE — All nonputrescible wastes generally regarded and classified as
rubbish, trash, junk and similar designations which have been rejected by
the owner or possessor thereof as useless or worthless.
SEWAGE — Any substance which contains any of the waste products or
excrements or other discharges from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any community or individual system, whether
publicly or privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature, or both, including various devices for
the treatment of such sewage or industrial wastes.
SOURCE — A well, spring, cistern, infiltration gallery, stream, reservoir,
pond or lake from which, by any means, water is taken either intermittently
or continuously for use by the public.
SPA POOL — Any whirlpool, hot tub or similar device other than a
residential whirlpool, spa or hot tub, which is designed for relaxation or
recreational use where the user is sitting, reclining or at rest and the pool is
use of the pool facilities. The pool facilities may not be used unless
the monitoring locations are manned.
(7) The pool facilities should be limited in terms of hours of operation.
All guests using the pool facilities must be accompanied at all times
by a resident.
(8)
(9) The pool facilities shall not contain more than four feet of water.
Individuals under the influence of alcohol or drugs shall not be
permitted to use the pool facilities.
(10)
Glass, pets, smoking and the consumption of alcoholic beverages
shall be prohibited within the pool facilities.
(11)
(12)Diving shall be prohibited within the pool facilities.
All personnel manning the monitoring locations must be trained
and certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation ("CPR") and trained
in first aid.
(13)
The Health Officer of the Township is hereby given the power and
charged with the responsibility to monitor all of the foregoing, to wit:
the method, means and operation of all of the foregoing.
B.
The standards set forth in this definition must be met in all lifecare
retirement communities which do not have a lifeguard as required by
§ 67-6A of this chapter. Failure to comply with the standards set forth
in this definition by such a community shall constitute a violation of this
chapter by the owner or operator of the pool facilities, but not by any
user thereof.
C.
§ 67-1 CHARTER § 67-1
C:113
not drained, cleaned or refilled after each use. A spa pool may include, but
not be limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral baths
or air induction bubbles in any combination. A spa pool may be an individual
unit or may be integrated into a larger swimming pool or bathing pool. A
spa pool may, depending on its size, accommodate one or more persons.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an
artificial body of water for swimming, diving, relaxation or recreational
bathing and having a depth of two feet or more at any point and including
all associated facilities, but excluding spa pools.
TURNOVER PERIOD — The number of hours required to completely
replenish the water in a pool or to recirculate a quantity of water equal to
the capacity of the pool.
WADING POOL — Any artificial pool of water less than two feet deep and
intended to be used for wading purposes.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
lakes, dammed water, ponds, springs and all other bodies of surface and
underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or
on the boundaries of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATER SUPPLY — A source or sources of water, as well as any and all water
treatment, storage, transmission and distribution facilities.
§ 67-2. Construction requirements.
A. Approval of plans. Any person who plans to construct, install or alter an
existing public bathing place must submit plans to the DEP and the
Department prior to such construction, installation or alteration. No
construction, installation or alteration shall begin until approval of the
proposed plans has been received in writing from the Department.
B. Content of plans. Such plans shall include:
(1) Maps, drawings, specifications and descriptions of the public
bathing place and its appurtenances and operations.
(2) Descriptions of the source or sources of water supply, amount of
chemical content and quality of water available and intended to be
used.
(3) Descriptions of the method and manner of water purification,
treatment, disinfection, heating, regulation and cleaning.
(4) Descriptions of measures employed to ensure installation of
necessary lavatories and dressing rooms and description of the
method and manner of washing, disinfecting, drying and storing
bathing apparel and towels.
(5) All other information required by DEP rules and regulations or by
the Department.
§ 67-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 67-3
C:114
§ 67-3. Licenses.
A. Application for license. Every owner shall be required annually to file an
application and secure a license from the Department to operate his,
her or its public bathing place. Such application shall include the name,
address and telephone number of the owner, the address of the public
bathing place and any other information requested by the Department.
The application shall also be accompanied by the required annual
inspection fee and a copy of a valid, current permit issued by DEP for
the operation of the public bathing place. Owners shall not operate a
public bathing place or permit a public bathing place to be operated
within Middletown Township except in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Department may refuse to issue a license or license
renewal if the public bathing place or facilities and/or equipment
therein do not meet the requirements of this chapter or any other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
B. Change in ownership. When there is a change in ownership of a public
bathing place, the new owner shall be required to file an application
and secure a new license from the Department as required in
Subsection A hereof. Licenses shall not be transferable.
C. Posting. The license issued by the Department hereunder shall be
posted in a conspicuous place accessible to patrons and approved by
the Department.
D. Inspection fee and license period. An annual inspection fee shall be paid
by the owner by January 1 of each calendar year at the time of
application. Any license issued hereunder shall be for a period of one
year commencing on January 1 of each year and expiring on December
31 of the same year, subject, however, to the right of the Department to
revoke or suspend any such license pursuant to Subsection E hereof.
The license fee shall be as follows:
(1) Swimming pools or wading pools (per complex): $150.
(2) Spa pools (each): $75.
E. Revocation of license. If the owner fails to comply with any provision of
this chapter and such failure in the opinion of the Township or the
Department endangers the life, safety or health of the users of the
public bathing place, the Department may suspend or revoke the
owner's license.
F. Applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. All provisions and
requirements herein shall be in addition to any and all other provisions
and requirements set forth in any and all other applicable federal, state
or local laws, ordinances or regulations, including, but not limited to,
Chapter 275, Zoning, Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
the Middletown Township Building Code and Plumbing Code25 and
Chapter 127, Food Establishments, Chapter 192, Solid Waste, Chapter
180, Sewers, and Chapter 242, Water. Nothing herein shall be
§ 67-3 CHARTER § 67-3
C:115
§ 67-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 67-5. Water supply.
construed to limit, replace or obviate the need to comply with any
other such applicable law, ordinance or regulation. To the extent that
any provision herein is inconsistent with any other applicable Township
ordinance or regulation, the provision herein shall control unless the
other applicable Township ordinance or regulation is stricter than the
provision herein, in which case the other ordinance or regulation shall
control.
G. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the actions or determinations of the
Department shall have the right to a hearing before the Township
Council. The aggrieved party and/or his duly authorized attorney or
agent may, within 10 days after such action or determination by the
Department, take an appeal therefrom to the Township Council. Any
such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the action or determination
of the Department being appealed from and the reasons for the
exception taken thereto, shall be verified by affidavit and shall be filed
with the Township Manager. The person appealing shall have the right
to appear and be heard if such a desire is stated in the written appeal. A
prompt decision of such appeal shall be made by the Township Council
and shall be duly recorded with the minutes of the Township.
A. Violations. Failure by the owner to secure a license as required by this
chapter, operation without a license, operation after suspension or
revocation of a license or the failure to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any other law or regulation applicable to such public bathing
place, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. When written notice of
a violation of this chapter has been served upon the owner, such
violation shall be promptly corrected as required by such notice.
B. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction thereof shall
pay a fine to Middletown Township of not less than $25 nor more than
$500, plus costs of prosecution and/or shall be imprisoned in the
Delaware County jail for a period not exceeding six months. Each day
during which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
A. Water quality generally. The water used in all public bathing places
other than spa pools shall meet the bacteriological, chemical, physical
and radiological standards of DEP and this chapter.
B. Circulation. Water shall be introduced to and withdrawn from the pool
so as to provide uniform circulation and uniform disinfectant residual
throughout the entire pool.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Art. II, Building Standards, and Art. III,
Plumbing Standards.
§ 67-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 67-5
C:116
C. Recirculation and filtration. All pools shall be provided with a
recirculation and filtration system except where there is a flow of water
of the quality and quantity through the pool which at all times conforms
to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Turnover period. The turnover period for wading pools shall be no more
than two hours, but in no case shall the turnover period for other types
of pools be more than eight hours.
E. Clarity of the pool. All water in the pool shall be sufficiently clear to
permit a black disc, six inches in diameter on a white field, when placed
on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible from
the runway or deck around the deep area of the pool.
F. Overflow facilities. Overflow facilities shall be provided and water
levels in the pool maintained to effectively remove scum, debris or other
floating matter.
G. Swimming pool and wading pool contamination. The water in a
swimming pool or wading pool shall be considered contaminated when
one of the following conditions exists:
(1) More than one ten-milliliter portion of any sample shows a positive
test for coliform organisms when multitube fermentation technique
is used or more than one coliform per fifty-milliliter portion when
the membrane filter test is used.
(2) Two consecutive samples show a positive test for coliform
organisms in any ten-milliliter portion of any sample when the
multitube fermentation technique is used or more than one
coliform per fifty-milliliter portion when the membrane filter test is
used.
(3) Two of any 10 consecutive samples show a positive test for coliform
organisms in any of the ten-milliliter portions of any sample when
the multitube fermentation technique is used or more than one
coliform per fifty-milliliter portion when the membrane filter test is
used.
H. Disinfection of pool water. Where chlorine or a hypochlorite compound
is used for disinfection, the free chlorine residual in the water in all
parts of the pool when in use shall be not less than 1.0 parts per million
and the pH value of the water shall be not less than 7.2 and not more
than 8.0. Other disinfecting materials or methods may be used if
approved by the Department.
I. Testing kits and procedures. Testing of pool water shall be performed
and records kept in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Accurate testing kits for making readings of residual disinfection
and pH shall be provided by the owner.
§ 67-5 CHARTER § 67-5
C:117
§ 67-6. General safety. [Amended 1-22-1996 by Ord. No. 562]
(a) Before opening for the day's activity and when the pool is in
use, tests for disinfectant residuals and pH shall be made as
follows:
[1] Outdoor pools: immediately before opening and every hour
when open.
[2] Indoor pools: immediately before opening and every two
hours when open.
(b) The results of these tests shall be recorded on forms
satisfactory to the Department and shall be readily available at
the pool side for inspection at any time.
(2) The owner or operator shall be responsible for the collection and
examination of samples for the purity of the water used for
swimming or bathing, and such samples shall be examined by a
laboratory in compliance with Subsection J.
(3) A total coliform bacteriological analysis shall be made at least once
each week of a sample collected during the period of maximum use
of the public bathing place. Additional analyses of additional
samples shall be furnished by the licensee upon request by the
Department.
(4) Copies of the reports of analyses described herein shall be
maintained by the licensee for at least two years and made
available to the Department upon request.
J. Laboratory testing. Tests of pool water shall be performed by
laboratories certified by DEP for microbiological examinations.
Conformity of the laboratory and the pool water to DEP standards for
laboratory certification and standards for safe and sanitary pool water,
respectively, shall be evidenced by a statement from the laboratory to
such effect. Upon notification by the laboratory that pool water does not
meet the standards for safe and sanitary swimming pool water, the pool
shall be immediately closed to the public until the problem has been
corrected. The Department shall be notified by the owner or operator
when this occurs. Notification of the Department shall be documented
on the daily records described below indicating the corrective
measures taken.
K. Records of tests. Daily records of tests and of the operation of the public
bathing place shall be kept on forms satisfactory to the Department and
copies thereof shall be filed with the Department monthly or more often
if required by the Department.
A. Number of lifeguards. One or more competent, certified lifeguards in
adequate number shall be on duty at the waterside at all times the
public bathing place is open to use by bathers or swimmers, and such
§ 67-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 67-6
C:118
§ 67-7. Hygiene.
lifeguard(s) shall not be assigned other tasks that would divert their
attention from the safety of the bather or swimmer. When there is
no certified lifeguard present or when the pool is closed for the day,
the pool shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access and use.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to lifecare retirement
communities when the standards set forth in the definition of "public
bathing place" in § 67-1 have been satisfied.
B. Qualifications of lifeguards. Lifeguards shall be capable swimmers,
skilled in lifesaving methods and in methods of artificial resuscitation as
evidenced by their possession of a currently valid certificate or other
proof of proficiency from the American Red Cross, the YMCA, YWCA or
other recognized training agency acceptable to the Department.
C. Lifesaving equipment. The following emergency equipment shall be
provided and shall be readily accessible for use at each public bathing
place:
(1) Telephone at pool side with a list of emergency medical and service
response numbers prominently displayed.
(2) Standard, filled twenty-four-unit first-aid kit.
(3) Blankets.
(4) Backboard with means to secure victim to board and provide
immobilization of head, neck and back.
(5) One or more reaching devices which may include but not be limited
to poles, ropes and any reasonable means to extend a person's
reach.
(6) One or more flotation devices which may include buoys, life jackets
or any flotation device that can support an adult in water.
D. Gas chlorination. Where gas chlorination equipment is installed at
either outdoor or indoor pools, the equipment shall be housed in a
separate room equipped with proper ventilation and all safety devices
as required and approved by the Department. All facilities using
chlorine gas as a disinfectant shall be required to have a gas mask
approved for use in chlorine disinfection with at least one backup
canister or an approved self-contained breathing apparatus unit. This
equipment shall be stored in an area separate from the chlorine gas.
A. General. The common use of drinking cups, towels, hair brushes or
other toilet articles shall be prohibited.
B. Employee health. No person having a disease in a stage which is
communicable shall be employed at a public bathing place. No
employee of a public bathing place who contracts a communicable
disease may continue to work in a public bathing place.
§ 67-6 CHARTER § 67-7
C:119
§ 67-8. Bather preparation facilities.
§ 67-9. Unsafe conditions.
C. Bather health. Persons with signs of illness or disease or with skin
rashes or sores or with bandages shall be excluded from public bathing
places except where certified by a physician not to have a disease in a
communicable stage.
D. Bathing suits and towels. Bathing suits and towels furnished to bathers
shall be thoroughly cleaned and dried each time they are used in such a
manner as to preclude the transmission of disease and shall be stored in
a clean and sanitary manner.
E. Food. Where food service is provided, the food service facilities and
operations shall comply with the provisions set forth Chapter 127, Food
Establishments.
F. Water. Each owner shall provide drinking water facilities at the owner's
public bathing places and shall ensure that water used for drinking,
food preparation, cleaning or personal hygiene at such public bathing
places is provided from a supply approved by DEP.
A. Requirement. Adequate bather preparation facilities shall be available
to all users of the public bathing place.
B. Dressing and toilet facilities. Bather preparation facilities shall be
provided with separate dressing facilities, showers, lavatories, toilets
and appurtenances for each sex.
C. Construction and sanitation. Bather preparation facilities shall be
designed and constructed so that good sanitation can be maintained
throughout the building at all times and so that injury to the bather is
reduced to a minimum.
D. Walls and floors. Interior walls and floors shall be easily cleanable and
the floors drained to prevent standing water.
E. Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided to promote cleanliness
and safety.
F. Ventilation and heating. Adequate ventilation and heating shall be
provided for the comfort of the bather.
A. Plumbing. All plumbing connections and modifications to existing
plumbing facilities at or to any public bathing place shall be performed
in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 89, Construction Codes,
Article III, Plumbing Standards. Plumbing shall be so sized, installed
and maintained as to carry adequate quantities of water to required
locations throughout the public bathing place, to prevent contamination
of the water supply, to properly convey sewage and liquid wastes from
§ 67-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 67-9
C:120
§ 67-10. Electrical safety.
Electrical installations and modifications to existing electrical facilities at
or to any public bathing place shall be performed in conformance with
provisions of the Middletown Township Electrical Code.26 Electrical
installations at all public bathing places and any additions or modifications
to such installations prior to being placed in service and every three years
thereafter shall be inspected and approved by an electrical inspection
agency approved by the Township. Evidence of such approval by the
electrical inspection agency shall be filed with the Department by the
owner.
§ 67-11. Garbage and refuse.
The owner of a public bathing place shall provide for the storage and
collection of all garbage and refuse, which collection shall be conducted in
a sanitary manner and as often as necessary in order to prevent a health
hazard or public nuisance.
the public bathing place to the sewerage or sewage disposal system and
to prevent the creation of an unsanitary condition or nuisance.
B. Cross-connections. Cross-connections shall not be permitted. A crossconnection
shall be considered broken where a minimum air gap of at
least twice the diameter of the water pipe is provided where potable
water enters the pool and where pool water or water from the
recirculation system is discharged to a sewer system.
C. Backflow prevention. Backflow shall not be permitted. A potable water
distributing pipe shall be considered as protected against backflow
from any plumbing fixture or other piece of equipment or from any
appliance capable of affecting the quality of the water in the potable
water supply where an air gap of at least twice the diameter of the
water supply pipe has been provided. Where it is not practical to
provide such minimum air gap, the connection to the fixture, equipment
or appliance shall be equipped with a backflow preventer assembly of a
type and at a location approved by the Township.
A. Storage. All garbage and refuse containing food wastes shall, prior to
disposal, be kept in leakproof, nonabsorbent, rust and corrosionresistant
containers of adequate number, which shall be kept covered
with tight-fitting lids when filled or stored or not in continuous use. Any
other manner of garbage and refuse storage may be used if approved by
the Department. All other garbage and refuse shall be stored in
containers, rooms or areas of sufficient numbers and size in a manner
so as to prevent arthropod or rodent problems and other nuisances.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Art. I, Adoption of Standards.
§ 67-9 CHARTER § 67-11
C:121
§ 67-12. General provisions.
§ 67-13. Water supply for spa pools.
B. Cleaning of area. Adequate cleaning facilities shall be provided, and
each container, room or area shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
emptying or removal of garbage and refuse.
A. Vector control. Adequate measures for the control of arthropods and
rodents which the Department deems a public health hazard shall be
taken in a manner satisfactory to the Department.
B. Sewage disposal. All sewerage systems serving public bathing places
shall be subject to all applicable federal, state, Township and DEP laws
and regulations. Any discharge of filter backwash and other pool
wastewater into the waters of the commonwealth shall be approved in
the DEP permit.
C. Reporting death, injury or illness. Each owner or operator shall:
(1) Notify the Department within 24 hours of a drowning, near
drowning, death or serious injury occurring at the public bathing
place.
(2) Immediately notify the Department of any incident creating a
potential problem of health or safety significance.
D. Public bathing places not in use. The owners of all public bathing places
not in use shall maintain one of the following conditions:
(1) Facilities shall be locked and secured at all times to prevent
uncontrolled access.
(2) Facilities which are abandoned shall be filled with material, subject
to the approval of Middletown Township.
A. Operation. The owner or person responsible for the operation
(operator) of a spa pool shall be knowledgeable in the operation of the
equipment, procedures for performing the necessary water quality
tests and safety checks required by this chapter and appropriate
emergency procedures. The owner shall make available to each
employee or person responsible for the operation of the spa pool a
written manual on the operation of and normal maintenance
procedures for the spa pool, and the operator shall be responsible for
disinfectant and water treatment operations. Unauthorized persons
shall not attempt disinfectant and water treatment.
B. Water quality generally. The water used in all spa pools shall meet the
bacteriological, chemical, physical and radiological standards of DEP
and this chapter.
§ 67-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 67-13
C:122
C. Circulation. Water shall be introduced to and withdrawn from the pool
so as to provide uniform circulation and uniform disinfectant residual
throughout the entire spa pool.
D. Recirculation and filtration. Spa pools shall be provided with a
recirculation and filtration system except where there is a flow of water
of the quality and quantity through the spa pool which at all times
conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
E. Clarity of the pool. All water in the spa pool shall be sufficiently clear to
permit a black disc, six inches in diameter on a white field, when placed
on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible.
F. Spa pool contamination. The water in a spa pool shall be considered
contaminated when one of the following conditions exists:
(1) More than one ten-milliliter portion of any sample shows a positive
test for coliform organisms when multitube fermentation technique
is used or more than one coliform per fifty-milliliter portion when
the membrane filter test is used.
(2) Two consecutive samples show a positive test for coliform
organisms in any ten-milliliter portion of any sample when the
multitube fermentation technique is used or more than one
coliform per fifty-milliliter portion when the membrane filter test is
used.
(3) Two of any 10 consecutive samples show a positive test for coliform
organisms in any of the ten-milliliter portions of any sample when
the multitube fermentation technique is used or more than one
coliform per fifty-milliliter portion when the membrane filter test is
used.
G. Laboratory testing. Tests of water shall be performed by a laboratory
certified by DEP for microbiological testing. Conformity of the
laboratory and the pool water to DEP standards for laboratory
certification and standards for safe and sanitary pool water,
respectively, shall be evidenced by a statement from the laboratory to
such effect. Upon notification by the laboratory that water does not
meet standards for safe and sanitary pool water, the spa pool shall be
immediately closed to the public until the problem has been corrected
and the owner or operator shall immediately notify the Department of
the lab results and the spa pool closure. Notification of the Department
shall be documented on the daily records described below indicating
the corrective measures taken.
H. Records of tests. Daily records of tests and of the operation of the public
bathing place shall be kept on forms satisfactory to the Department,
and copies thereof shall be filed with the Department monthly or more
often if required by the Department.
§ 67-13 CHARTER § 67-13
C:123
I. Turnover period. Spa pools must be capable of minimum turnover rates
of 30 minutes.
J. Cleaning and refilling. Spa pools shall be emptied and cleaned as often
as necessary. The necessity of emptying and cleaning will be directly
related to the length of time the pool is in operation and the number of
people using it.
K. Disinfection of pool water. When chlorine or a hypochlorite compound is
used for disinfection, the free chlorine residual in the water of the spa
pool shall not be less than 2.0 parts per million or more than 4.0 parts
per million. When bromine is used, the minimum residual shall not be
less than 2.0 parts per million or more than 4.0 parts per million.
Additional procedures for disinfecting the water may include shocking
daily to raise halogen levels to 5.0 parts per million and shocking
weekly to levels of 10.0 parts per million. The pH value of the water
shall be maintained between 7.2 and 8.0 depending on the amount of
free available chlorine or bromine.
L. Temperature. A pool thermometer shall be provided for the pool and the
temperature of the spa water may not exceed 104° F. [40° C.]. This
temperature shall be monitored and recorded every hour unless an
automatic shutoff occurs when water reaches 104° F.
M. Testing kits and procedures. Testing of water and keeping of records
shall be consistent with § 67-5I, J and K of this chapter, with the
exception that spa water shall be tested for temperature and chlorine
residual immediately before using and every hour when in use.
N. Warning sign.
(1) A precaution sign shall be mounted adjacent to the entrance to the
spa pool containing the following warnings and information:
(a) Prohibition of use by persons under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
(b) Caution that persons suffering from heart disease, diabetes or
high blood pressure should contact a physician before use.
(c) Caution that women who are or who may be pregnant should
seek the advice of a physician regarding use and that such
women should limit time in the pool.
(d) Persons should limit the stay in the pool to 15 minutes at any
one session.
(e) Prohibition of food or drink.
(f) Location of nearest telephone or emergency notification
number.
§ 67-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 67-13
C:124
Chapter 81
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A281.
§ 81-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 81-2. Title; definitions.
(g) Location of audible emergency alarm to alert others in the area
of a need to respond.
(h) Not to be operated at water temperatures greater than 104° F.
[40° C.].
(2) These requirements shall be conveyed by any combination of
words, pictures or symbols.
A. Council finds and determines that the public convenience of the
Township would be served by a cable television and communications
system.
B. The purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, operation,
maintenance, and use of a cable television and communications
system in, upon, along, across, above, over, under, or in any manner
connected with the streets, public ways or public places within the
corporate limits of the Township, as they now or in the future may
exist.
(2) To provide for the payment of franchise fees to the Township for the
construction and operation of cable communications systems.
(3) To provide remedies for violations of this chapter.
(4) To provide for the development of cable television as a community
communications system and for other public purposes.
A. This chapter may be cited as the "Middletown Cable Television and
Communications Ordinance."
B. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COUNCIL — That Town Council of the Township of Middletown.
CTAC — Cable Television Advisory Committee provided for in § 4-35.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
§ 67-13 CHARTER § 81-2
C:125
FRANCHISEE — The person to whom a franchise under this chapter is
awarded.
PERSON — The corporation, partnership, principle or other entities
that have a legal existence.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
C. Technical terms.
(1) Cable television. A service whereby television and other
telecommunications signals are distributed within a specific
geographical area by means of wires or coaxial cables.
(2) Cable television system. The technical facilities and ownership or
management thereof for distributing cable television service within
a given franchise area.
(3) Franchise area. For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of
Middletown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
(4) Channel. That band of contiguous frequencies within the
electromagnetic spectrum assigned to and capable of carrying the
signals of a given service. A "television channel" is a band 6 MHz
wide, and carries video, audio, and synchronizing and other
components of the signal.
(5) Public access channel. A television channel carried by a cable
television system that contains programs or other information
supplied by members of the public on a nondiscriminatory basis.
The cable television system operator (hereafter "operator") may
not charge for use of this channel or channels (although a charge
may be made for extensive use of studio facilities utilized for
preparation of materials), may not supply programming for these
channels himself, and may not exercise any power of censorship
except as provided in Section 319 of this chapter.27
(6) Dedicated channel. A television channel carried by a cable
television system is restricted to one of the following uses: local
government, educational institution, or public access.
(7) Downstream. The direction of signal flow from a origination to the
terminal of a subscriber.
(8) Upstream. The direction of signal flow from a subscriber, or from a
local origination point such as a school, to the cable television
system's signal distribution center.
(9) Subscriber. A resident of Middletown Township who contracts with
a cable television system operator for cable television service.
27.Editor's Note: Original Section 319, Obscenity and lotteries, was repealed 4-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 644.
§ 81-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-2
C:126
(10) Drop or service drop. The furthest downstream wiring connecting a
subscriber to a cable television system's trunk line.
(11) Trunk. The main line(s) of a cable television system, from the
distribution center to the tap(s) from which subscriber drops are
run. The term "trunk" includes all associated amplifiers and other
equipment.
(12) Franchise. An agreement between a cable television system
operator and a municipality or similar governmental body defining
the rights and obligations of each with respect to a service to be
provided the community involved. A cable television franchise is a
nonexclusive license granted under terms of an appropriate
ordinance.
(13) Head end. That point which television broadcast signals are
received off the air or by microwave and inserted into a cable
television system. It is possible for signals to be received at a head
end by coaxial cable from a nearby system under common
ownership, but most cable television systems use appropriate
antennas.
(14) Distribution center. The location where necessary amplification,
signal modification, and switching of signals received from the
head end and other origination points, such as studios, is
performed. The distribution center may be located at the head end
or elsewhere, and has as its main purpose the insertion of the
proper signals into the trunks of a cable television system.
(15) Terminal. All equipment at the subscriber's location located
between the service drop and the antenna terminals of the
subscriber's television receiver. Additional equipment, such as that
needed for two-way use of the cable television system by the
subscriber, shall fall within this definition, whether supplied by the
cable operator or by the subscriber or by others.
(16)VHF television. Television broadcast on the Very High Frequency
band between 30 and 300 MHz (channels numbered two through
13 by the Federal Communications Commission).
(17)UHF television. Television broadcast on the Ultra High Frequency
band between 300 and 3,000 MHz (channels numbered 14 through
83 by the Federal Communications Commission).
(18) Interconnection. The physical or microwave connection of the
franchisee's cable television system, cable television companies
servicing adjoining townships. This includes broadcast capability to
provide subscribers with educational and public interest
programming originating from adjoining townships, upon request
of Township or Rose Tree Media School District.
§ 81-2 CHARTER § 81-3
C:127
§ 81-3. Franchise required; duration; nonexclusivity; other business
activities.
§ 81-4. Franchise territory.
A. Council may grant franchises for the construction, operation and
maintenance of cable television and communications systems subject to
the terms and conditions contained in this chapter.
B. Any person proposing to commence or engage in the business of
construction or operating a cable television and communications
system in the Township must first have been awarded, and have duly
executed an agreement awarding, a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
[Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
C. Any person submitting a proposal to enter into an agreement for the
award of a franchise under this chapter shall provide all information
required by this chapter and such other information as may be required
by Council. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
D. Each franchise shall be granted for a term of 10 years or such lesser
period of time approved by Council. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord.
No. 644]
E. Franchises granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive; by
entering into an agreement awarding a franchise under this chapter,
the franchisee acknowledges the right of the Township to grant
additional franchises upon such terms and conditions as it deems
appropriate.
F. Franchises granted pursuant to this chapter shall not be voluntarily
transferred or voluntarily encumbered without the express approval of
the Council after a public proceeding afforded due process, unless such
approval is not required pursuant to controlling law. For the purpose of
this subsection, the transfer of control of the franchisee shall be
deemed to be a transfer of the franchise. [Amended 4-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 64428]
G. Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by
the franchisee to the FCC or any other federal or state regulatory
commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters
affecting cable television and communications operations authorized
pursuant to this chapter shall also be submitted simultaneously to the
Township.
A. Franchises granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for the present
territorial limits of the Township and for any area henceforth added
thereto during the term of this franchise or renewal thereof.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection G, restricting franchisee
from selling and repairing electronic equipment, which immediately followed this
subsection. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection H as Subsection G.
§ 81-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-4
C:128
§ 81-5. System construction. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
B. The franchisee shall offer cable television and communications service
to all residents of the Township. To the extent that the franchisee
intends to impose additional installation charges for service to any
specific area, street, building or other location, the franchisee shall
clearly indicate in its proposal to enter in an agreement for the award of
a franchise in accordance herewith the technical or economic reason
for such additional charges in the enumerated locations. There will be
no additional charges without express consent of the Council, and after
a public proceeding affording due process. [Amended 4-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 644]
A. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the Township
where telephone and electric utilities' facilities are or are required to be
underground at the time of the installation of the franchisee's cable
television system. In areas where both telephone and electric utilities'
facilities are above ground at the time of the installation of the
franchisee's cable television and communication system, the franchisee
may install its service above ground only upon the condition, which
shall be included in any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance
herewith, that at such time as those facilities are placed underground
by the telephone and electric utility companies or are required to be
placed underground by the Township, the franchisee shall likewise
place its facilities underground at its sole cost and expense.
B. The franchisee at his expense shall restore all private property
damaged or disturbed during the installation of poles, cables, wires or
equipment to a condition at least equal to the kind and quality existing
at the start of the work.
C. All installations of equipment shall be durable, of a permanent nature,
and installed in accordance with good engineering practice and shall
comply with all existing Township regulations, ordinances, and state
laws so as not to unduly interfere with the travel and use of public
places by the public during the construction, repair, or removal thereof.
D. In the construction, conduct, maintenance and operation of its
business, the franchisee shall comply with all requirements of the
Township ordinances, resolutions, local laws, requirements and
specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, including
but not limited to those concerning street work, street excavation, use
and removal and relocation of property within a street.
E. The franchisee shall maintain all wires, conduits, cable and other real
and personal property and facilities in good condition.
F. The franchisee shall keep accurate and complete, as-built maps and
records of its system and facilities and shall furnish to the Township as
soon as they are available, complete copies of such maps and records.
§ 81-4 CHARTER § 81-5
C:129
§ 81-6. Services. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
Said maps and records shall be available for inspection by the public
during normal business hours.
G. The franchisee shall comply with all federal, state and local codes and
ordinances governing the construction, installation, operation, and
maintenance of the cable television system.
A. The franchisee shall comply with current and future rules and
regulations of the federal, state, and local agencies in connection with
and relating to the operation of its system.
B. Remote live telecasting. The franchisee shall provide upstream channel
capability for live or taped telecasts from at least:
(1) Penncrest High School.
(2) Township Municipal Building or other public buildings.
C. Service to community facilities. The franchisee shall provide each
accredited college or university, and each public and licensed private or
parochial educational institution (elementary or secondary, for
educational purposes only), each public library, each fire company and
each Township building and such other facilities as the Township and
franchisee may mutually agree, with a single service drop and service
without charge.
D. Interconnection.
(1) Subject to applicable third-party agreements, the franchisee shall
be required to interconnect its public, education and government
access channels with those of any other cable television and
communications facility operating in contiguous municipalities or
such larger territory as may be feasible, such interconnection to be
made within 30 days of a request by the Township. For good cause
shown, the franchisee may request and the Township may grant
reasonable extension of time to comply with this requirement.
(2) Franchisee will interconnect its cable television system with any
and all companies serving the municipalities which comprise the
Rose Tree Media School District. Franchisee will broadcast all local
origination and educational broadcasts originating from such other
townships on franchisee's cable television system, whether
produced by franchisee or such other companies serving the
municipalities which comprise the Rose Tree Media School District.
Franchisee shall make available all local origination educational
and public interest programming to any and all cable television
companies servicing the municipalities which comprise the Rose
Tree Media School District. Franchisee will waive any proprietary
interests in live or taped programming so produced.
§ 81-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-7
C:130
§ 81-7. System specifications and state-of-the art equipment.
[Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
§ 81-8. Rates; change in rate schedule. [Amended 4-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 644]
§ 81-9. Local regulatory framework. [Amended 1-25-1982 by Ord.
No. 303; 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
The Council shall have power to adopt, prescribe, make, alter and rescind
such rules and regulations, procedures and forms, consistent with
A. All performance and technical standards governing construction,
reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, use, maintenance and
dismantling of the cable television system provided for herein shall be
in accordance with all current applicable FCC and other federal, state,
and local laws and regulations; provided, however, that the Township
may require higher or different standards unless specifically prevented
from doing so by law.
B. The franchisee shall maintain and operate a cable system covering the
Township which utilizes fiber optic receiver nodes located throughout
the plant which divide the distribution of cable system signals to
subscribers in a manner which provides high-quality programming
signals and reliable service. The cable system shall be built for digital
television standards with a bandwidth of no less than 750 MHz with
addressable technology with no less than 116 video channels received
for digital or analog transmission and with sufficient portion of said
bandwidth delivering reliable two-way cable services.
C. In recognition of the fact that the technology of cable systems is an
evolving field, the cable system in the Township shall be capable of
offering cable services that are as good as or better than other cable
systems operating in the Township and as good as or better than other
cable systems operating in the counties of Bucks, Chester, Delaware
and Montgomery ("comparable systems").
D. The cable franchise agreements entered into between the Township and
franchisees shall contain state-of-the-art provisions requiring
franchisees to improve or upgrade their cable systems when the cable
services they are offering in the Township are not as good as cable
services in comparable systems.
A. Each franchisee shall state in its proposal to enter into an agreement
for the award of a franchise hereunder its initial monthly rates and
installation and all other charges for service.
B. The franchisee shall give notice of its intention to change monthly rates
and installation charges for residential service by mailing notice thereof
to each of its current subscribers to whom such charges shall apply in
accordance with all FCC requirements.
§ 81-7 CHARTER § 81-9
C:131
ordinances of the municipality and laws of the Commonwealth, from time to
time, for carrying out its functions and responsibility.29
§ 81-10. Franchise fees; financial information. [Amended 4-14-2003
by Ord. No. 644]
A. The Franchisee shall pay to the Township a franchise fee based upon an
agreed percentage of the franchisee's gross revenues, as negotiated
between the parties, in accordance with FCC regulations.
B. "Gross revenues" shall mean all revenue received directly or indirectly
by the franchisee or its affiliated entities from any source whatsoever
arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation
of franchisee's cable system in the Township to provide cable services.
Gross revenues shall include, but are not limited to, the following: basic
service fees; fees charged to subscribers for any optional, per-channel
or per-program services; revenue from the provision of any other cable
services; charges for installation, additional outlets, relocation,
disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees for video or
audio programming; fees for leasing of channels; rental or sales of any
and all equipment, including converters and remote control devices;
studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees; any and all
advertising revenues; fees charged for use of any equipment, including
cable transmission wires, to any other entity; revenues or commissions
from home shopping channels; fees for any and all music services,
including DMX fees for video-on-demand; sales of program guides; late
payment fees; NSF check charges; and franchise fees. Gross revenues
shall not include: Internet access or cable modem service fees;
installation, relocating, disconnection, reconnection and change-inservice
fees for Internet access or cable modem service; bad debts or
any taxes on services furnished by franchisee and imposed directly
upon any subscriber or user by the municipality, state, federal or other
governmental unit.
C. The Franchisee shall file annually with the Township within 90 days
after the expiration of each fiscal year of the franchisee a financial
statement certified by an independent certified public accountant in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. In addition
to the normal audit procedures, the auditor shall perform such work as
may be necessary to certify that gross revenues as defined above, as
may then be applicable, are property stated.
D. On an annual basis, upon 30 days prior written notice, the Township
shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the franchisee's
records reasonably related to the sources, amounts and computation of
gross revenues in accordance with generally accepted accounting
29.Editor's Note: Original Section 311, Cable Television Advisory Committee; community TV
workshops, was moved to § 4-35 at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II). Original Section 312, Complaints, and Section 313, Cancellations of
Service by Subscribers, which immediately followed said section, were repealed 4-14-2003
by Ord. No. 644.
§ 81-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-10
C:132
§ 81-11. Cancellation of franchise. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
644]
In addition to all of the rights and powers accruing to the Township under
this chapter or otherwise, Council reserves the right to terminate and
cancel the franchise in accordance with applicable law.
§ 81-12. Rights of Township upon termination or cancellation or
proposed transfer. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted, or upon
its termination and cancellation as provided for herein, the Township shall
have the right to require the franchisee to remove at its own expense all
portions of the system from the Township.
§ 81-13. Indemnity. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
Franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold the
Township, its elected and appointed officials, its officers, employees and
agents, acting in their official capacities, harmless at all times during the
term of the franchise agreement from and against any and all liability, losses
or damages, including attorneys' fees and costs of defense, the Township
may suffer as a result of claims, demands, suits, actions or proceedings or
any kind or nature arising out of the construction, upgrade, installation,
removal, operation or maintenance of all or part of its cable system,
including the actions of any contractor or subcontractors acting within the
scope of its engagement. Upon timely receipt of notice in writing from
the Township of the Township's receipt of a claim or action pursuant to
this section, franchisee shall, at its own expense, defend any action or
proceeding against the Township in which it is claimed that any injury or
property damage was caused by the activities of franchisee, its officers,
principles; provided, however, that any such audit shall take place
within four years from the date the Township receives such payment,
after which period any such payment shall be considered final. Such
records shall be kept or made available to the Township at the notice
location for franchisee specified in the cable franchise agreement
between Township and franchisee. Any reproduction of such records
for purposes of inspection shall be performed at franchisee's expense.
If the audit shows that franchisee fees have been underpaid, then
franchisee shall pay the underpaid amount and liquidated damages of
10% of the underpayment. If franchise fees have been underpaid by 5%
or more, then franchisee shall also pay the total cost of the audit.
E. The franchisee shall also supply to the Township such financial
information relating to the franchisee as the Township may, from time
to time, reasonably request in writing.30
30.Editor's Note: Original Section 315, Renewal of franchise, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644.
§ 81-10 CHARTER § 81-13
C:133
employees and/or agents, in the construction, upgrade, installation,
removal, operation or maintenance of its cable system.
§ 81-14. Insurance. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
§ 81-15. Violations.
A. Franchisee shall maintain insurance through the term of this
agreement with the Township as an additional insured, with an
insurance company which is authorized to conduct business in
Pennsylvania and which has an A.M. Best rating (or equivalent) no less
than "A", indemnifying the Township from and against any and all
claims for injury or damages to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction, installation, reconstruction,
operation, maintenance or removal of the cable system by franchisee or
any of its contractors, subcontractors, agents or employees in the
following amounts:
(1) The amount of such insurance against liability for damage to
property shall be no less than $1,000,000 as to any one occurrence.
(2) The amount of such insurance against liability for injury or death to
any person shall be no less than $1,000,000.
(3) The amount of such insurance for excess liability shall be
$5,000,000 in umbrella form.
(4) Franchisee shall maintain workers' compensation insurance on all
employees engaged in its installation or service of its equipment.
B. All insurance coverage shall be maintained throughout the period of the
agreement. All insurance policies shall contain a provision that the
Township will receive 30 days' written notice prior to any changes or
cancellation of the policy. All expenses incurred for said insurance shall
be at the sole expense of franchisee.
C. A certificate evidencing the insurance coverage required herein shall
be provided by franchisee to the Township upon request.31
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or engage in the
business of constructing or operating a cable television and
communications system in the Township without having been awarded,
and having duly executed an agreement awarding a franchise under
this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of the franchised cable
television and communications system within the Township for the
31.Editor's Note: Original Section 319, Obscenity and lotteries, and Section 320, Privacy,
which immediately followed this section, were repealed 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644.
§ 81-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-15
C:134
§ 81-16. Penalties. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
Any person violating any term or condition or prohibition contained in this
chapter shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000 per day for each
day of violation. In the event that the violation is a violation of a specific
provision contained in a cable franchise agreement between the Township
and the franchisee, which provides for a specific penalty or sanction for
the particular violation, the penalty provisions in said agreement, including
but not limited to any amicable notice provisions and liquidated damages
provisions, shall govern.
§ 81-17. Other laws applicable.
§ 81-18. Amendments.
purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal,
radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the
operator of said system in accordance with its then-current rate
schedule.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to
willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires, or equipment
used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures,
programs or sound.
A. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter authorizes the franchisee
only to install and operate a cable television and communications
system and does not grant any other license, permit or franchise which
may be required by law, ordinance or regulation.
B. The franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and
Township laws and regulations.
A. Subject to rights granted pursuant to an agreement awarding a
franchisee hereunder, this chapter may be amended by Council at any
time.
B. Council shall have power to adopt by resolution any rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 644]
§ 81-15 CHARTER § 81-18
C:135
Chapter 89
CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 186.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 198.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 81-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 81-18
C:136
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 653]
§ 89-1. Adoption of codes by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, including certain appendixes to the
Uniform Construction Code and regulations to Act 45 of 1999 promulgated
by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference as the Building Code of the Township
of Middletown.
§ 89-2. Election to administer and enforce.
The Township of Middletown hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 89-3. Adoption of appendixes.
In addition to the Uniform Construction Code, the following appendixes
contained within the Uniform Construction Code are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference and included as part of the Building Code
of the Township of Middletown:
A. International Building Code:
(1) Appendix E, relating to accessibility.
(2) Appendix F, relating to requirements for rodent proofing.
(3) Appendix H, relating to sign construction.
(4) Appendix I, relating to patio covers.
B. International Residential Code:
(1) Appendixes A through H.
(2) Appendixes J through L.
C. International Fire Code:
(1) Appendix B, relating to required fire flow as amended herein.
(a) Section B103, Modifications, is hereby amended by deleting
the words "Fire Chief" and replacing same with the words "Fire
Code Official."
(2) Appendixes C through G.
D. International Plumbing Code:
§ 89-1 CHARTER § 89-3
C:137
§ 89-4. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Township of
Middletown shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined
by the Township Council of the Township of Middletown from time to time
by resolution:
§ 89-5. Board of Appeals. [Amended 5-24-2012 by Ord. No. 729]
(1) Appendix B.
(2) Appendixes D through G.
E. International Mechanical Code:
(1) Appendix A.
F. International Fuel Gas Code:
(1) Appendixes A through D.
G. International Electrical Code. (The International Electrical Code
contains no appendixes.)
H. International Energy Conservation Code:
(1) Appendix A.
I. International Existing Building Code:
(1) Appendixes A and B.
J. International Urban-Wildland Interface Code:
(1) Appendixes A through H.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Township of Middletown to
serve as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the Township of
Middletown;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Township of Middletown;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Township of
Middletown;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 89-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-5
C:138
A. Establishment. The Middletown Township Council does hereby
establish a Board of Appeals (the "Board") as required by the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, as amended,
[35.P.S. § 7210.501(c)], the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
(34 Pa.Code §§ 403.121 and 403.122) and the Building Code of the
Township of Middletown [Ordinance Nos. 653 and 656 of 2004], subject
to and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Membership.
(1) Composition of Board. [Amended 10-22-2012 by Ord. No. 732]
(a) The Board shall consist of five members and two alternate
members who shall be appointed and qualified to render
decisions on matters pertaining to building construction as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, as
amended.
(b) The alternate members of the Board shall be called by the
Chairperson or acting Chairperson of the Board to hear
appeals in the event of the absence or disqualification of a
member of the Board.
(2) The Middletown Township Council shall designate and appoint, by
resolution, the membership of the Board.
(3) Members of the Board shall serve at the pleasure of the
Middletown Township Council.
(4) No member of the Middletown Township Council or the
Middletown Township Code administration may serve on the
Board.
(5) Members of the Board shall reside in the Township of Middletown
unless the Middletown Township Council cannot find persons to
serve on the Board who meet the minimum requirements of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, as amended.
(6) No member of the Board may vote on a matter before the Board on
which that member has a personal, professional or financial
interest.
(7) The members of the Board shall meet on the second Monday of
January of each year at 7:00 p.m. in the Middletown Township
Administration Building and appoint a Board chairperson, vice
chairperson and secretary, who shall serve until their respective
replacements are duly appointed. The Board shall schedule all
other meetings from time to time as may be necessary to hear
applications to the Board filed with Middletown Township.
(8) The Middletown Township Council may appoint separate legal
counsel to serve the Board. The Middletown Township Council shall
determine the compensation to be paid. Legal counsel serving the
§ 89-5 CHARTER § 89-5
C:139
Township or any other commission or board of the Township shall
not be appointed to serve the Board.
(9) The Board shall cause the date, time and location of all meetings to
be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
Middletown Township in accordance with applicable law.
(10) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with this section, ordinances of Middletown
Township and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
Board shall keep full public records of its business, which shall be
the property of the Township. The Board shall submit reports of its
activities to the Middletown Township Council as requested by the
Middletown Township Council.
C. Jurisdiction. The Board shall hear and rule on appeals, requests for
variances and requests for extensions of time, from or under the
Building Code of the Township of Middletown, which do not relate to
accessibility or the validity of the Building Code of the Township of
Middletown or provisions thereof.
D. Appeals, variances and extensions of time.
(1) An appellant may seek a variance or extension of time or appeal a
building code official's decision by filing an application with
Middletown Township on a form provided by Middletown Township
and paying the required application fee established by the
Middletown Township Council from time to time, by resolution,
within 30 days of the date of the issuance of the enforcement notice
or decision under the Building Code of the Township of Middletown
from Middletown Township.
(2) All applications will be promptly reviewed by Middletown Township
for completeness. Incomplete application forms or forms which are
not accompanied by the correct application fee shall be returned to
the applicant with written reasons therefor, for completion and
resubmission by the applicant.
(3) The postmark date of a properly completed application or the date
of personal service of such application upon Middletown Township
will establish the filing date of the application and request for
variance or extension of time for purposes of computation of time.
(4) An appeal or request for variance or extension of time to the Board
will automatically suspend an action to enforce an order to correct
until the matter is resolved, except that an action relating to unsafe
building, structure or equipment may not be stayed or suspended
by the filing of an appeal.
(5) The Board shall only consider the following factors when deciding
an appeal:
§ 89-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-5
C:140
(a) The true intent of the Building Code of the Township of
Middletown was incorrectly interpreted.
(b) The provisions of the Building Code of the Township of
Middletown do not apply.
(c) If the form of construction to be used is equivalent to the
Building Code of the Township of Middletown.
(6) The Board may consider the following factors when ruling upon a
request for extension of time or the request for variance:
(a) The reasonableness of the application of the Building Code of
the Township of Middletown in a particular case.
(b) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension
of time will pose a violation of the Building Code of the
Township of Middletown or an unsafe condition.
(c) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed
to bring the matter into compliance with the Building Code of
the Township of Middletown.
(d) The availability of materials and equipment needed to bring
the matter into compliance with the Building Code of the
Township of Middletown.
(e) The efforts being made to bring the matter into compliance
with the Building Code of the Township of Middletown as
quickly as possible.
(f) Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree
of protection to the Building Code of the Township of
Middletown.
(7) An applicant shall file an appeal, request for variance and request
for extension of time relating to accessibility with the Accessibility
Advisory Board under § 403.142 of the Uniform Construction Code.
(8) A person aggrieved by the application or enforcement of any
provision of the Building Code of the Township of Middletown shall
challenge the validity of the Building Code of the Township of
Middletown in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County. In
order to be aggrieved, a person must have a direct, immediate and
substantial interest in the application or enforcement of the
Building Code of the Township of Middletown.
E. Hearings and decisions.
(1) The Board shall hold a hearing within 60 days from the date of a
properly completed application unless the applicant agreed in
writing to an extension of time, or the applicant did not request a
hearing at the time of the filing of the properly completed
§ 89-5 CHARTER § 89-5
C:141
application. In the case of an appeal or request for variance or
extension of time involving the construction of a one- or two-family
residential building, the hearing must be held within 30 days from
the date of the application, unless the applicant has agreed to an
extension or did not request a hearing at the time of the filing of
the properly completed application.
(2) If the applicant has requested a hearing, the Board of Appeals shall
notify the applicant, building code official and any other person
who has requested notice in writing, of the date, time and place of
the hearing.
(3) If the hearing is scheduled for a meeting other than a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board for which notice has already been
advertised, notice of the hearing shall also be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation within Middletown Township at
least seven days, but in no event less than 24 hours, prior to the
date and time of the scheduled hearing. Such notice shall at a
minimum state the date, time and location of the meeting and a
brief summary of the purpose of the hearing.
(4) All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The
applicant, the code official and any person whose interests are
affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
(5) The Board shall decide an appeal, variance request or request for
extension of time by reviewing documents and written brief of the
applicant and with argument if the applicant has requested a
hearing at the time the application is filed.
(6) The Board shall keep a stenographic record of all hearings. The
appearance fee for the stenographer shall be the responsibility of
the applicant. Copies of transcripts shall be the responsibility of the
person requesting the transcript.
(7) The Chairperson or acting Chairperson of the Board shall have the
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents
and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the
parties, and shall make all rulings on the admissibility of evidence.
(8) The applicant and any other party may be represented at a hearing
by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and
present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse
witnesses on all relevant issues.
(9) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(10) The applicant shall bear the burden of proof on all matters in
connection with the application.
§ 89-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-5
C:142
§ 89-6. Effect on other provisions.
Existing ordinances and regulations:
§ 89-7. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township of Middletown for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the Code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
(11) The Board shall render a decision upon the application in which it
may:
(a) Deny the relief in whole or in part.
(b) Grant the relief in whole or in part.
(c) Grant the relief upon certain conditions being satisfied.
(12) The Board shall mail the written decision to the applicant within 10
business days following the conclusion of the last hearing on the
application. In the case of an application to the Board involving the
construction of a one- or two-family residential building, the Board
shall mail the written decision within five business days of the last
hearing on the application. A copy of the decision shall also be sent
to the building code official and to any other person who shall have
filed a written request with the Board requesting the decision.
When an application is denied or contested, the Board shall issue
findings of fact.
(13) Any party aggrieved by the Board's decision shall have the right to
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County within 30
days of the entry of the Board's decision.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Township of Middletown on or before July 1, 1999, and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time
to time.
§ 89-5 CHARTER § 89-7
C:143

ARTICLE II
Building Standards
[Adopted 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 535; amended in its entirety
5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 653 (Ch. VII, Art. 1, of the 1976 Ordinance
Book)]
§ 89-8. Special provisions for designated floodplain districts.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
flooding conditions, the following provisions shall apply to all proposed
construction or development occurring in any of the floodplain districts
designated in Chapter 275, Zoning, as amended, and as delineated in
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 30, 1993, and Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) prepared for the Township of Middletown by
the National Flood Insurance Program, Federal Insurance Administration,
including any future amendments or supplements thereto. Said study and
maps are available for reference in the Middletown Township offices.
A. Residential structures. Within any designated F-1, F-2 or F-3 Floodplain
District, the lowest floor (including basement) of any new or improved
residential structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundredyear
flood elevation. An elevation certificate shall be submitted, sealed
by a licensed professional engineer, which identifies the elevation of the
lowest floor of such structure.
B. Nonresidential structures. Within any designated F-1, F-2 or F-3
Floodplain, the lowest floor (including basement) shall be at least 1 1/2
feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain
either completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
Any structure, or part thereof, which will not be completely or
adequately elevated, shall be designed and constructed to be
completely or essentially dry in accordance with the standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
(United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1971) or some other
equivalent standard for that type of construction. A floodproofing
certificate shall be submitted, sealed by a licensed professional
engineer, which verifies that the structure is floodproofed in
accordance with accepted standard practices.
C. New construction and substantial improvement to existing buildings
and structures that fully enclose areas below the lowest floor that are
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
§ 89-8 CHARTER § 89-8
C:145
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock material only; sanitary landfill shall not
be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slope is submitted to and
approved by the Code Official.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
E. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing, consideration shall be
given to their effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
F. Anchoring. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation,
collapse or other movement, thus reducing the threat to life and
property and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge
openings and other restricted sections of the watercourse. All air ducts,
large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation.
G. Floor, walls and ceilings. Where located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation:
(1) Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without incurring structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood shall be of an exterior or marine grade and of a waterresistant
or waterproof variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have sufficient
wet strength and be so installed as to survive inundation.
(4) Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other components
shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
H. Electrical systems.
§ 89-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-8
C:146
(1) All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric airconditioning
and ventilating systems and other electrical
equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above
the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation
less than three feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
(3) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
I. Plumbing systems.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or
apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the
regulatory flood elevation.
(2) No part of any on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed
within any designated floodplain district.
(3) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to preclude infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(4) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into the floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
J. Paints and adhesives. Where located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation:
(1) Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation (i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
(2) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be sealed
with a marine or water-resistant quality sealant or similar product.
(3) Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving inundation
(i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
K. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in time
of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall be
stored below the regulatory flood elevation.
L. Streets and utilities. Streets, drainage, sanitary sewer facilities, water
supply facilities and other facilities shall be placed or constructed in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 210, Subdivision and
Land Development, Article VIII, pertaining to streets and utilities within
the floodplain districts.
§ 89-8 CHARTER § 89-8
C:147
M. Existing structures in designated floodplain districts. Structures
existing in any designated floodplain district prior to the enactment of
this article which are not in compliance with these provisions may
continue to remain, but shall not be expanded or enlarged, unless the
effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is
fully offset by accompanying improvements.
(1) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure in a designated floodplain district to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be
elevated and/or floodproofed in conformance with this article as
well as Article XXIX of Chapter 275, Zoning.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure in a designated floodplain district, to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
N. Variances in floodplain districts.
(1) If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements
stated above would result in an exceptional hardship for a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Township Council
may, upon appeal, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirement in accordance with Section 105, Appeals, of this
article.32 Such relief may be granted in accordance with the
following procedures and criteria:
(a) No variance shall be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodplain area that
would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year elevation.
(b) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(c) In granting any variance, the Township Council may attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare and to achieve the objectives of this article.
(d) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township Council shall
notify the applicant, in writing, that the granting of the
variance may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance and that such variance may increase risks to life and
property.
(e) In reviewing an appeal for a variance, the Township Council
shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:
32.Editor's Note: Said Section 105 was repealed 5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 653.
§ 89-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-8
C:148
[1] That there is good and sufficient cause.
[2] That failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
[3] That the granting of the variance will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with any other applicable local or
state ordinance or regulation.
(f) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting
the hydrostatic and hydrodynamics loads and pressures and effects
of buoyancy of the one-hundred-year flood.
O. Other permit issuance requirements. Prior to the issuance of any
building permits, the Township Engineer shall review the application
for permit to determine if all other necessary governmental permits
such as those required by state and federal laws have been obtained,
including those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act, the Pennsylvania Water Obstructions Act of 1913,33 and the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33
U.S.C. § 1334. No permit shall be issued until this determination has
been made.
P. Start of construction. For purposes of implementation of these
provisions, construction shall be considered to have started with the
first placement of permanent construction on the site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation.
For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the start of
construction includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the
structure or any part thereof on its pilings or foundation or the affixing
of any prefabricated structures or mobile home to its permanent site.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, land
clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation of sewer, gas
and water pipes or electric or other service lines from the street.
Q. Supplemental definitions for designated floodplain district provisions.
The following are special definitions which shall be used in making
reasonable interpretations of the provisions contained in this article:
33.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq. for the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act. The
Pennsylvania Water Obstructions Act of 1913 was repealed by Act No. 70 of 1978. See now
32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
§ 89-8 CHARTER § 89-8
C:149
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts
specifically designated in Chapter 275, Zoning. Included would be
areas identified as Floodway (F1), One-Hundred-Year Floodplain (F2),
Five-Hundred-Year Floodplain (F3) and Soils Subject to Flooding
Subdistrict (F4).
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY DISTRICT OR AREA — The channel of a
river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to
carry and discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude as
specifically defined in Chapter 275, Zoning.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and
the subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
OBSTRUCTIONS — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or designated
floodplain district, which may impede, retard or change the direction
of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
carried by such water or is placed where the flow of water might carry
the same downstream to the damage of life and property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years; a flood having a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in a given year.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
R. Supplementary administrative provisions for activities in designated
floodplain districts.
(1) Plan requirements. In addition to the permit application
requirements normally required under the Township Building
§ 89-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-8
C:150
§ 89-9. Fire suppression systems.
Where required, fire suppression systems shall be installed and maintained
in full operating condition, as specified in the Building Code, in the following
locations:
Code, as amended, the Township Code Official shall require the
following specific information to be included as part of the
application for a building permit:
(a) A plan which details the existing and proposed contours and
elevations (in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929) of the ground and the lowest floor of proposed
construction, one-hundred-year flood elevations and other
associated factors, such as pressures and impact forces, etc.,
storage elevations, size of the structure, location and elevation
of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, soil types and
floodproofing measures, including specific reference to the
level of the floodproofing in relation to the one-hundred-year
flood.
(b) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction has
been adequately designed to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
hydrostatic and hydrodynamics and buoyancy factors
associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such statement
shall include a description of the type and extent of
floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into the
design of the structure.
(2) Review by county conservation district. A copy of all applications
and plans for construction or development in any designated
floodplain district to be considered for approval shall be submitted
by the Township Code Official to the County Conservation District
for review prior to issuance of a building permit. The
recommendation of the Conservation District shall be considered
by the Township Code Official for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
A. Use Group A (assembly) occupancies.
(1) Use Group A-1 (theaters): in buildings or structures and all portions
thereof of Use Group A-1, no exceptions.
(2) Use Group A-2 (nightclubs, discos, etc.): in buildings or structures
and all portions thereof of Use Group A-2:
(a) When of construction Type 1, 2, 3 or 4, and more than 5,000
square feet in area, or more than one story.
(b) When of construction Type 5.
§ 89-8 CHARTER § 89-9
C:151
(3) Use Group A-3 (restaurants, museums, etc.): in buildings or
structures and all portions thereof of Use Group A-3:
(a) When of construction Type 1, 2, 3 or 4, and more than 5,000
square feet in area, or more than one story.
(b) When of construction Type 5.
(4) Use Group A-4 (churches): in buildings or structures and all
portions thereof of Use Group A-4:
(a) When of construction Type 1, 2, 3 or 4, and more than 5,000
square feet in area, or more than one story.
(b) When of construction Type 5.
(5) Use Group A-5 (outdoor assembly): in buildings or structures,
except temporary structures, and all portions thereof of Use Group
A-5:
(a) When of construction Type 3, 4 or 5, and more than 50%
enclosed by exterior walls, and more than 10,000 square feet
in area.
B. Use Group B (business, office, etc.).
(1) Use Group B: in buildings or structures and all portions thereof of
Use Group B:
(a) When of construction Type 1, 2, 3 or 4, and more than 5,000
square feet per floor, or more than 15,000 square feet in total
area on all floors, or more than three stories or 35 feet in
height above the lowest level of Fire Department access.
(b) When of construction Type 5.
C. Use Group E: educational occupancies.
(1) Use Group E: in all buildings or structures and all portions thereof
of Use Group E:
(a) When of construction Type 1 and 2 and more than 10,000
square feet per floor, or more than 20,000 square feet in total
area on all floors, or more than two stories or 25 feet in height
above the lowest level of Fire Department access.
(b) When of construction Type 3 and 4 and more than 5,000 square
feet per floor, or more than 10,000 square feet in total area on
all floors, or more than two stories or 25 feet in height above
the lowest level of Fire Department access.
(c) When of construction Type 5.
D. Use Group F (factory, industrial, etc.) occupancies.
§ 89-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-9
C:152
(1) Use Group F-1 and F-2: same as Use Group B above.
E. Use Group H (high hazard) occupancies.
(1) Use Group H: in buildings or structures and all portions thereof of
Use Group H, including H-1, H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies.
F. Use Group I (institutional) occupancies.
(1) Use Group I: in buildings or structures and all portions thereof of
Use Group I-1, I-2 and I-3, no exceptions.
G. Use Group M (stores) occupancies.
(1) Use Group M: same as Use Group B above.
H. Use Group R (residential) occupancies.
(1) Use Group R-1 (hotels, motels, etc.): in buildings or structures and
all portions thereof of Use Group R-1 in accordance with Section
906.2.1 or 906.2.2., no exceptions.
(2) Use Group R-2 (apartments, dormitories, etc.): in buildings or
structures and all portions thereof of Use Group R-2 in accordance
with Section 906.2.1 or 906.2.2., no exceptions.
I. Use Group S (storage) occupancies.
(1) Use Group S: in buildings or structures and all portions thereof of
Use Group S-1 and S-2:
(a) When of construction Type 1, 2, 3 or 4, same as use Group B
(above).
(b) When of construction Type 5.
J. Public Garages (Group I and Group II): in all public garages:
(1) When more than 10,000 square feet in area.
(2) When more than 7,500 square feet in area and more than one story
in height.
(3) When more than 5,000 square feet in area and more than two
stories in height.
(4) When more than three stories in height.
(5) When located in a building(s) of mixed occupancy as defined in the
BOCA National Building Code, 1993 Edition.
(6) When located in a story that is more than 50% below grade.
(7) In an interior fuel-dispensing area(s).
K. Bus garages: in all bus garages:
§ 89-9 CHARTER § 89-9
C:153
§ 89-10. Smoke detectors in dwellings.
Whenever substantial additions, alterations or repairs occur to the interior
of a dwelling which require the issuance of a building permit, or when one
or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the
entire building shall be provided with smoke detectors installed and located
as required by the BOCA National Building Code, 1993 Edition, for new
dwellings.
(1) When required by Subsection J above.
(2) When used as a passenger terminal for four or more buses.
(3) When used for the storage or loading of four or more buses.
L. Unlimited area buildings: in unlimited area buildings as required by
Section 507.0 of the BOCA National Building Code, 1993 Edition.
M. Additional fire-suppression systems. The installation of a complete or
partial fire suppression system is required as specified in Sections
904.10 and 904.11 and Table 904.11 of the BOCA National Building
Code, 1993 Edition. Limited area sprinkler systems shall be designed,
installed and maintained in accordance with Section 907.0 of the BOCA
National Building Code, 1993 Edition.
N. High-rise buildings: in high-rise buildings and all portions thereof:
(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to all buildings of any use
group when such buildings are more than three stories or 35 feet in
height above the lowest level of Fire Department access.
O. Covered mall buildings: in all covered mall buildings and portions
thereof:
(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to all covered mall
buildings and portions thereof as defined in the BOCA National
Building Code, 1993 Edition.
§ 89-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-10
C:154
ARTICLE III
Plumbing Standards
[Adopted 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 536; amended in its entirety
5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 653 (Ch. VII, Art. 2, of the 1976 Ordinance
Book)]
§ 89-11. Amendments to the BOCA National Plumbing Code, 1993
edition.
A. Chapter 1, Section P-108.1 is amended by the addition of the following
paragraph to the existing text: "No construction, alteration or work of
any kind in connection with any water supply, sewage disposal or
sanitary drainage system shall be commenced until the person, firm or
corporation who is to perform the work covered by this code shall
present to the Code Enforcement Officer satisfactory proof of
qualifications. The applicant shall register his or its name and address
on a form supplied by the Township and shall pay a registration fee for
each calendar year or part thereof. A certificate of insurance, in an
amount not less than $100,000, must be submitted with the application
for registration. A person performing any work covered by this code on
his own home shall not be required to be registered, but must
demonstrate to the Code Enforcement Officer qualifications to perform
the work to be done. However, a plumbing permit shall be required,
unless otherwise excepted by another section of this article.
B. Chapter 3, Section P-303.1 is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence: "Notwithstanding the above, no condensate line
from air conditioners, dehumidifiers or similar appliances shall
discharge into a sanitary sewage system unless specifically approved by
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer or the Middletown Township
Sewer Authority.
C. Chapter 3, Section P-304.1 is hereby amended by deletion of the printed
text and substitution of the following: "The water distribution and
drainage system of any building in which plumbing fixtures are
installed shall be connected to a public water main and public sewer
respectively, if available. Where a public water main or public sewer
line is not available, an individual, private water supply and sewage
disposal system shall be provided. Each individual water supply or
sewage disposal system shall be constructed in accordance with all
applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PaDEP) and the following:
(1) Permits shall be required for the construction or alteration of all onlot
sewage disposal systems, regardless of lot size.
(2) Each percolation test (perc test) shall be observed by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO). A minimum of three visits to
the test site will occur with readings observed during the visits.
After the conclusion of the test, the test data shall be submitted to
§ 89-11 CHARTER § 89-11
C:155
the SEO and the results will be verified prior to the issuance of a
permit.
(3) If a distribution box (D-BOX) is to be installed, the D-BOX shall be
installed so the base of the D-BOX is 36 inches below grade on
undisturbed soil or the D-BOX rests on a foundation that extends to
36 inches below grade.
D. Chapter 3, Section P-304.3 is hereby amended by deletion of the printed
text and the substitution of the following: "Every building with installed
plumbing fixtures and intended for human habitation, occupancy or use
and located within 150 feet of a street, alley or easement, or adjacent to
or abutting property to which there is public water shall have a
connection to the public water supply service."
E. Chapter 3, Section P-309.5 is hereby amended by the deletion of the
printed text and the substitution of the following: "Installation of
building sewers which connect to public sewers shall conform to the
standards of the Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer
Authority. A public sewer system shall be deemed available to premises
used for human occupancy within the Township of Middletown as set
forth in the Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority's
standards and requirements."
F. Chapter 4, Section P-403.4 is hereby amended by the deletion of the
printed text and the substitution of the following: "Water service pipe
installed from the utility company's main to the meter shall be Type K
copper or copper alloy pipe or tube, or ductile iron pipe. Water service
pipe on the house side of the meter shall conform to one of the
standards listed in Table P-402.4. All pipe or tubing when used
underground for water service and when installed outside of a building
wall shall have a minimum working pressure of 160 pounds per square
inch 1,103 kilopascals at 73.4° F.) 23° C. Where the water pressure
exceeds 160 pounds per square inch 1,103 kilopascals, piping material
shall have a minimum rated pressure equal to the highest available
pressure. Plastic water service piping, where entering a building, shall
terminate within five feet inside the point of entry."
G. Chapter 6, Section P-606.2 is hereby amended by the addition of a new
Subsection A, as follows:
A. Residential sewage pumping systems. A complete residential
sewage pumping system shall include one sewage grinder pump
or one solids handling sewage pump; level controls, fiberglass,
polyethylene, PVC or concrete sump with removable cover and
vent flange; inlet and discharge flange, discharge pipe and check
valve. A weatherproof control box shall be supplied for mounting
at the sump location or remote from the sump location as required.
1. Operating conditions.
§ 89-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-11
C:156
a. Solids handling sewage pumps shall be capable of passing
two-inch spherical solids with two-inch national pipe
thread (NPT) discharge.
b. Sewage grinder pumps shall be capable of macerating all
material in normal domestic sewage and pump it through
a discharge of 1 1/2 inch.
c. The pump shall have a minimum capacity of eight gallons
per minute at the operating conditions at the specific
installation location. Maximum output per pumping cycle
shall not exceed 120 gallons.
2. Motor. The motor shall be capable of operating fully
submerged and shall be provided with an automatic reset
thermal overload protector.
3. Level control. Sump level control shall be a sealed mercury
switch in a float ball, pressure switch or float switch.
4. Electrical control panel.
a. The control panel shall have a NEMA I enclosure for inside
mounting or a NEMA III enclosure for outside mounting.
b. The panel shall have overload protection for one leg for
single-phase power and three legs for three-phase power,
manual reset button and a hands-off automatic switch. An
electrical underwriter's inspection certificate is required
for the complete electrical installation.
5. Check valve and piping. A non-clog flapper-type or ball check
valve shall be provided in the discharge piping to prevent
backflow. Discharge piping shall be PVC pressure pipe
minimum Schedule 40. All pressure pipe joints shall be rigid.
No flexible connectors will be permitted. A pipe union shall be
installed to access pump or check valve, or both.
6. Sump basin cover. A separate basin cover shall be supplied
of the same material as the sump basin and shall be provided
with a sealing gasket. The cover shall include mounting
flanges, pipe discharge sealing flange, removable pump cover,
electrical cord grips and sealing and vent flange. A concrete
basin shall be provided with a raintight concrete cover.
7. Sump basin. The sump basin shall be fiberglass, polyethylene,
PVC or concrete and shall have a maximum storage capacity
of 500 gallons. Septic tank and cesspools shall not be utilized
as a sump basin.
8. Piping. All piping external to the sump basin shall be PVC pipe
conforming to ASTM specification D2241, SDR26 (Class 160).
§ 89-11 CHARTER § 89-11
C:157
9. Alarm. The sump basin shall be equipped with a warning
device to indicate when the basin is filled to 75% of its
capacity. Such warning device shall create a visual or audible
signal, or both, at a location frequented by the owner or other
responsible individual.
B. Deletions from the BOCA National Plumbing Code, 1993 Edition.
1. The BOCA National Plumbing Code, 1993 Edition, is further
amended by deletion of the following sections: P-113.2,
P-116.4, P-121.0 and P-805.4.
2. The code is further amended by deletion of the following
words from Section P-118.2; "shall be liable for a fine of not
less than (designate) dollars or more than (designate) dollars."
§ 89-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-11
C:158
ARTICLE IV
Fire Prevention
[Adopted 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 537; amended in its entirety
5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 653 (Ch. VII, Art. 3, of the 1976 Ordinance
Book)]
§ 89-12. Open burning. [Amended 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 705]
Amendments to the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, 1993 Edition.
§ 89-13. Fire lanes.
A. Chapter 4, Section F-403.4. is hereby amended by the addition of the
word "agriculture" after the word "silviculture" in the third sentence.
B. Chapter 4, Section F-403.5 is hereby amended by the addition of a new
Subsection F-403.5.1 as follows: "F-403.5.1. Open burning operations
shall be prohibited on the surface of any street, dish gutter or curbing."
C. Chapter 4, Section F-403.6 is hereby amended by the addition of a new
Subsection F-403.6.1 as follows: "F-403.6.1. The open burning of leaves,
grass clippings and all other vegetative matter is prohibited at all
times."
A. Deletions from the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, 1993 Edition.
B. Chapter 3, Section F-311.0, Fire Lanes, is hereby deleted and the
following provisions substituted in its place:
SECTION F-311.0 FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR
PUBLIC USE
F-311.1 Designation of fire lanes. The marking of fire lanes on
private property devoted to public use shall be required on all parking
areas and other similar places, so as to insure that firefighting and
other lifesaving equipment shall have access to all portions of the
property at all times. The plans for fire lanes shall be submitted to and
approved by the Fire Marshal and a permanent record of the marking
of said fire lanes shall be maintained by the Township of Middletown.
The cost of marking said fire lanes and plan of same shall be borne by
the owner of the property where said lanes are located.
F311.2 Parking or otherwise obstructing fire lanes. The parking
of any vehicle or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at
all times.
F311.3 Maintenance. All designated fire lane signs or markings, or
both, shall be maintained in a clear and legible condition at all times
and replaced when necessary to ensure adequate visibility.
§ 89-12 CHARTER § 89-14
C:159
§ 89-14. Fine for parking in designated fire lane.
Any person, business or corporation who or which has been cited for
parking in a fire lane or fire zone or obstructing an emergency exit or
entrance, fire hydrant or fire department connection shall pay, within five
days to the Township of Middletown, a fine of $10 for each citation.
§ 89-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 89-14
C:160
ARTICLE V
Electricians, Licensing of
[Adopted 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 538; amended in its entirety
5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 653 (Ch. VII, Art. 4, of the 1976 Ordinance
Book)]
§ 89-15. Electrical license required.
A. No electrical work of any kind shall be performed within the Township
by any master electrical contractor, chief plant electrician or other
qualified individual until the person, firm or corporation who is to
perform such electrical work shall present satisfactory proof of his or
her being a qualified electrician. The applicant shall register his, her or
its name and address and other pertinent information on a form to be
submitted with the electrical license application. A certificate of
insurance, in an amount not less than $100,000, shall be submitted with
the application for registration.
(1) Upon issuance, such license shall continue in full force and effect
following its issuance to and including the 31st day of December in
the year of issuance unless sooner revoked.
(2) Any applicant who is refused a license or whose license is revoked
prior to expiration shall have the right to appeal such action
pursuant to Section 409 of this article.34 Failure to comply with the
licensing requirements in Subsection A above or evidence of
unsatisfactory knowledge or performance pursuant to the
requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be cause for
revocation or refusal to issue or renew an electrical license.
B. A person performing electrical work, pursuant to this article and code
on his own home or structure shall not be required to obtain an
electrical license, but shall demonstrate to the Examining Board
qualifications to perform the work to be done. An electrical permit, as
required below, shall be required.
34.Editor's Note: Said Section 409 was repealed 5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 653.
§ 89-15 CHARTER § 89-15
C:161

ARTICLE VI
Natural Cut Trees in Certain Occupancies
[Adopted 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 655]
§ 89-16. Restricted occupancies.
Middletown Township hereby adopts Section 804.1.1 of the International
Fire Code, 2003 Edition, and any successor provisions as follows:
Section 804.1.1. Restricted occupancies. Natural cut trees shall be
prohibited in Group A, E, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2 and R-4 occupancies
(as defined in the International Building Code and International Fire Code,
2003 and successor editions).
Exception: Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system, installed in accordance with Section 903.1.1 or 903.3.1.2
(of the International Fire Code, 2003 or successor editions), shall not be
prohibited in Group A, E, M, R-1 and R-2 (as defined in the International
Building Code and International Fire Code, 2003 and successor editions).
§ 89-16 CHARTER § 89-16
C:163
Chapter 112
FIREARMS
§ 112-1. Unlawful discharge of firearms.
§ 112-2. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in the Game and Wildlife Code and
Regulations, any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a summary offense. Except as otherwise provided
in the Game and Wildlife Code35 and regulations, any person who violates
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300 for each offense,
plus the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such fine and costs,
the violator shall be confined in the Delaware County Jail for a period of not
more than 30 days.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm anywhere
within Middletown Township except in defense of person or property in
accordance with Pennsylvania law; or except to the extent otherwise
provided in the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code, Act of July 8,
1986, P.L. 442, No. 93, 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as the same may be
amended from time to time, and/or in any regulations promulgated
thereunder (the Game and Wildlife Code and regulations); or except by
authorized persons on properly designated property used by a hunting
or gun club as a shooting or target range; or except by law enforcement
officials while on duty.
B. The term "firearm" as used herein shall mean any gun, revolver, pistol,
shotgun, rifle or other weapon capable of propelling a projectile by
means of an explosive material or charge.
C. The phrase "hunting club or gun club" as used herein shall mean the
existing hunting and gun club in Middletown Township, more
specifically the Delaware County Sportsmen's Association located on ±
59 acres at 168 Fox Road and the Delaware County Field and Stream
located on ± 66 acres at 713-749 Creek Road.
D. The phrase "shooting or target range" as used herein shall mean a
properly constructed, properly safeguarded and properly designated
area which is owned, leased or maintained by a military or police
organization or by a hunting club or gun club as above defined and
which is used for firearm target practice.
35.Editor's Note: See 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 89-16 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 112-2
C:164
Chapter 127
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Food establishments — See Ch. 127.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Water — See Ch. 242.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 127-1. General provisions. [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 490;
3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 504; 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 530]
A. Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this chapter,
shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ADULTERATED FOOD — Food which:
CONSUMER, CUSTOMER AND/OR PATRON — Any person to whom
food and/or drink is served (whether or not for payment), sold or offered
for sale.
CORROSION-RESISTANT MATERIAL — A material which maintains its
original surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food,
cleaning compounds and sanitizing solutions which may be in contact
with it.
Bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
(1)
Bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for
which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in
excess of such tolerance if one has been established;
(2)
Consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid or decomposed
substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
(3)
Has been processed, prepared, packed or held under unsanitary
conditions, whereby it may have become contaminated with filth or
rendered injurious to health;
(4)
Is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal, or an animal
which had died otherwise than by slaughter; or
(5)
Is in a container composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or
deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health.
(6)
§ 112-2 CHARTER § 127-1
C:165
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EASILY CLEANABLE — Readily accessible and of such material and
finish, and so fabricated that residue may be completely removed by
normal cleaning methods.
EMPLOYEE — Any cook, waiter, kitchen help or other employee of any
kind in a food establishment who, in any manner whatever, handles or
comes in contact with any food or drink served to or provided for the
public, and the proprietor or any member of the proprietor's family who
handles said food or drink.
EQUIPMENT — All stoves, ranges, hoods, meatblocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dish-washing machines, steam tables and similar
items, other than utensils, used in the operation of a food-service
establishment.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient intended in whole or in part for human consumption.
FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES — Surfaces of equipment and utensils
which normally come in contact with food, directly or indirectly.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A public eating and drinking place, as
defined herein, a retail food establishment, as defined herein, a
temporary public eating and drinking place, as defined herein, and any
other place regulated herein.
GARBAGE — All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body waste,
including animal and vegetable offal.
LICENSOR — Middletown Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania
Department of Health.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
other entity.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Any perishable food which
consists in whole or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat,
poultry, fish, shellfish or other ingredients capable of supporting rapid
and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
PROPRIETOR — Any person, partnership, association, corporation or
other entity conducting or operating a food establishment within the
Township.
PUBLIC EATING AND DRINKING PLACE — Any public establishment
within the Township which serves food or drink to customers or patrons
and which is regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
PUBLIC ESTABLISHMENTS — Any place in which or at which food
and/or drink is served to one or more individual or individuals, other
than within a residential household or family dwelling unit and other
than at the Fair Acres Geriatric Center (which Center is owned and
operated by the County of Delaware and has dietary departments which
§ 127-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-1
C:166
are reviewed for food preparation, service, distribution and sanitation
standards by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Health, Division of Long Term Care), regardless of whether money is
paid for such food or drink, whether the place or server is a profit or
nonprofit entity, whether food service is the primary function of the
establishment or whether individuals are served only at the invitation
of the establishment or members of the establishment. "Public
establishment" shall include but not be limited to hospitals, medical
and health care facilities, nursing homes, schools and other educational
facilities, employee cafeterias, penal institutions and any other place
where food is served to one or more individual or individuals, other than
within a residential household or family dwelling unit and other than at
the Fair Acres Geriatric Center.
REFUSE — All nonputrescible wastes generally regarded and classified
as rubbish, trash, junk and similar designations which have been
rejected by the owner or possessor thereof as useless or worthless.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any place, whether temporary or
permanent, stationary or mobile, where food or drink is packaged,
stored, served, sold or offered for sale directly to the consumer.
SAFE TEMPERATURE — Applied to potentially hazardous food, an
internal temperature of 45° F. or below and 140° F. or above.
SANITIZE — Effective bactericidal treatment of clean surfaces of
equipment and utensils by a process which has been approved by the
Department as being effective in destroying microorganisms, including
pathogens.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use
of water for domestic water supply or for recreation.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether community or individual,
publicly or privately owned, for the collection and disposal of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature, or both, including various devices
for the treatment of such sewage or industrial wastes.
SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES — Cups, containers, lids or closures,
plates, knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, place mats,
napkins, doilies, wrapping materials and all similar articles which are
constructed wholly or in part from paper, paperboard, molded pulp,
foil, wood, plastic, synthetic or other readily destructible materials, and
which are intended by the manufacturers and generally recognized by
the public for one use only and then to be discarded.
SOURCE — Any well, spring, cistern, infiltration gallery, stream,
reservoir, pond or lake from which water is taken, by any means, either
intermittently or continuously, for use by the public.
§ 127-1 CHARTER § 127-1
C:167
TEMPORARY PUBLIC EATING AND DRINKING PLACE — Any public
eating or drinking place which operates at any location for a temporary
period of time not to exceed more than 14 consecutive calendar days,
regardless of whether the establishment operates continuously during
this time, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or
similar transitory gathering. Mobile food-service establishments shall
be considered "temporary public eating and drinking places" for the
purposes of this chapter.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
UTENSILS — Any tableware and kitchenware used in the storage,
preparation, conveying or serving of food.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, lakes, dammed water, ponds, springs and all other
bodies of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATER SUPPLY — A source or sources of water, as well as any and all
water treatment, storage, transmission and distribution facilities.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the provisions of this chapter shall be to
provide regulations for the sanitary treatment and serving of food and
drink in the various food establishments of the Township.
C. Licensing and fees.
(1) License requirement. Proprietors shall not operate or conduct a
food establishment within the Township except in compliance with
the appropriate provisions of this chapter. Before granting any
initial license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the
licensor shall visit and inspect the food establishment for which a
license has been requested. The licensor may refuse to issue a
license or license renewal if the food establishment or the facilities
and/or equipment therein do not meet the requirements of the Act
of May 23, 1945, P.L. 926, as amended, 35 P.S. § 655.1 et seq., the
applicable rules and regulations of the Department and/or the
provisions of this chapter. No initial license shall be issued until
inspection of the premises, facilities and equipment has been made
by the licensor, and they are found to be adequate to protect the
public health and comfort of patrons. The licensor shall provide the
applicant with written notice of the reason for any refusal to issue a
license or license renewal.
(2) Revocation and suspension of license. Any proprietor in possession
of a valid license from either the Department or the licensor to
operate a food establishment who fails to comply with the
appropriate provisions of this chapter may have such license either
revoked, after a reasonable time to cure, or suspended by the
licensor at any time during the license period.
§ 127-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-1
C:168
(3) Timing of licensing. After the effective date of the ordinance
enacting this chapter, it shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a
food establishment in Middletown Township without first obtaining
a license from the licensor, except that any food establishment
which, between the effective date of the ordinance enacting this
chapter and December 31, 1991, is operating under a current, valid
license from the Department need not be licensed by the licensor
until January 1, 1992.
(4) Licensing fee. The fee for any such license shall be calculated in
accordance with the fee schedule for such licenses adopted by
ordinance of the Middletown Township Council. Middletown
Township Council is hereby authorized to establish by ordinance a
fee schedule for the licensing of food establishments in the
Township and to revise such fee schedule from time to time in its
sole discretion.
(5) Licensing period. Any license issued hereunder shall be for a period
of one year commencing on January 1 of each year and expiring on
December 31 of the same year, subject, however, to the right of the
licensor to revoke or suspend any such license pursuant to
Subsection C(2) hereof. Application for renewal of a license shall be
made one month before the expiration of the existing license.
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the
license period for any license issued to a temporary public eating
and drinking place shall be only for the duration of the event for
which the temporary public eating and drinking place is licensed,
except that the license period for any license issued to a mobile
food-service establishment shall be for a period of one year.
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, all
temporary public eating and drinking places, except mobile foodservice
establishments, must obtain a license for each event and for
each location at which it operates.
(6) Contents, display and transfer of licenses. Each license issued
hereunder shall specify the name of the licensee, the place
licensed, the date of issuance of the license and the period of
coverage. The license shall be conspicuously displayed in the
licensed food establishment at all times. Licenses shall not be
transferable.
(7) Inspections. The licensor shall have the authority to visit and
inspect any food establishment at any time during the normal
business hours of the food establishment without the prior
knowledge or consent of the food establishment or any proprietor,
owner, operator or employee thereof in order to determine whether
the food establishment is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. The licensor shall also have the authority to visit and
inspect any food establishment at other times if necessary in the
opinion of the licensor to abate or avoid an emergency situation or
if consented to by the proprietor of the food establishment.
§ 127-1 CHARTER § 127-1
C:169
D. Applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. All provisions and
requirements herein shall be in addition to any and all other provisions
and requirements set forth in any and all other applicable federal, state
or local laws, ordinances or regulations, including but not limited to
Chapter 275, Zoning, Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
the Middletown Township Building Code and Plumbing Code,36 Chapter
192, Solid Waste, Chapter 180, Sewers, and Chapter 242, Water.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit, replace or obviate the need
to comply with any other such applicable law, ordinance or regulation.
To the extent that any provision herein is inconsistent with any other
applicable Township ordinance or regulation, the provision herein shall
control unless the other applicable Township ordinance or regulation is
stricter than the provision herein, in which case the other ordinance or
regulation shall control.
E. Violations, penalties and appeals.
(1) Violations. The failure to secure a license when required, the
operation of a food establishment after suspension or revocation of
a license by the licensor or the failure to comply with any provision
of this chapter or any other law or regulation applicable to such
food establishment shall constitute a violation of this chapter. When
written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
has been served upon any person in violation, such violation shall
be discontinued immediately.
(2) Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300 for each offense, plus
the costs of prosecution. In default of payment of such fine and
costs, the violator shall be confined in the Delaware County Jail for
a period of not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(3) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the actions or determinations of
the licensor shall have the right to a hearing before the Township
Council. The aggrieved party and/or his duly authorized attorney or
agent may, within 10 days after such action or determination, take
an appeal therefrom to the Township Council. Any such appeal shall
be in writing, shall state the action or determination of the licensor
being appealed from and the reasons for the exception taken
thereto, shall be verified by affidavit and shall be filed with the
Township Manager. The person appealing shall have the right to
appear and be heard if such a desire is stated in the written appeal.
A prompt decision of such appeal shall be made by the Township
Council and shall be duly recorded with the minutes of the
Township.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Art. II, Building Standards, and Art. III,
Plumbing Standards.
§ 127-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:170
§ 127-2. Public eating and drinking places.
A. Food supplies.
(1) General.
(a) All food in public eating and drinking places shall be clean,
wholesome, free from spoilage, free from adulteration and safe
for human consumption.
(b) No food prepared in a private home or processed in a place
other than a commercial food processing establishment shall
be sold or used in the preparation of foods offered for sale, sold
or given away in a public eating and drinking place unless such
place is regulated by a health authority or other appropriate
official regulatory agency.
(2) Milk products.
(a) Only pasteurized fluid milk and fluid milk products shall be
used or served. Dry milk and milk products may be
reconstituted in the establishment if used for cooking purposes
only.
(b) All milk and fluid milk products for drinking purposes shall be
purchased and served in the original, individual container in
which they were packaged at a milk plant or shall be served
from an approved bulk milk dispenser.
(c) Cream, whipped cream or half-and-half which is to be
consumed on the premises may be served from the original
container of not more than one quart capacity or from a
dispenser approved by the Department for such service. For
mixed drinks requiring less than 1/2 pint of milk, milk may be
poured from one-quart or one-half-gallon containers packaged
at a milk plant.
(3) Shellstock and shellfish.
(a) All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from sources approved
by the Department. When the source is outside Pennsylvania, it
shall be one which is certified by the state of origin or the
Federal Food and Drug Administration.
(b) Shellstock shall be identified with an official tag giving the
name and certificate number of the original shellstock shipper
and the kind and quantity of the shellstock. The tags and an
accurate record of the source and quantity of all lots of
shellfish shall be maintained for 60 days.
(c) Fresh and frozen shucked oysters, clams and mussels shall be
packed in nonreturnable containers identified with the name
and address of the packer, repacker or distributor and the
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:171
certificate number of the packer or repacker preceded by the
abbreviated name of the state of origin.
(d) Shellfish, crabs and lobsters, if served in the shell, shall be
served in the original shell, but the reuse of such shells as food
containers in the preparation or serving of food shall be
prohibited.
(4) Examination of food.
(a) Food may be examined or sampled by the licensor as often as
may be necessary to determine freedom from adulteration.
(b) The licensor may, upon written notice to the owner or person in
charge, place a hold order on any food which the licensor
determines or has probable cause to believe to be
unwholesome or otherwise adulterated. Under a hold order,
food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be
unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order, notice
or tag placed on food by the licensor, and neither such food nor
the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repacked,
reprocessed, altered, disposed of or destroyed without
permission of the licensor, except on order by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Food protection and storage.
(1) General.
(a) All food, while being stored, prepared, displayed, served or
sold at public eating and drinking places or during
transportation between such establishments shall be protected
from contamination and stored in such a manner as to prevent
rodent harborage and permit ease of cleaning of the foodservice
facilities.
(b) All perishable food shall be stored at such temperatures as will
protect against spoilage. All potentially hazardous food shall be
maintained at safe temperatures. Food shall be stored in the
refrigerator so as to permit the free circulation of cold air and
in such a manner as to prevent contamination. To promote
rapid cooling, potentially hazardous foods shall be stored in the
refrigerator in shallow containers or by such other means
which shall ensure the cooling of the total mass to a
temperature of 45° F. or less within two hours, unless
otherwise specified by the Department.
(c) Raw fruits and vegetables shall be washed before use.
Stuffings, poultry, stuffed meats and stuffed poultry, and pork
and pork products shall be thoroughly cooked before being
served.
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:172
(d) No food which has been previously served to any person or
persons or returned from any counter or table shall be used in
the preparation of foods offered for sale or given away.
However, wrapped food which has not been unwrapped and
which is wholesome may be reserved.
(e) Tongs, forks, spoons, picks, spatulas, scoops and other suitable
utensils shall be provided and shall be used by employees to
reduce manual contact with food to a minimum. For selfservice
by customers, similar implements shall be provided.
(2) Poisonous and toxic materials.
(a) Only those poisonous and toxic materials which are required to
maintain sanitary conditions and for sanitization purposes may
be used or stored in public eating and drinking places. Such
materials shall be identified and shall be used only in such a
manner as will not contaminate food or constitute a hazard to
employees or customers.
(b) When not in use, poisonous and toxic materials shall be stored
in cabinets which are used for no other purpose or in a place
which is outside the food storage, food preparation and
cleaned equipment and utensil storage rooms.
(c) Bactericides and cleaning compounds shall not be stored in the
same cabinet or area of the room with insecticides,
rodenticides or other poisonous materials.
(3) Cold storage facilities.
(a) Each cold storage facility used for the storage of perishable
food in the nonfrozen state shall be provided with an indicating
thermometer accurate to ±2° F., located in the warmest part of
the facility in which food is stored and of such type and so
situated that the thermometer can be easily and readily
observed for reading.
(b) The temperature in each cold storage facility used to store
potentially hazardous food in the nonfrozen state shall not be
higher than 45° F.
(c) The wet storage of packaged, canned and bottled food or drink
shall be prohibited.
(4) Frozen food.
(a) Frozen food shall be kept at such temperatures as to remain
frozen, except when being thawed for preparation or use.
Potentially hazardous frozen food shall be thawed:
[1] At refrigerator temperatures of 45° F. or below.
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:173
[2] Under cool, potable running water 70° F. or below.
[3] Quick-thawed as part of the cooking process.
[4] By any other method satisfactory to the Department,
including but not limited to use of a microwave oven, but
only when the food will be immediately transferred to
conventional cooking facilities as part of a continuous
cooking process or when the entire, uninterrupted cooking
process takes place in the microwave oven.
(b) Once thawed, frozen foods shall not be refrozen.
C. Preparation of certain foods.
(1) Stuffed meats and poultry. Stuffings, poultry and stuffed meats and
stuffed poultry shall be heated throughout to a minimum
temperature of 165° F. with no interruption of the initial cooking
process.
(2) Custards and cream fillings.
(a) Potentially hazardous custards, cream fillings or similar
products which are prepared by hot or cold processes and
which are used as puddings or pastry fillings shall be kept at
safe temperatures and shall meet the following requirements,
as applicable:
[1] Pastry fillings shall be placed in shells, crusts or other
baked goods either while hot [not less than 140° F.] or
immediately following preparation if a cold process is
used.
[2] Such fillings and puddings shall be refrigerated at 45° F. or
below in shallow pans, immediately after cooking or
preparation, and held thereat until combined into pastries
or served.
(b) All completed custard-filled and cream-filled pastries shall,
unless served immediately following filling, be refrigerated at
45° F. or below promptly after preparation and held thereat
pending service.
D. Health and disease control for employees.
(1) Employees with diseases.
(a) No employee with any disease in a communicable form or who
is a carrier of such disease shall work in any public eating and
drinking place in any capacity which brings him into contact
with the production, handling, storage or transportation of
food and/or equipment used in public eating and drinking
places.
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:174
(b) No proprietor shall employ in any such capacity any such
person or any person suspected of having any disease in a
communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease.
(c) Any employee who has a discharging or infected wound, sore
or lesion on his hands, arms or any exposed portion of the body
shall be excluded from those operations which will bring him
into contact with food, beverages, utensils or equipment used
in public eating and drinking places.
(2) Control of infectious employees. When suspicion arises as to the
possibility of transmission of infection from any employee, the
licensor shall be authorized to require any or all of the following
measures:
(a) The immediate exclusion of the employee from the eating and
drinking place.
(b) The immediate closing of the eating and drinking place
concerned until, in the opinion of the licensor, no further
danger of disease outbreaks exists.
(c) The restriction of the services of the employee to some area of
work where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
(d) The adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his
associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be
necessary.
(3) Cleanliness.
(a) All employees shall wear clean outer garments, maintain a high
degree of personal cleanliness and conform to hygienic
practices while on duty. They shall wash their hands
thoroughly in an approved hand-washing facility before
starting work and as often as may be necessary to remove soil
and contamination. No employee shall resume work after
visiting the toilet room without washing his hands with soap
and warm water.
(b) Hair nets, caps or other effective hair covering shall be used by
employees engaged in the preparation and service of food or
washing of utensils and equipment to keep hair from food and
food-contact services.
(c) Persons engaged in the preparation, handling or service of
food shall not use tobacco in any form while in equipment and
utensil washing, food preparation or food serving areas.
However, designated locations in such areas may be approved
by the licensor for smoking where no contamination hazards
will result.
E. Design and installation of equipment and utensils.
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:175
(1) Sanitary design and installation.
(a) All utensils and all show and display cases or windows,
counters, shelves, tables, chairs, refrigerating equipment,
sinks and other equipment or utensils shall be so constructed
as to be easily cleanable and durable and shall be kept in good
repair.
(b) Food-contact surfaces of such equipment and utensils shall be
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection, nontoxic,
corrosion-resistant and relatively nonabsorbent. Food-contact
surfaces shall not be considered easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection unless they can be cleaned and inspected
without being disassembled or by being disassembled without
the use of tools or by being easily disassembled with the use of
only simple tools kept available near the equipment.
(c) All equipment shall be designed, installed and operated in
accordance with the criteria set forth by the National
Sanitation Foundation, Automatic Merchandising Health-
Industry Council, Baking Industry Sanitation Standards
Committee and the Committee for 3-A Sanitary Standards for
Dairy Equipment or other nationally recognized testing
laboratory or agency.
(d) Equipment that is placed on tables or counters, unless
portable, shall be sealed to the table or counter or elevated on
legs to provide at least a four-inch clearance between the table
or counter and equipment and shall be installed to facilitate
the cleaning of the equipment and adjacent areas.
(e) Utensils containing or plated with cadmium, lead or zinc shall
not be used, although solder containing lead may be used for
jointing if otherwise permitted by all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations.
(f) All glassware, china, crockery, pottery and utensils or
equipment of a similar character or coating shall be free from
breaks, cracks and chipped places.
(2) Accessibility for cleaning. All equipment shall be so installed and
maintained as to facilitate the cleaning thereof and of all adjacent
areas.
(3) Single-service articles. Single-service articles shall be made from
nontoxic materials and shall have been manufactured, packaged,
transported, stored and handled in a sanitary manner and shall be
used only once.
F. Cleaning and sanitizing of equipment and utensils.
(1) General.
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:176
(a) All eating or drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed and sanitized after each usage.
(b) All kitchenware and food-contact surfaces of equipment used
in the preparation or serving of food or drink and all multi-use
food-storage utensils, exclusive of cooking surfaces of
equipment, shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
Cooking surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at least once a
day.
(c) All utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation or storage of potentially hazardous food shall be
thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and sanitized prior to such use,
except that food-contact surfaces of equipment or utensils
which will be heated in the baking or cooking process of food
preparation to above 140° F. shall not be required to be
sanitized prior to usage. Surfaces of equipment which do not
come in contact with food shall be cleaned at such intervals as
to keep them in a clean and sanitary condition. After cleaning
and until use, all food-contact surfaces of equipment and
utensils shall be so stored and handled as to be protected from
contamination.
(d) Cloths used for wiping food spills on tableware, such as plates
or bowls to be served to the consumer, shall be clean, dry and
used for no other purpose.
(e) Moist cloths or sponges used for wiping food spills on
kitchenware and food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be
clean and rinsed frequently in appropriate sanitizing solutions
and shall be used for no other purpose. These cloths and
sponges shall be stored in the sanitizing solution between uses.
(2) Manual dish-washing.
(a) When manual dish-washing is employed, equipment and
utensils shall be thoroughly washed in a warm detergent
solution which is kept reasonably clean and then shall be
rinsed free of such solution. All eating and drinking utensils
and, where required, the food-contact surfaces of all other
equipment and utensils, shall be sanitized by one of the
following methods:
[1] Immersion for at least 1/2 minute in clean hot water at a
temperature of at least 170° F. Thermometers accurate to
±3° F. shall be provided convenient to the sink to permit
frequent checks of the water temperature.
[2] Immersion for a period of at least one minute in a
sanitizing solution containing one of the following:
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:177
[a] At least 50 parts per million of available chlorine at a
temperature of not less than 75° F.
[b] At least 12.5 parts per million of available iodine in a
solution having a pH not higher than 5.0 and a
temperature of not less than 75° F.
[c] Any other chemical sanitizing agent which has been
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Department to
be effective and nontoxic under use conditions and for
which a suitable field text is available. Such sanitizing
agents, in use solutions, shall provide the equivalent
bactericidal effect of a solution containing at least 50
parts per million of available chlorine at a
temperature not less than 75° F.
[3] Equipment too large or impractical to treat by the methods
in Subsection F(2)(a)[1] or [2] of this section may be
treated:
[a] With live steam from a hose, in the case of equipment
in which steam can be confined;
[b] By rinsing with boiling water; or
[c] By spraying or swabbing with a chemical sanitizing
solution of at least twice the minimum strength
required for the particular sanitizing solution when
used for immersion sanitization.
(b) Public eating and drinking places shall conduct manual
washing and sanitization of utensils only in three-compartment
sinks, with the following exceptions and conditions:
[1] In establishments were the only utensils to be washed are
limited to spatulas, tongs and similar devices and when the
only equipment to be cleaned is stationary and does not
require disassembly for proper cleaning, a onecompartment
sink may be approved by the licensor for
such purpose.
[2] At least a two-compartment sink shall be provided and
used for washing kitchenware and equipment which does
not require sanitization.
(c) Sinks used for manual washing and sanitizing operations shall
be of adequate length, width and depth to permit the complete
immersion of the equipment and utensils, and each
compartment of such sinks shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water.
(d) Where there is a need for a slop sink or device to discard liquid
waste, such sink or device shall be provided in addition to the
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:178
three-compartment sink. Cleaning wastes shall not be emptied
into sinks used for the preparation of food or the cleaning and
sanitizing of utensils.
(e) When hot water is used as the sanitizing agent in manual
operations, dish baskets shall be of such design as to permit
complete immersion of the utensils and equipment components
being sanitized therein. The sink compartment used for the
sanitization process shall be equipped with heating facilities
which are capable of maintaining the temperature of the water
at not less than 170° F.
(3) Machine dish-washing.
(a) Dish-washing machines, including prewashing units, shall be
designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated so
as to comply with the following criteria, if applicable:
[1] When chemicals are relied upon for sanitization, they shall
be of a class or type approved by the Department and shall
be applied in such concentration and for such a period of
time as to provide effective bactericidal treatment of the
equipment and utensils.
[2] An easily readable thermometer shall be provided in each
tank of the dishwashing machine which will indicate to an
accuracy of ±3° F. the temperature of the water or solution
therein. In addition, a thermometer of equal accuracy shall
be provided which will indicate the temperature of the
final rinse as it enters the manifold. All thermometers shall
be so placed as to be easily read by the operator and so
located as not to be unduly exposed to breakage.
[3] The wash and final rinse cycles of all machines shall be
automatically timed.
[4] The flow pressure of the final rinse water shall not be less
than 15 or more than 25 pounds per square inch in the line
at the machine.
[5] Appropriate connections shall be provided to enable the
testing of the temperature and pressure of the final rinse
water, and plumbing connections shall be located
immediately adjacent to the supply side of the valve
control in the line carrying the final rinse water to the dishwashing
machine.
[6] When automatic cold-water glass washers are employed
for washing and sanitizing glasses, the following
provisions shall be met:
[a] The washer shall be self-cleaning and sanitizing.
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:179
[b] All used water shall flow out of the washer
immediately following use.
[c] The washer shall contain brushes or employ other
effective means which will adequately clean both the
inside and the outside of the glass.
[d] The detergent-sanitizer used shall be one that is
expressly for use in cold-water glass washers and is
effective.
(b) Any other type of machine, device or facilities and procedures
may be approved by the Department for cleaning or sanitizing
equipment and utensils, if it can be readily established that
such machine, device or facilities and procedures will routinely
render equipment and utensils clean to sight and touch and
provide effective bactericidal treatment.
(4) Lack of adequate facilities. Public eating and drinking places which
do not have adequate and effective facilities for cleaning and
sanitizing utensils shall use single-service articles which may be
used only once.
(5) Utensils for frozen desserts and drink.
(a) Spoons, dippers, scoops and other utensils used in serving and
packaging ice cream and allied products shall be cleansed
thoroughly with hot water and soap at least once each day
immediately following the day's operation. During the period
when they may be used, such utensils shall be kept in running
water, if practicable. Otherwise, the water shall be changed
frequently enough to keep it clean.
(b) Straws offered for use shall be wrapped, and the use of bulk,
unwrapped straws shall be prohibited.
(c) Dispensing scoops, spoons and dippers used in serving frozen
desserts shall be stored, between uses, either in an approved
running-water dipper well or in a manner approved by the
Department.
G. Sanitary facilities and controls.
(1) Water supply.
(a) Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be provided
in all areas where food is prepared or where equipment,
utensils or containers are washed.
(b) All water used in the operation of a public eating and drinking
place shall be provided from a supply approved by the licensor.
Approval of a water supply shall be based upon satisfactory
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:180
compliance with construction standards for water supplies
approved by the Department.
(c) The water supply shall be adequate in quantity and shall meet
the bacteriological and chemical water standards of the
Department. Unapproved water supplies shall be made
inaccessible to the public in a manner deemed satisfactory to
the licensor.
(d) When bottled water is used in an establishment, it shall be
from a source under permit from the Department.
(2) Ice.
(a) Ice used for any purpose shall be made from water which
comes from a safe and satisfactory source and shall be used
only if it has been manufactured, stored, transported and
handled in a sanitary manner.
(b) All ice shall meet the bacteriological and chemical standards
for drinking water.
(3) Sewage disposal. All sewage disposal systems serving public eating
and drinking places shall be approved by the licensor. Approval of
the sewage disposal system shall be based upon satisfactory
compliance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 180, Sewers,
and any other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
(4) Plumbing.
(a) Plumbing shall be sized, installed and maintained in order to:
[1] Carry adequate quantities of water to required locations
throughout the establishment.
[2] Prevent contamination of the water supply.
[3] Properly convey sewage and liquid wastes from the
establishment to the sewage disposal system.
[4] Avoid any creation of unsanitary conditions or nuisance.
(b) Devices shall be installed to protect against backflow and back
siphonage at all fixtures and equipment where an air gap at
least twice the diameter of the water supply inlet is not
provided between the water supply inlet and the fixture's flood
level rim. A hose shall not be attached to a faucet unless a
backflow prevention device is installed.
(5) Toilet facilities.
(a) For employees. Each public eating and drinking establishment
shall be provided with adequate, conveniently located toilet
facilities for its employees. When approved by the licensor,
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:181
public eating and drinking places may be authorized to use
toilet facilities not located directly within such establishments.
(b) For patrons. For all new establishments or establishments
undergoing alterations, toilet facilities, separate for each sex,
shall be provided on the premises for patrons and shall be
located so as not to require the patrons to pass through any
food preparation area. Toilet facilities need not be installed for
the patrons whenever food is not consumed within an eating
and drinking place or when only carry-out food is provided.
(c) Sanitary design. All toilet rooms shall be maintained in
compliance with the following requirements:
[1] Toilet fixtures shall be of sanitary design and be readily
cleanable.
[2] All facilities shall be kept in a clean condition and good
repair.
[3] Doors in all toilet rooms shall be self-closing.
[4] Toilet tissue shall be provided.
[5] Rooms shall be ventilated to outside air.
[6] Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste
materials.
[7] Receptacles shall be provided in toilet rooms for women
for sanitary napkins, and such containers shall have
covers.
(6) Hand-washing facilities.
(a) Each public eating and drinking place shall be provided with
adequate, conveniently located hand-washing facilities for its
employees, including a lavatory or lavatories equipped with hot
and cold or tempered running water, hand cleansing soap or
detergent, and approved sanitary towels or other approved
hand-drying devices.
(b) Hand-washing facilities shall be subject to the following
requirements:
[1] The facilities shall be kept clean and in good repair.
[2] Hands shall not be washed in sinks used for the
preparation of food or the cleaning or sanitizing of
utensils.
[3] When the hot water is above 110° F., a mixing valve or
combination faucet shall be provided.
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:182
[4] Facilities shall be located within all toilet rooms, including
those provided for the public.
[5] In all new establishments and establishments which are
extensively altered, a hand-washing facility shall be
located within the area where food is prepared, not more
than 50 feet from any work area.
[6] Lavatories shall be adequate in size and number and so
located as to permit convenient and expeditious use by all
employees.
(7) Garbage and refuse disposal.
(a) Food waste. All garbage and refuse containing food wastes
shall, prior to disposal, be kept in leakproof, nonabsorbent,
rust- and corrosion-resistant containers of adequate number,
which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids when filled or
stored or not in continuous use. Any other manner of garbage
and refuse storage may be used if approved by the licensor.
(b) All other. All other rubbish shall be stored in containers, rooms
or areas of sufficient numbers and size so as to prevent
arthropod or rodent problems and other nuisances. Adequate
cleaning facilities shall be provided, and each container, room
or area shall be thoroughly cleaned after each emptying or
removal of garbage and rubbish. When disposal of garbage or
refuse is accomplished within or upon the premises of the
establishment, the disposal facilities shall be operated and
maintained so as not to create a nuisance or a health hazard.
(8) Insect and rodent control. Adequate measures for the control of
arthropods and rodents which the Department deems a public
health hazard shall be taken in a manner satisfactory to the
licensor.
H. Care of other facilities and operations.
(1) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) The floor surfaces in kitchens, in all other rooms and areas in
which food is stored or prepared and in which utensils are
washed, and in walk-in refrigerators, rubbish or food waste
rooms, dressing or locker rooms and toilet rooms shall be of
smooth, nonabsorbent materials and so constructed as to be
easily cleanable.
(b) The juncture between the floor and wall shall be closed, and in
new establishments or those extensively altered, it shall also
be covered. Carpeting is prohibited in all areas referred to in
Subsection H(1)(a) and in equipment-washing areas where it
would be exposed to large amounts of grease and water. The
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:183
floors of nonrefrigerated dry food storage areas need not be
nonabsorbent.
(c) All floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good
repair.
(d) All walls or rooms or areas in which food is prepared, or
utensils or hands are washed, or rubbish or food waste is
stored shall be easily cleanable, smooth, light-colored and shall
have washable surfaces up to the highest level reached by
splash or spray. Ceilings in food preparation and utensil
washing areas shall be light-colored.
(2) Floor drains. Floor drains shall be provided in all rooms where
floors are subjected to the type of cleaning which involves the use
of water hoses. Such floors shall be graded to drain.
(3) Surface of exterior areas.
(a) All exterior area where food is served shall be kept clean and
properly drained, and surfaces in such areas shall be finished
so as to facilitate maintenance and minimize dust.
(b) The walking and driving surfaces of all exterior areas where
food is served shall be kept clean and free of debris and shall
be properly drained so that water will not accumulate. Such
areas shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt or with gravel
or similar material effectively treated to facilitate maintenance
and to minimize dust.
(4) Lighting.
(a) All areas in which food is prepared or stored or utensils are
washed, hand-washing areas, dressing or locker rooms, toilet
rooms and garbage and rubbish storage areas shall meet the
minimum illumination standards of the Department.
(b) Lights and fixtures suspended over exposed food or equipment
shall be of the safety type or otherwise constructed to protect
food products and equipment from damage by breakage.
(c) During all cleanup activities, adequate light shall be provided
in the area being cleaned and upon or around equipment being
cleaned.
(5) Ventilation.
(a) All rooms in which food is prepared or served or utensils are
washed, dressing or locker rooms, toilet rooms and garbage or
rubbish storage areas shall be well-ventilated.
(b) Mechanical ventilation facilities which meet the standards of
the Department shall be provided as needed to prevent the
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-2
C:184
condensation or accumulation of offensive or dangerous gases,
moisture, excessive heat, steam, dust, offensive odors, smoke,
grease and vapors.
(c) All mechanical ventilation devices, including blowers,
canopies, hoods and ducts, shall be so constructed as to be
easily cleanable and shall be maintained as to prevent grease
or other materials from dropping into or onto food preparation
surfaces.
(d) All exhaust outlets from mechanical ventilating devices shall
be designed and installed so as to avoid creating a nuisance.
(e) Filters, where used, shall be readily removable for cleaning or
replacement.
(f) Ventilation systems shall comply with applicable state and local
fire prevention requirements.
(6) Dressing rooms and lockers.
(a) Adequate facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of
the clothing and personal belongings of employees. Where
employees routinely change clothes within the establishment,
one or more dressing rooms or designated areas shall be
provided for this purpose. Such designated areas shall be
located outside of the food preparation, storage and serving
areas, and the utensil washing and storage areas.
(b) When approved by the licensor, such an area may be located in
a storage room where only completely packaged food is stored.
Designated areas as well as dressing rooms shall be provided
with lockers or other suitable facilities and shall be kept clean.
(7) General cleanliness.
(a) All parts of public eating and drinking establishments and their
premises shall be kept neat, clean and free of litter, garbage
and rubbish.
(b) Cleaning operations shall be conducted so as to prevent
contamination of food and food-contact surfaces.
(c) The operations connected within a public eating and drinking
place shall not be conducted in any room used for living or
sleeping quarters.
(d) Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in suitable
containers until removal for laundering.
(e) Live birds or animals shall not be allowed in any area where
public eating or drinking place operations are carried on,
§ 127-2 CHARTER § 127-2
C:185
§ 127-3. Temporary eating and drinking places.
except that guide dogs accompanying blind persons may be
permitted in dining areas.
(f) Vacuum cleaning, wet cleaning or other dustless methods of
floor and wall cleaning shall be used or dust-arresting
sweeping compounds and pushbrooms shall be employed. All
such cleaning, except emergency floor cleaning, shall be done
during those periods when the least amount of food is exposed,
such as after closing or between meals.
I. Plan review.
(1) Review by licensor.
(a) Before work is begun in the construction, remodeling or
alteration of a public eating and drinking place where food is
prepared, stored or served or in the conversion of an existing
establishment to an eating or drinking place, properly
prepared plan and specifications shall be submitted to and
approved by the licensor.
(b) The plans and specifications submitted to the licensor by the
owner of a future public eating and drinking place shall
include, where applicable, data relating to the following:
[1] Surrounding grounds.
[2] Buildings.
[3] Equipment.
[4] Sewage disposal.
[5] Water supply, including plumbing.
[6] Refuse disposal.
[7] Any other such information required by the licensor.
A. Food supplies. The provisions regulating food supplies for temporary
eating and drinking places shall be the same as prescribed in § 127-2A
of this chapter, relating to food supplies of public eating and drinking
places.
B. Food protection and storage.
(1) Temporary eating and drinking places shall comply with the
provisions of § 127-2B of this chapter, relating to food protection
and storage in public eating and drinking places.
(2) Wet storage of packaged, canned or bottled food or drink shall be
prohibited, except that beverages may be stored in direct contact
§ 127-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-3
C:186
with chipped or crushed ice when the following requirements are
met:
(a) Drains are provided which prevent the accumulation of water
in the storage compartment.
(b) The cap, top, crown or pouring lip of the container is not
submerged in the ice.
(c) Wastewater from the storage facility is disposed of so as not to
create a nuisance or any sanitation problems.
(d) The ice and storage facility are kept clean at all times.
(e) Potentially hazardous beverages, prior to icing, have an
internal temperature of not more than 45° F. and are kept
properly iced at all times.
C. Custards and cream fillings. Treatment of custards and cream fillings
shall be as prescribed in § 127-2C(2) of this chapter, relating to custards
and cream fillings.
D. Health and disease control. Control of temporary eating- and drinkingplace
employee health and infections shall be as prescribed in § 127-2D
of this chapter, relating to health and disease control of employees in
public eating and drinking places.
E. Design and installation of equipment and utensils.
(1) General. Design and installation provisions shall be as prescribed
in § 127-2E of this chapter, relating to design and installation of
equipment and utensils.
(2) Additional requirements. Mobile food-service establishments shall
also meet the following requirements:
(a) All power equipment shall be installed so as to eliminate the
danger from electrical shock.
(b) Service openings shall be no larger than necessary to carry out
the food operation and shall be of such size as to prevent
health hazards. Service openings shall be kept closed at all
times except when food is actually being served. When the
mobile unit is in motion, such openings shall be covered with a
solid material so as to prevent the entrance of dust, flies and
other sources of contamination.
(c) Equipment shall be installed so as to protect unwrapped foods
from customer handling.
(d) The driver's compartment as well as the food preparation and
storage areas shall be enclosed and protected against the
entrance of airborne contaminants and vermin. However, the
licensor may accept a mobile food-service establishment of
§ 127-3 CHARTER § 127-3
C:187
different design whenever only commercially packaged or
canned food are sold and the contents are not removed from
the original package prior to being sold.
(e) The driver's compartment shall be separated from the food
service, storage and preparation areas by a wall. The wall on
the side of the food compartment shall meet the wall
requirements of § 127-2H(1), (2), (3) and § 127-3H(1) of this
chapter, relating to floors, walls and ceilings, floor drains and
the surface of exterior areas. However, a wall need not be
provided if the doors of the driver's compartment are selfclosing
and cannot be propped open when the mobile unit is in
motion. Doors used to gain entrance from one part of the
mobile unit to another shall be self-closing and constructed
from solid material.
(f) The hot food storage facilities and cold storage facilities in a
mobile food-service establishment shall be capable of
operating at all times whenever perishable or potentially
hazardous foods are stored therein.
F. Cleaning and sanitization of utensils and equipment.
(1) General.
(a) All temporary public eating and drinking places shall use
single-service articles to serve food and drink to the public.
However, where adequate dish-washing facilities are available
and properly used, eating or drinking utensils may be utilized
for customer service.
(b) All eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed and sanitized after each usage in a three-compartment
sink.
(c) When the only utensils to be washed are limited to spatulas,
tongs and similar devices and when the only equipment to be
cleaned is stationary and does not require disassembly for
proper cleaning, a one-compartment sink may be approved by
the licensor for this purpose.
(d) At least a two-compartment sink shall be provided and used for
washing kitchenware and equipment which does not require
sanitation.
(e) Each compartment of all sinks shall be supplied with hot and
cold running water.
(f) Temporary public eating and drinking places shall comply with
the provisions set forth in § 127-2F(1)(b) and (c) of this chapter,
relating to cleaning and sanitizing of equipment and utensils.
(2) Manual dish-washing.
§ 127-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-3
C:188
(a) Temporary public eating and drinking places shall comply with
the provisions set forth in § 127-2F(2)(a), (d) and (e) of this
chapter relating to manual dish-washing.
(b) Any type of machine, device or facilities and procedures may
be approved by the Department for cleaning or sanitizing
equipment and utensils, if it can be readily established that
such machine, device or facilities and procedures will routinely
render equipment utensils clean to sight and touch and provide
effective bactericidal treatment.
(3) Frozen dessert utensils. The washing of frozen dessert utensils
shall be regulated by the provisions of § 127-2F(5) of this chapter,
relating to utensils for frozen desserts and drink.
G. Sanitary facilities and controls.
(1) General. Temporary public eating and drinking places shall comply
with the provisions set forth in § 127-2G(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this
chapter, relating to water supply, ice, sewage disposal and
plumbing.
(2) Exceptions to water provisions.
(a) Hot and cold running water under pressure need not be piped
to temporary eating and drinking places whenever:
[1] The only utensils are limited to knives, spatulas, tongs and
similar devices or a single container.
[2] Extensive soiling of the temporary public eating and
drinking places from the food operation does not occur.
[3] The equipment to be cleaned is stationary and does not
require disassembly for proper cleaning.
[4] No health hazard will result.
(b) When the conditions of Subsection G(2)(a) of this chapter are
met, the proprietor shall comply with the following:
[1] Water required for cooking, cleaning and hand-washing
shall be obtained in a container which has a tight-fitting lid
and is easily cleanable.
[2] The outlet from which the water is obtained shall be so
located and protected as to preclude contamination of the
water outlet as well as the water being drawn.
[3] An adequate quantity of water shall be provided within the
temporary eating and drinking place in containers
approved by the licensor as to design, construction and
size.
§ 127-3 CHARTER § 127-3
C:189
(3) Additional water requirements. Mobile food-service establishments
shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) The water system shall be closed to contamination from the
filling inlet to the discharge outlets. Vent openings are
permitted wherever necessary, if properly protected to prevent
contamination of the water supply.
(b) The water-filling inlet shall be so located and designed that it is
protected from contamination, provided with a hose
connection of a different size and type from the waste retention
tank flushing connections on the mobile unit and easily
accessible.
(c) The water storage tank shall have a minimum capacity
equivalent to the amount needed for one day of operation, but
in no case shall be less than five gallons, unless otherwise
approved by the licensor.
(d) Whenever the waste retention tank is cleaned or flushed in
place, two separate hoses shall be provided for the servicing
operation, one for use in filling the water storage tank and one
for use in flushing the waste retention tank.
(e) The water fill hose, unless otherwise protected from
contamination, shall have the end of the hose provided with a
permanently attached disc or molded protection so that the
nozzle will not rest on the ground or floor if dropped. The filler
hose shall be kept in the vehicle and shall be protected from
contamination.
(f) Hot-water generating facilities shall be provided which are
able to function whether the vehicle is mobile or stationary.
(4) Additional sewage disposal provisions.
(a) Mobile food-service establishments shall comply with the
following requirements:
[1] A suitable liquid waste system, including a waste tank
having a capacity of five gallons greater than the water
storage and distribution system and hot-water generating
system combined, shall be provided. The waste tank shall
be capable of being completely drained and flushed.
[2] When wastes are retained in removable soil or waste cans,
provision shall be made to fix the cans in place so as to
prevent excrement or waste from falling or spilling outside
of the container.
[3] When the soil can is removed from the mobile unit, the
contents shall be enclosed or covered while being
§ 127-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-3
C:190
transported to the facilities for emptying and cleaning of
the cans.
[4] All hoses used to clean soil cans shall be equipped with
acceptable vacuum breakers installed on the discharge
side of the last control valve.
[5] When wastes are stored in retention tanks which are
permanently installed on the mobile unit, the tanks shall
be so designed that the contents cannot be discharged
when the vehicle is in motion. In addition, discharge
control devices on the retention tank outlet shall be
designed to prevent leakage and to prevent spattering of
the servicing area or servicing area personnel.
[6] The disposal of all waste shall be done so as not to create a
nuisance or health hazard.
(b) Temporary public eating and drinking places which do not have
water piped to their facility and which do not have a plumbing
system within their facility that connects to an approved waste
disposal system shall:
[1] Provide a wastewater container which has a minimum
capacity of five gallons, a tight-fitting lid and design and
construction features that permit ease of cleaning.
[2] Clean and empty the container each day.
[3] Dispose of all wastewater so as not to cause a health
hazard or nuisance.
(5) Toilet facilities. Each temporary public eating and drinking place
shall have available adequate, conveniently located toilet facilities
for its employees. A mobile food-service establishment shall be
provided with toilet facilities approved by the licensor on the
vehicle if the operator does not have access to such facilities at his
designated stops or base of operation.
(6) Hand-washing facilities.
(a) Each temporary public eating and drinking place shall be
provided with adequate, conveniently located hand-washing
facilities for its employees, including a lavatory or lavatories
equipped with hot and cold or tempered running water under
pressure, hand cleansing soap or detergent and approved
sanitary towels or other approved hand-drying devices.
(b) Temporary eating and drinking places which do not have water
piped to their facilities may utilize the following:
[1] Auxiliary heating facilities to produce an ample supply of
hot water.
§ 127-3 CHARTER § 127-3
C:191
[2] A basin or pan in lieu of a sink. Such container shall be
emptied and rinsed immediately after each person's use.
[3] An adequate quantity of water shall be provided within the
establishment in containers approved by the licensor for
design, construction and size.
(7) Garbage disposal and rodent control. Temporary public eating and
drinking places shall comply with the provisions set forth in
§ 127-2G(7) and (8) of this chapter, relating to garbage and refuse
disposal and insect and rodent control.
H. Care of other facilities.
(1) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Temporary public eating and drinking places shall comply with
the provisions set forth in § 127-2H(1), (2) and (3) of this
chapter, relating to floors, walls, ceilings, floor drains and the
surface of exterior areas.
(b) Temporary public eating and drinking places which are not
permanently located shall be eligible for the following
exceptions to the provisions of SubsectionH(1)(a):
[1] Floors may be dirt or gravel-covered when graded to
prevent the accumulation of liquids. Such floors shall be
covered with removable, cleanable wooden platforms or
duckboards which shall be kept clean. The area
underneath such platforms shall also be kept clean.
[2] The walls enclosing food operations may be of canvas or
another type of material approved by the licensor
whenever one of the following conditions exists:
[a] The food service equipment is so located and of such
type that the walls will not become soiled during the
food preparation and serving operations.
[b] Durable, smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleaned
splash backs or splash guards are provided which
prevent soiling of the walls. The installation of such
protective devices shall be done so no cleaning, rodent
or insect problems can occur.
(2) Lighting. All areas in which food is prepared or stored or utensils
are washed, hand-washing areas and garbage and refuse areas
shall be well-lighted and adequate for all necessary operations.
(3) Ventilation. Adequate ventilation shall be provided when necessary
and shall comply with the ventilation standards of the Department.
§ 127-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-3
C:192
§ 127-4. Retail food establishments.
(4) Dressing rooms and lockers. Adequate facilities shall be provided
for the orderly storage of clothing and personal belongings of
employees. These facilities shall be kept clean.
(5) General cleanliness. Temporary public eating and drinking places
shall comply with the provisions set forth in § 127-2H(7) of this
chapter, relating to general cleanliness of public eating and
drinking establishments.
A. Food supplies.
(1) Examination of food. Retail food establishments shall comply with
the provisions set forth in § 127-2A(4) of this chapter, relating to
examination of food in public eating and drinking places.
(2) General. All food in retail food establishments shall be clean,
wholesome, free from spoilage, free from adulteration and safe for
human consumption. No food prepared in a private home or which
has been processed in a place other than a commercial food
processing establishment, shall be sold or used in the preparation
of foods offered for sale, sold or given away, unless such place is
regulated by a health authority or other appropriate official
regulatory agency. Food received from a caterer or commissary
shall not be offered for sale unless such caterer or commissary has
a valid license as provided in the Act of May 23, 1945, P.L. 926, as
amended (35 P.S. § 655.1 et seq.).
B. Food protection and preparation.
(1) General.
(a) Retail food establishments shall comply with the provisions set
forth in § 127-2B(1), (2), (3) and C(2) of this chapter, except as
otherwise provided herein, relating to general provisions;
poisonous and toxic materials; cold storage facilities; and
custards, creams and fillings.
(b) Retail food establishments shall comply with the provisions set
forth in § 127-2B(3)(b) and (c) of this chapter, relating to cold
storage facilities of public eating and drinking places, except
that food or drink may be stored in direct contact with chipped
or cracked ice when the following conditions exist:
[1] Drains are provided which prevent the accumulation of
water in the storage compartment.
[2] The cap, top, crown or pouring lip of food containers are
not submerged in the ice.
[3] Wastewater from the storage facility is disposed of so as
not to create a nuisance or any sanitation problems.
§ 127-3 CHARTER § 127-4
C:193
[4] The ice and storage facility are kept clean at all times.
[5] Potentially hazardous foods, prior to icing, have an
internal temperature of not more than 45° F. and are kept
properly iced at all times.
[6] The food or container is of such type that no health hazard
may result.
(c) Only persons directly employed in the retail food establishment
shall be permitted to handle unpackaged food intended for sale
to the public. Display cases shall be so designed and arranged
to prevent handling of such food by the public. The provisions
of this Subsection B(1)(c) shall not apply to produce or any
other product which is adequately packaged, wrapped or
protected for display and self-service to the customer.
(d) No food shall be wrapped in newspapers or previously used
wrapping paper.
(e) The evisceration, skinning, dressing or other operation, except
the cutting, slicing or grinding of meat or poultry to facilitate
its use, handling or sale, shall be prohibited in sales rooms.
(f) All perishable food shall be stored at such temperatures as
shall protect against spoilage. All potentially hazardous food
shall be maintained at safe temperatures.
(g) Meat, poultry, fish and other food requiring no further heat
treatment before eating shall not be placed directly on a scale
unless such food is placed in a single-service container or on
wrapping paper which is only used one time.
(2) Cold storage facilities.
(a) Foods shall be stored in each cold storage facility or
refrigerator so as to permit the free circulation of cold air, and
in such a manner as to prevent contamination, except that food
already at or below 45° F. may be placed in display cases
without regard to air circulation, provided that the case is
capable of maintaining this product temperature.
(b) To promote rapid cooling, potentially hazardous foods shall be
stored in the refrigerator in shallow containers or by such
other approved means that will ensure the cooling of the total
mass to a temperature of 45° F. or less within two hours, unless
otherwise specified by the Department.
(3) Frozen food.
(a) Frozen food shall be kept at such temperatures as to remain
frozen.
§ 127-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-4
C:194
(b) Frozen products shall be moved into frozen storage
immediately upon delivery.
(c) Frozen food products shall not be loaded above the load limit
line on display cases or in such a manner as to in any way block
the circulation of cold air.
(d) Any freezer case found to be overloaded or containing thawed
or partially thawed foods shall subject the food products
therein contained to condemnation and destruction.
(e) Food products shall be rotated in such a manner that the
products first in the display case or storage areas are the first
product to be sold.
(f) All frozen food products shall have the date of processing
stamped or printed upon each package or container. This
requirement may be met by calendar or code dating.
(g) Frozen foods, once thawed, shall not be refrozen.
C. Health and disease control for employees. Retail food establishments
shall comply with the provisions set forth in § 127-2D of this chapter,
relating to health and disease control for employees in public eating
and drinking places.
D. Maintenance of food equipment and utensils.
(1) General.
(a) Retail food establishments shall comply with the provisions set
forth in § 127-2E of this chapter, relating to maintenance of
equipment and utensils.
(b) Meat blocks and cutting boards shall be free of holes, cracks
and crevices and shall be kept clean by effective methods.
(c) No oil cloth or newspaper shall be used on any counter, table or
shelf where food is handled.
(2) Equipment design and installation. All equipment, where
applicable, shall be designed, installed and operated in accordance
with the criteria set forth by the National Sanitation Foundation,
Automatic Merchandising Health-Industry Council, Baking
Industry Sanitation Standards Committee and the Committee for
3-A Sanitary Standards for Dairy Equipment or other nationally
recognized testing laboratory or agency, with the following
exceptions:
(a) Equipment which was installed in a retail food establishment
prior to June 27, 1968, and which does not meet fully all of the
design and construction requirements of this section, shall be
deemed acceptable in that establishment if it is in good repair,
§ 127-4 CHARTER § 127-4
C:195
capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition and the
food-contact surfaces are nontoxic.
(b) Equipment described in Subsection D(2)(a) hereof shall be so
located and installed as to enable reasonable compliance with
all of the requirements of this section pertaining to equipment
installation and all of the requirements pertaining to food
protection.
E. Cleaning and sanitization of equipment and utensils.
(1) General.
(a) All utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment, exclusive
of cooking surfaces of equipment, shall be thoroughly cleaned
after each use.
(b) Cooking surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at least once a
day.
(c) All utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment used in the
preparation, handling or storage of potentially hazardous food
shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and sanitized in a threecompartment
sink prior to such use. However, food-contact
surfaces of equipment or utensils which will be heated in the
baking or cooking process of food preparation to above 140° F.
need not be sanitized prior to usage.
(d) Nonfood contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at
such intervals as to keep them in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(e) After cleaning and until use, all food-contact surfaces of
equipment and utensils shall be stored and handled as to be
protected from contamination.
(2) Sinks for washing.
(a) In those retail food establishments where the only items to be
washed are limited to spatulas, tongs and similar devices and
when the only equipment to be cleaned is stationary and does
not require disassembly for proper cleaning, a onecompartment
sink may be approved by the licensor for
washing and sanitizing purposes.
(b) At least a two-compartment sink shall be provided and used for
washing utensils and equipment which does not require
sanitization.
(c) Sinks used for manual washing and sanitizing operations shall
be of adequate length, width and depth to permit the complete
immersion of the equipment and utensils, and each
compartment of such sinks shall be supplied with hot and cold
§ 127-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 127-4
C:196
§ 127-5. Licensing fee schedule.
running water. If the licensor deems it impractical to meet this
requirement for large utensils or equipment, a smaller sink
may be approved.
(3) Slop sinks. Where there is a need for a slop sink or device to
discard liquid waste, such sink or device shall be provided in
addition to the equipment and utensil washing sinks.
(4) Machine washing and adequacy of facilities. Retail establishments
shall comply with the provisions set forth in § 127-2F(3), (4) and (5)
of this chapter, relating to machine dish-washing, lack of adequate
facilities and utensils for frozen desserts and drink.
F. Sanitary facilities and controls.
(1) General. Retail food establishments shall comply with the
provisions set forth in § 127-2G of this chapter, relating to sanitary
facilities and controls in public eating and drinking places.
(2) Other facilities and operations. Care of various facilities in retail
establishments shall be in compliance with the provisions in
§ 127-2H of this chapter, relating to care of other facilities and
operations in public eating and drinking places.
G. Plan review. Retail food establishments shall comply with the provisions
in § 127-2I of this chapter, relating to review of construction plans of
public eating and drinking places by the licensor.
A. Definitions. The following phrase, when used in this section, shall have
the following meaning:
OCCASIONAL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility regulated by
the provisions of this chapter in which food service is not the primary
function of the establishment and in which food service is not provided
more than 12 times per year.
B. Licensing fee schedule. Food establishments shall pay the following
license fees to the Township, and the licensor is hereby authorized to
charge and collect such fees:
(1) Food establishments (other than temporary public eating and
drinking places and occasional food establishments):
Number of Seats
Fee
(per year)
0 and no preparation or processing of food $50
0 to 25 $150
26 to 50 $200
51 to 75 $250
§ 127-4 CHARTER § 127-5
C:197
Chapter 139
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 192. Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 139-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKYARD — Includes any space or area, whether fenced or not, with or
without a roof, used for the purpose or purposes of dismantling, depositing
or storing an outworn, discarded, abandoned, junked or wrecked motor
vehicle or vehicles, machinery, metal scrap, furniture or household goods or
accumulation of parts thereof.
§ 139-2. Junkyards prohibited.
Number of Seats
Fee
(per year)
76 to 100 $300
101 to 125 $350
126 to 250 $400
251 and above $450
(2) Occasional food establishments: $50 (per year).
(3) Temporary public eating and drinking places:
(a) Mobile food-service establishments: $50 (per year).
(b) All other temporary public eating and drinking places: $50 per
concession stand, unit or truck (per event and per location).
(4) Plan review. In addition to the applicable fee set forth above, the
licensing fee for each food establishment shall include a charge of
$50 per hour for the review of plans which this chapter requires be
submitted to the licensor. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 490;
amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 504]
A. The establishment, maintenance or conduct of any junkyard within the
limits of the Township of Middletown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and liable to be abated as
provided by law.
§ 127-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 139-2
C:198
§ 139-3. Violations and penalties.
§ 139-4. Filing with Bureau of Municipal Affairs.
A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Bureau of Municipal
Affairs, Department of Internal Revenue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, within 15 days after its final passage and adoption.
Chapter 148
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 192. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
§ 148-1. Unlawful to litter.
From and after the passage of this chapter it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, firm or corporation, to throw, place or be a party to any
throwing or placing of any papers, bottles, cans or other rubbish or waste
materials on any lawn, vacant lot, public area, sidewalk, street, or public
highway in the Township of Middletown.37
§ 148-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, before any Magisterial
District Judge shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $50, together with
costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of the fine and costs, may
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons firm or corporation, to
establish, maintain, conduct or permit the establishment, maintenance
or conduct of any junkyard within the limits of the Township of
Middletown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
this chapter shall, upon summary conviction before a Magisterial
District Judge of said Township, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 or more than $100, together with the costs of prosecution,
which shall be recoverable as debts of like amount are now recoverable,
and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be committed to
the Delaware County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. The establishment, maintenance or conduct of a junkyard, as aforesaid,
for any day, or portion thereof, shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation.
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 65729, 66529 and 65101 et seq.
§ 139-2 CHARTER § 148-2
C:199
be sentenced and committed to the County Jail for a period not exceeding
30 days.
Chapter 155
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 63.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 161.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
All-terrain vehicles — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 155-1. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to make or cause or suffer or permit to be
made or caused, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him
or it or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in the Township of
Middletown, any unnecessary noises or sounds by means of the human
voice or by any other means or methods which are physically annoying
to the comfort of any person or which are so harsh or so prolonged or
unnatural or unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical
discomfort or which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of
inhabitants of said Township.
§ 155-2. Specific prohibitions.
A violation of any of the following regulations and/or prohibitions is
declared to be loud, disturbing, excessive, unreasonable noise and a
nuisance in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive:
A. Musical instruments, stereos and other sound-producing devices. No
person, firm or corporation shall play, use or operate or knowingly
permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, sound amplifier, loudspeaker or other
machine or device for the reproduction of sound upon property (real or
personal) or premises owned, occupied or used by him, them or it, so
that the sound coming from such machine can be audibly heard at a
distance greater than 100 feet from the property or premises wherein
such machine or device is located. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit the otherwise lawful playing of a band or
orchestra in any concert hall, auditorium, club room or public park or
other public location for a bona fide purpose.
B. Sound trucks and loudspeakers.
§ 148-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 155-2
C:200
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall operate a sound truck or
loudspeaker on the streets or public places of the Township of
Middletown without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Code
Enforcement Department. Such permit shall be for a period of one
day only. Such permit shall not be transferable from person to
person or from sound truck to sound truck and may not be
extended as to the date it shall be used nor shall any permit for the
operation of such sound truck be issued for use earlier than 8:00
a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. of the prevailing local time. Every
application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of
$25 or such other amount as may be set by Township Council by
resolution from time to time.
(2) The application for such permit shall be filed in duplicate with the
Township Manager, and the permit issued shall be limited in
accordance with the information contained in such application,
which shall set forth the following:
(a) Name and home address of the applicant.
(b) Business address of the applicant.
(c) Name and address of the owner of the sound truck.
(d) Make and license number of the sound truck.
(e) Name and address of the person operating the sound truck.
(f) Name and address of the person operating the sound
equipment.
(g) The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.
(h) The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.
(i) A certificate from an engineer that such amplifying machine is
so equipped and regulated as to decibels that the sound
coming from such machine cannot be audibly heard at a
distance greater than 100 feet from the sound truck or
amplifying machine.
(3) After the issuance of said permit, the Township Manager shall
return one certified copy of the application to the permittee,
together with the permit, which must be in the possession of the
operator of the sound truck during such time that the soundamplifying
equipment is in operation. Such certified application
and permit shall, upon request, be promptly exhibited to any Code
Enforcement Officer or other law enforcement officer of the
Township of Middletown.
(4) No sound truck or loudspeaker operating pursuant to a permit so
issued may be used in such a way that it attracts the attention of
§ 155-2 CHARTER § 155-2
C:201
motorists or pedestrians, causing the blocking of streets and
thereby creating a traffic congestion and hazard.
C. Horns. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sound
any horn or warning device on any automobile, truck, motorcycle, bus
or other vehicle, except when required by law or to give timely warning
of impending danger to persons driving other vehicles or to persons
upon the street. No person shall sound any horn or warning device on
any automobile, truck, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which shall emit
an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
D. Construction work.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or their
agents or employees owning, occupying or performing construction
work at any building, premises or other place in the Township of
Middletown to operate or permit to be operated any type of
machinery, appliance, equipment or hand or power tool for
construction purposes which emits noise beyond the premises upon
which said machinery, appliance, equipment or hand or power tool
is being operated or used between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., current time or on any Sunday or legal holiday.
(2) The Code Enforcement Department shall be authorized to permit
emergency construction and repair outside of the hours specified
above upon submission of adequate proof of the necessity of such
work.
E. Motorized parking lot sweepers. Operating or permitting the operation
of any motor vehicle or motor-driven equipment which is designed to
collect refuse by rotating broom, vacuum, blower or other method
requiring mechanical operation, and which creates during the
collection cycle or operation a disturbing noise or any noise audible off
of the property on which the vehicle or equipment is being operated is
prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
day.
F. Domestic landscaping and maintenance. No person, firm or corporation
shall operate or permit to be operated any power saw, sander, drill,
grinder, mower, blower, garden equipment or tools of like nature, used
primarily for domestic purposes, outdoors between one hour after
sunset and 8:00 a.m. the following day.
G. Operation of ATVs. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
permit the operation of an ATV (as defined in Chapter 227 of the
Middletown Township Code) in violation of Chapter 227, or in any
manner such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance
which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighboring property.
[Added 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 650]
§ 155-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 155-3
C:202
§ 155-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of such fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be
a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 161
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89. All-terrain vehicles — See Ch. 227.
§ 161-1. Prohibited activities and conduct.
The following activities and conduct are prohibited in Township park and
recreation areas owned, leased or under the control of the Township
Council:
A. Intoxicating beverages or drugs.
B. Gambling or obscene or indecent act or language or any conduct that
may annoy others.
C. Defacement of any building, tree, plant or equipment.
D. The use of fireworks.
E. The use of moped, minibike, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any
other motorized vehicle.
F. Bicycles or wheeled vehicles on hiking trails.
G. Parking in other than a designated parking area or occupying a parked
vehicle after dark.
H. Lighting a fire anywhere except in designated fireplaces.
I. Use of javelins, arrows, discuses or similar equipment dangerous in
character.
J. One-time use by a group in excess of 25 persons, except upon permit
obtained 48 hours in advance from the Township.
K. Extended use of the facility for a project or program without Township
approval.
L. Use after sunset or before sunrise without prior Township approval.
§ 155-3 CHARTER § 161-1
C:203
§ 161-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any of the foregoing provisions shall
be subject to a fine of $500, upon conviction before a Magisterial District
Judge. Should any act of assembly permit a fine in an amount greater than
$500, the greater of that amount or $500 shall be permissible.
Chapter 167
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Ch. 127.
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
§ 167-1. Definitions.
M. Dogs or other animals running at large.
N. Playing or practicing of golf.
O. Use of motorized toys or models.
P. Littering or dumping of trash, refuse or other debris.
Q. Use of glass containers in trail areas.
R. Hunting with use of bows, arrows, pistols, rifles, knives or any other
weapons or devices.
S. Use of paint ball guns or other devices for the discharge of paint balls in
or onto Township park and recreation areas as described above.
[Added 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 585]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling, as hereinabove
defined.
PEDDLING — Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking
orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or
merchandise, upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from dwelling unit
to dwelling unit within the Township of Middletown; provided, the word
"peddling" shall not apply to:[Amended 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 811]
(1) Farmers selling their own produce;
§ 161-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 167-1
C:204
§ 167-2. License required.
No person shall engage in peddling in the Township of Middletown without
first having taken out a license as herein provided.
§ 167-3. Application for license. [Amended 9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
811]
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares or merchandise for immediate or future delivery, or
seeking contributions of money, property or services, or for services
performed for the homeowner by a private individual or for-profit
corporation, from dwelling unit to dwelling unit within the
Township.[Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 811]
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting as hereinabove
defined.[Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 811]
The sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable
or philanthropic purpose; or
(2)
Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk or milk products.
(3)
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Every person desiring to engage in peddling in the Township of
Middletown shall first make application to the Township Manager for a
license. If such person shall also be required to obtain a license from
any county officer, he shall, when making such application, exhibit a
valid county license. Upon such application, such person shall give his
name; address; his previous criminal record, if any; the name of the
person for whom he works, if any; the type of goods, wares and
merchandise he wishes to peddle, the length of time for which he
wishes to be licensed; the type of vehicle he uses, if any; and the
number of helpers he has; provided, where a person makes application
for himself and one or more helpers, all applicable personal information
specified above shall be given for each helper, and an individual license
shall be required for each helper. No license issued under this chapter
shall be transferable from one person to another.
B. Each license shall be for the current year. No abatement of the annual
license fee shall be made for any fractional part of a year, other than the
annual license fee applied for on or after August 1 of each year,
whereupon the said license fee shall be reduced to 1/2 of the original
fee. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they
were issued.
§ 167-1 CHARTER § 167-4
C:205
§ 167-4. License fee. [Amended 6-21-1976 by Ord. No. 199;
9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 811]
Fees shall be established by the Master Fee Schedule adopted from time to
time by Council resolution.
§ 167-5. Display of license.
Upon making application therefor and paying for the proper fee as herein
specified, a license shall be issued to every peddler. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given upon the application therefor.
Every peddler shall at all times when engaged in peddling in the Township
wear prominently upon his person such license as is supplied by the
Township. No peddler shall engage in selling any product not mentioned
upon such license nor shall any person having a foot peddler's license
operate from or with any horse-drawn or motor vehicle.
§ 167-6. Permitted selling times.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall engage in peddling
at any time on Sunday, or upon any other day of the week before 9:00 a.m.
or after 5:00 p.m.
§ 167-7. Noise prohibited.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall hawk or cry his
wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the Township, nor shall be use
any loud speaker or horn or any other device for announcing his presence
by which the public is annoyed.
§ 167-8. Parking.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall park any vehicle
upon any of the streets or alleys of the Township in order to sort, rearrange
or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise; nor may any such person
place or deposit any refuse upon any of such streets or alleys; nor may any
such person maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any
vehicle upon any street or alley in the Township for longer than necessary
to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 167-9. Fixed location prohibited.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall occupy any fixed
location upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Township for the
purpose of peddling, with or without any stand or counter.
§ 167-10. Records. [Amended 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 811]
The Township Manager shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter and shall supervise the activities of all holders of such licenses.
§ 167-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 167-11
C:206
§ 167-11. Suspension of license.
The Township Manager of the Township of Middletown is hereby authorized
to suspend any license issued under this chapter when he deems such
suspension to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals, or for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or for giving false
information upon any application for a license hereunder.
§ 167-12. Additional requirements. [Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
81138]
Every person to whom a license has been issued hereunder shall, in the
carrying on of his business or activities in the Township, comply with the
following:
§ 167-13. Violation and penalties. [Amended 9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
811]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
Chapter 180
A. The licensee shall not permit any other person to have possession of
their license card and shall immediately report its loss to the Police
Department. The licensee shall not cause or permit their license card to
be altered or defaced.
B. The licensee shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling unit
without invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately
leave any premises upon request.
C. The licensee shall immediately surrender their license card upon
revocation of his license.
D. No peddling or soliciting of any goods to any resident who has posted
upon the resident's property signs such as "No Solicitation," "No
Peddling," "No Trespassing," or such similar signs indicating a
prohibition of entry upon resident's property.
E. Any peddler entering upon a resident's property shall immediately
leave said property when asked or instructed to do so by anyone
present on the property.
F. No peddling or soliciting of any goods from a semi-tractor/tractor
trailer truck on any street, highway, sidewalk or other locations in the
Township.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 167-12, Violations and penalties,
as § 167-13.
§ 167-11 CHARTER § 167-13
C:207
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 81.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Water — See Ch. 242.
§ 167-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 167-13
C:208
ARTICLE I
Sewer Use Regulations
[Adopted 5-2-1968 by Ord. No. 105 (Ch. VI, Art. 2, Sec. 201, of the
1976 Ordinance Book)]
§ 180-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Middletown Township Delaware County Sewer Authority, a
Pennsylvania municipality authority.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any improved property to the lateral of a sewer.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of
energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process, or in the course of the development, recovery
or processing of natural resources and or man-made materials, as distinct
from sewage.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curbline, or, if there shall be no curbline, to the edge of pavement or to
the edge of cartway or easement, if not paved, or, if no such lateral shall
be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of, or place in, a sewer
which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in this Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any
improved property.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial
wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township and owned, maintained and
operated by the Authority or the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania
a political subdivision, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors, or in
appropriate cases, by and through its authorized representatives.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — An engineer employed by the Township or an
authorized member of his staff.
§ 180-1 CHARTER § 180-2
C:209
§ 180-2. Use of public sewers required; use regulations.
§ 180-3. Connections; permits. [Amended 12-8-1969 by Ord. No.
130]
A. Connection and billing. The owner of any improved property which is or
hereafter becomes accessible to and whose principal building is within
150 feet of the sewer system, shall make connection therewith in such
manner as this Township or the Authority may require, within 60 days
after notice to such owner from this Township to make such connection,
for the purpose of discharge of all sewage and acceptable industrial
wastes from such improved property, subject to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be
established by this Township or the Authority from time to time;
provided, however, that the billing for each connection shall commence
in 60 days after the notice to make the same.
B. Connection to sewer required. All sewage and acceptable industrial
wastes from any improved property, after connection of such improved
property with a sewer shall be required under Subsection A, shall be
conducted into a sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as
shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by this
Township or the Authority from time to time.
C. Private discharge within Township prohibited. No person shall place or
deposit or permit to be placed or deposited upon public or private
property within this Township any sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of Subsection A. No person shall discharge or permit to be
discharged to any natural outlet within this Township any sewage or
Industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A, except where suitable
treatment has been provided which is satisfactory to this Township.
D. Connection notice specifications. The notice by this Township to make a
connection to a sewer, referred to in Subsection A, shall consist of a
copy of this article, including any amendments at the time in effect, and
a written or printed document requiring the connection, and may be
given at any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey
sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the
particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the
owner either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, as
provided by law.
A. Separate connections required. Except as otherwise provided in this
Subsection A, each improved property shall be connected separately
and independently with a sewer through a building sewer. Grouping of
more than one improved property on one building sewer shall not be
permitted except under special circumstances and for good sanitary
reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after special
permission of this Township and the Authority, in writing, shall have
been secured.
§ 180-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-3
C:210
§ 180-4. Attachment to line; inspections; maintenance; prohibited
sewage. [Amended 7-19-1976 by Ord. No. 200]
B. Connection required after notice. Each owner of any occupied building
in the Township on property abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there has been constructed a sanitary sewer and where any
part of such building is within 150 feet of said sewer, shall at his own
expense connect his facilities directly with such sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this article within 60 days after the date of official
notice to do so, given by personal service or by mail. In the event any
such owner shall refuse or neglect to so connect within said sixty-day
period, he shall be deemed to be in violation of this article, and the
Board of Supervisors of the Township or their agents may enter upon
such property and construct such connection. In such case, the Board of
Supervisors shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an
itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to such
owner, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or
refusal by such owner to pay said bill within 30 days thereafter, it shall
be the duty of the Board of Supervisors to file municipal liens for said
construction, to be subject in all respects to the general law provided
for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
C. Application for permit. Each owner of any property to which Subsection
B above applies shall make application in writing to the Township, in
such form as may be prescribed by the Township for a permit to make
the required connection to the sanitary sewer. Upon submission of the
above-mentioned application and payment of a connection charge, the
applicant shall be entitled to a permit to make such connection.
D. Compliance required. All connections made to any sanitary sewer shall
be constructed in compliance with standard rules and regulations
hereafter adopted by the Township governing the making of
connections.
A. Attachment to sewer line. An improved property, at the time connection
to a sewer is required, shall break the existing sewer line on the
structure side of such sewage disposal system or device and attachment
shall be made, with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as
a building sewer.
B. Inspection of building sewer. No building sewer shall be covered until it
has been inspected and approved by this Township. If any part of a
building sewer is covered before so being inspected and approved, it
shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner
of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
C. Maintenance. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be
maintained in a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of
such improved property.
§ 180-3 CHARTER § 180-4
C:211
D. Excavation and restoration. Every excavation for a building sewer shall
be guarded adequately with barricades and lights to protect all persons
from damage and injury. Streets, sidewalks, and other public property
disturbed in the course of installation of a building sewer shall be
restored, at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property
being connected, in a manner satisfactory to this Township.
E. Failure to comply. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a
notice of this Township or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any
unsatisfactory condition with respect to a building sewer, within 15
days of receipt of such notice, this Township or the Authority may
refuse to permit such person to discharge sewage and industrial wastes
into the sewer system until such unsatisfactory condition shall have
been remedied to the satisfaction of this Township and the Authority.
Where the engineer of the Sewer Authority determines that excessive
infiltration is occurring in the building sewer, said sewer authority shall
require the owner or owners of the building sewer to correct the
excessive infiltration. Should the owner or owners of the building sewer
fail to correct the condition after reasonable notice, the Sewer
Authority shall cause the condition to be corrected and shall forthwith,
upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill covering the costs of
said work to such owner or owners, which bill shall be payable within
30 days thereafter. In case of neglect or refusal by such owner or
owners to pay such bill within said period of time, it shall be the duty of
the Sewer Authority, as operating agent for the Board of Supervisors, to
file a municipal lien for said correction, to be subject in all respects to
the general law providing for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
The Authority shall also pursue any other legal remedies available for
the collection of said bills.
F. Types of sewage prohibited. No person shall pass any sewage into the
sewer system containing any direct stormwater, roof or surface or
subsurface drainage from stormwater inlets, sump pumps, floor drains,
roof leaders or discharge from tile fields, nor any industrial waste,
chemicals or other matter:
(1) Having a temperature higher than 150° F.;
(2) Containing more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil, or
grease;
(3) Containing any gasoline, benzine, naptha, fuel oil or other
inflammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gas;
(4) Containing any unground garbage;
(5) Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction or
other interference with the operation of the treatment plant;
§ 180-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-4
C:212
§ 180-5. Enforcement.
Any person who shall violate this article shall be liable, upon summary
conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for each
subsequent offense, to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100,
together with costs of prosecution in each case. Default in payment of fine
and costs shall make the offender liable for imprisonment for a term not to
exceed five days. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed
and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this article shall be enforceable
and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
(6) Having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the treatment plant;
(7) Containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the treatment plant. Toxic wastes shall include wastes
containing cyanide or copper, chromium or other toxic metallic
ions;
(8) Containing total solids of such character or in such quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the treatment plant; and
(9) Containing noxious, malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance.
G. Industrial wastes. The admission into sanitary sewers of any industrial
wastes is prohibited unless the owner or occupier of the property
producing such waste shall first make application to the Board of
Supervisors to discharge such waste into the sewer system, and if
approved by the Board of Supervisors, to provide at his own expense
adequate treatment facilities approved by the Township. Such facilities
shall be continuously maintained in good condition.
H. Compliance with Township plumbing code. Every connection made
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall likewise be made in
pursuance of the Township Plumbing Code.39 The owner of the
improved property upon which such connection is made shall be
required to secure permits as required under such plumbing code (any
notice under the provisions of this article shall not be construed to be a
plumbing permit or compliance under the plumbing code with the
requirements of a permit) and such work likewise shall be done in
compliance with such plumbing code.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Art. III, Plumbing Standards.
§ 180-4 CHARTER § 180-6
C:213
§ 180-6. Purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of inhabitants of
this Township.
§ 180-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-6
C:214
ARTICLE II
Connection Fees and Sewer Charges
[Adopted 5-2-1968 by Ord. No. 106 (Ch. VI, Art. 2, Sec. 202, of the
1976 Ordinance Book)]
§ 180-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority, a
Pennsylvania municipality authority.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in parts per million by weight, utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five
days at 20° C. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in
the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage," published by the American Public Health Association.
COUNCIL — The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of
the Township.
EDU — Equivalent dwelling unit.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form
of energy rejected or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, trade
or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
PARTS OF PER MILLION (PPM) — The ratio of parts by weight of material
under consideration to 1,000,000 parts by weight of sewage. Metric
conversion will be milligrams per liter (mg/l).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in moles per liter and indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity
of a substance.
SERVICES — A person or property where the principal building is within
150 feet of the sewer system, regardless of whether or not sewage can be
carried away by gravity.
SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial
wastes, situate in or adjacent to the Township and owned, maintained and
operated by the Township, the Sewer Authority or their designated agents.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or waste exceeding a
concentration or flow greater than five times that of the average twenty-
§ 180-7 CHARTER § 180-7
C:215
four-hour discharge from the person, which is discharged continuously for
a period longer than 15 minutes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtration.
TAPPING FEE — A charge assessed by the Middletown Township, Delaware
County, Sewer Authority for each connection as determined by the Authority
from time to time and established by resolution.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, acting by or through its Council or, in appropriate cases by
and through its authorized representatives.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any poisonous substance.
TREATMENT PLANT — Wastewater treatment facility owned by Southwest
Delaware County Municipal Authority in Aston Township, Aston,
Pennsylvania, servicing Middletown Township by contract dated January 10,
1968.
WATER SUPPLIER — The public agency or private company furnishing
water services to the particular property connected to the sewer system.
§ 180-8. Imposition of connection charges and tapping fee.
There is hereby imposed upon each owner of property connecting to the
sewer system a connection charge of $200 for each connection to a lateral
of the sewer system at the curb or property line constructed during the
1968 sewer system construction project. The Authority shall, by resolution,
establish a tapping fee.
§ 180-9. Imposition of sewer rent or charges. [Amended 11-22-2010
by Ord. No. 716]
There is hereby imposed upon each property in the Township which can
be serviced by the sewer system and having the use thereof an annual
or quarterly sewer rent or charge payable as hereinafter provided (such
rent or charge having been determined, to the extent required by law, by
the Authority) for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the sewer system,
based on the schedules of classifications and rates or charges hereinafter
set forth.
§ 180-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-10
C:216
§ 180-10. Rates. [Amended 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 603; 11-24-2008
by Ord. No. 701; 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 716; 12-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 734; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 742; 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 753;
11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 762; 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 774; 12-11-2017
by Ord. No. 78940]
Rates shall be as follows:
A. The annual charge per equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) is increased from
$500 to $550 for the calendar year 2018 and each year thereafter until
amended.
B. Each other user shall pay a quarterly rental for sanitary sewage service
based on the quantity of water used, as evidenced by meter readings of
water meters installed and maintained by the water supplier for the
purpose of measuring water purchased from said supplier and such
other meters, including metered sewer flows, as may be installed
pursuant to any provision of this article and subject to the minimum
charge hereinafter provided, all as follows:
Classification
Water
Consumed/
Metered Sewer
Flows Rate Per Quarter
Other users 0 to 24,000
gallons
$151 for the calendar year 2018
and each year thereafter until
amended
Above 24,000
gallons
$6.25 per 1,000 gallons (or portion
thereof) for the calendar year 2018
and each year thereafter until
amended
40.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of the new rates would
be 1-1-2018 and that the implementation of these rates would commence with the
1-1-2018 billing cycle for residential customers and the 2-15-2018 quarterly billing cycle
for commercial and industrial customers.
§ 180-10 CHARTER § 180-10
C:217
§ 180-11. Additional sewer rent for industrial wastes.
Classification
Water
Consumed/
Metered Sewer
Flows Rate Per Quarter
Multiple use — In case of a combination of one or
more private dwellings or living
units with one or more commercial
establishments in one building,
each of which has the use of the
sewer system through one sewer
connection, each such dwelling or
living unit and each such
commercial establishment shall be
charged the applicable foregoing
rates under Subsection A or B, as
applicable, as though each thereof
was in a separate structure and as
though each had a direct and
separate connection to the sewer
system.
A. The sewer rentals and charges for collection and treatment of industrial
wastes discharged into the sewer system shall be made in accordance
with § 180-10 above. In addition thereto, further charges shall be made
for all sewage discharged into the sewer system having suspended
solids and biochemical oxygen demand in excess of the following
concentrations:
(1) Suspended solids: 350 parts per million.
(2) BOD: 300 ppm.
B. The additional charge for sewage having concentrations in excess of the
foregoing shall be based on the strength factor determined according to
the following formula:
Factor = 0.60 + 0.10 (BOD in ppm*)/(300) + 0.30 (SS in ppm*)/(350)
* NOTE: Where these figures are less than 300 ppm in BOD or 350
ppm in suspended solids, the value in the parentheses shall be equal
to one.
C. In cases where the suspended solids, in the opinion of the Township, do
not represent the true characteristics of the solids loading, the
Township reserves the right to use total solids instead of suspended
solids.
D. No industrial user shall begin or continue to discharge any industrial
waste into the sewer system until he has first submitted a written
§ 180-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-11
C:218
§ 180-12. Measuring volume of sanitary sewage.
application to the Township for permission to do so, accompanied by
a detailed report prepared by a sanitary engineer registered in
Pennsylvania and satisfactory to the Township, setting forth such
information relating to such industrial waste as the Township may
require and until the Township shall have consented to such discharge.
A. Methods of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the water
supplier discharges sanitary sewage into the sewer system, the
volume of water consumed, as determined from meter readings of
the water supplier, shall be used in computing the sewer rental.
(2) In cases where dwellings and establishments have sources of water
supply in addition to or other than that of the water supplier, those
establishments shall provide a meter on such additional or other
source of supply. The total amount of water consumed, as shown by
these meter readings, will be used in computing the sewer rental.
(3) In cases where establishments use water from the water supplier
and/or from an independent supply for industrial or recreational
purposes such that the water so used is not discharged into the
sewer system, the quantity of water used to determine the sewer
rental shall be computed by one of the following methods:
(a) Method No. 1: by placing a meter or measuring device on the
sewer connection. The readings from this meter or measuring
device shall be used in computing the sewer rental.
(b) Method No. 2: by placing a meter or measuring device on the
effluent not discharging into the sewer system. The readings
from this meter or measuring device will then be deducted
from the total water meter readings and the remainder will be
used in computing the sewer rental.
B. No meters. When, in the opinion of the Township or its designated
agents, it is not practical to install meters or measuring devices to
determine the sewer rental under either Subsection A(2) or (3) of this
section, the Township may determine, in such manner and by such
method as it may prescribe, the total amount of sanitary sewage
discharged into the sewer system, and the quantity so determined to be
discharged shall be used to determine the sewer rental. Any dispute as
to the estimated quantity shall be submitted to the Township after
notice of the estimate to the property owner. The decision of the
Township on the matter shall be final for the current year.
C. Measuring devices. All meters or other measuring devices not provided
by the water supplier but required to be used under the provisions of
this article shall be furnished and installed by the property owner and
shall be under the control of the Township and may be tested, inspected
§ 180-11 CHARTER § 180-12
C:219
§ 180-13. Prohibited wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastes which
contain any direct stormwater, roof, surface or subsurface drainage from
stormwater inlets, sump pumps, floor drains, roof leaders or discharge
from tile fields nor any industrial waste, chemicals or other matter (unless
otherwise permitted, authorized or approved by the Township):
or repaired by the Township employees whenever the Township deems
necessary. The owner of the property upon which such measuring
device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and
safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at the property
owner's expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary
wear and tear or other causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by the
Township, shall be due and payable at the same time and collected in
the same manner as are the bills for sewer services; such bills from and
after their due date shall constitute a lien upon the property upon which
such measuring device is installed.
D. Meter reading. The Sewer Authority shall have the right to read all
meters or measuring devices, and they shall be available to Authority
employees for meter reading at any reasonable time. The property
owner shall keep meters safely accessible at all times.
A. Having a temperature higher than 150° F;
B. Containing more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or
grease;
C. Containing any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable
or explosive liquids, solids or gas;
D. Containing any unground garbage;
E. Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction or other interference
with the operation of the treatment plant;
F. Having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment or personnel of the treatment plant;
G. Containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the treatment plant. Toxic wastes shall include wastes
containing cyanide or copper, chromium or other toxic metallic ions;
H. Containing total solids of such character or in such quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the
treatment plant; and
§ 180-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-13
C:220
§ 180-14. Admission of industrial wastes to the sewer system.
I. Containing noxious, malodorous gas or substances capable of creating
a public nuisance.
A. Industrial waste questionnaire. Any person desiring to make a
connection to the sewer system for the purpose of discharging
industrial wastes to the public sewers shall fill in and file with the
Township an industrial waste questionnaire, which shall furnish
pertinent or predicted data, inclusive of quantity of flow, and an analysis
of the industrial waste to be discharged into the sewerage system.
B. Control manhole.
(1) Any person discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system
shall construct and maintain a suitable control manhole or
manholes downstream from any treatment, storage or other
approved works to facilitate observation, measurement and
sampling of all wastes, including domestic sewage from the person.
(2) The control manhole or manholes shall be constructed at suitable
and satisfactory locations and built in a manner approved by the
Township Engineer.
(3) The control manhole or manholes shall be equipped with
permanent-type volume-measuring devices of a type approved by
the Township Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the
person discharging the waste, at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe, accessible and in proper
operation condition at all times.
(4) Plans for the construction of the control manhole or manholes and
all included devices shall be approved by the Township prior to the
beginning of construction.
C. Measurement of flow.
(1) The volume of flow used in computing surcharges shall be the
metered water consumption of the person, as shown in the records
of meter readings maintained by the water supplier.
(2) Where the person discharging wastes into the sewage works of the
Township procures any part or all of his water supply from sources
other than the water supplier, all or a part of which is discharged
into the sewerage system, the person discharging said waste may
install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type
approved by the Township for the purpose of determining the
proper volume of flow to be used.
D. Sewage metering.
(1) Sewage metering may be authorized by the Township in those
cases in which there is no other method of determining the volume
§ 180-13 CHARTER § 180-14
C:221
§ 180-15. Time and method of payment.
of industrial wastes or sanitary sewage entering the sewerage
system.
(2) Auxiliary meters for determining the volume of flow of these sewers
shall be installed, owned and maintained to the satisfaction of the
Township by the property owners. However, following the
installation of such meters and approval of the installation by the
Township, such meters may not be removed without the approval of
the Township.
E. Sewage sampling.
(1) The industrial wastes of each person discharging the same into the
sewerage system shall be subject to periodic inspection and a
determination of character and concentration of said wastes. These
determinations shall be made quarterly, or as required, by the
Township at the expense of the owner or his representative and a
report of determinations submitted to the Township.
(2) The installation, operation and maintenance of the sewage
sampling facilities shall be assumed by the person discharging the
waste and shall be subject at all times to the approval of Township.
Access to the sewage sampling location or locations shall be
available to the Township or its duly authorized representatives at
all times. Due care shall be exercised in the collection and
preservation of all samples to ensure the preservation of the
sample in as nearly its natural state as possible. This includes the
refrigeration of all samples which will be analyzed by biochemical
methods.
F. Analysis. The laboratory methods used in the examination of all
industrial waste shall be those set forth in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, as published by the
American Public Health Association. However, alternate methods for
the analysis of industrial wastes may be used, subject to mutual
agreement between the Township and the particular person.
A. Residential. The above tapping fee assessment shall be payable upon all
applications for permits to make sewer connections. Sewer rental
charges shall be made to residential houses, apartments,
condominiums, townhouses, trailers or other dwelling units, by
semiannual bills dated the 15th days of February and August of each
year, beginning on the semiannual billing date immediately following
the semiannual calendar period in which connection is made to the
sewer system or when a connection is made to the sewer system or
when a certificate of use and occupancy is issued by the Township for
new or renovated buildings. Bills for the first billing period will be
prorated from the date of connection or issuance of a certificate of
occupancy to the billing date.
§ 180-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-15
C:222
§ 180-16. Penalties; delinquent rentals and liens.
§ 180-17. Segregation of sewer revenues.
The funds received by the Township or its billing agent from the collection
of the connection charges and from sewer rentals and all penalties thereon
as herein provided for and any fines collected by the Township in connection
with the sewer system shall be segregated and kept separate and apart
from all other funds of the Township and shall be used only for the purpose
of defraying the expenses of the Township in the operation, maintenance,
repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation or other expenses in relation to
such sewer system, including periodic payments due under an agreement
with Southwest Delaware County Municipal Authority for treatment and
B. Commercial, industrial, municipal and any user other than residential
shall be charged quarterly on March 15, June 15, September 15 and
December 15 or dates which correspond to the receipt of quarterly
water and sewage meter data, beginning on such quarterly date
immediately following the quarterly calendar period on which
connection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy is made to the
sewer system, for the quarterly calendar period or portion thereof
preceding the date of the bill.
A. Annual charges for sewer service shall be subject to a penalty of 10% if
not received in the Township Building, the Sewer Authority Building or
designated bank on or before May 31 of each year, and the Township
shall have the right to terminate water and/or sewer service from the
property where payment has not been made and not to restore same
until all unpaid bills against the property and the costs of cutting off and
restoring service shall have been paid. Further, the Township may
impose an interest charge each month as established by Council from
time to time. [Added 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 60341]
B. All sewer rentals, together with all penalties thereon, not paid on or
before December 31 of each year shall be deemed to be delinquent. All
delinquent sewer rentals and all penalties thereon shall be a lien on the
property served and shall be entered as a lien against such property in
the office of the Prothonotary of Delaware County and shall be collected
in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of such liens.
[Added 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 60342]
C. Notice. All persons serviced by the sewer system must give the
Township their correct address. Failure to receive bills will not be
considered an excuse for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the
period during which bills are payable at face amount.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of the above changes
shall be January 1, 2001, and implementation of the change shall take place with a single
billing cycle for the year 2001.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of the above changes
shall be January 1, 2001, and implementation of the change shall take place with a single
billing cycle for the year 2001.
§ 180-15 CHARTER § 180-17
C:223
disposal of sewage, and for such payments as the Township may be required
to make under any lease it may enter into for and of, or in connection with,
said sewer system with the Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer
Authority, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, as amended.43
§ 180-18. Rules, regulations and operations.
The Township reserves the right to and may from time to time adopt, revise,
amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and
proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules
and regulations shall become a part of this article. Further, the Township
reserves the right to contract with the Middletown Township, Delaware
County, Sewer Authority to operate the sewer system on terms and
conditions agreed upon mutually.
§ 180-19. When effective.
This article and any rules and regulations hereunder shall become effective
at once and shall be applicable to the properties in the Township as soon
as they become connected with and have the right to use the sewer system.
The Township reserves the right to make such changes from time to time
as, in its opinion, may be desirable or beneficial and to amend this article or
to change the rates or charges in such manner and at such times as, in its
opinion may be advisable.
43.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L. 287, No. 22; see now 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5601 et seq.
§ 180-17 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-19
C:224
ARTICLE III
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 520 (Ch. VII, Art. 6, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 180-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use, operation
and maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage,
on a limited and temporary basis, whether from residential or commercial
uses, and for the collection, transportation and disposal of sewage
therefrom, and it is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is
necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of Middletown Township (the "Township").
§ 180-21. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of the following terms used in this article shall be as follows:
COUNCIL — The Council of Middletown Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage conveyed by a water-carrying system and which is designed and
constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within Middletown Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located within Middletown Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation,
firm, society or other group or entity.
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for
collecting, pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of sewage and
industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to the Township and owned,
maintained and operated by the Township or the Township Sewer Authority
or an entity approved by the Township.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products,
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance which is harmful or inimical to the
public health, to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or recreation.
TOWNSHIP — Middletown Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 180-20 CHARTER § 180-22
C:225
§ 180-22. Rights and privileges granted.
The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to undertake within the Township, in accordance with the
provisions hereof, the control over methods of holding tank usage, operation
and maintenance and the disposal, collection and transportation of sewage
therefrom.
§ 180-23. Rates and charges.
The Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall have the right and power
to charge and collect application or permit fees and escrow account funds
in accordance with the provisions hereof.
§ 180-24. Limited/temporary use of holding tanks.
The use of holding tanks shall be permitted in Middletown Township only
on improved property and only on a limited and temporary basis. No person
shall be permitted to use a holding tank in Middletown Township unless:
§ 180-25. Licensing and fees.
A. A permit therefor is issued by the Township in accordance with the
provisions hereof;
B. All approvals and permits for the use of the holding tank which are
required by law have been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) and any other agency or entity with
jurisdiction; and
C. The connection of the improved property to a public sewer system is
imminent. The connection of the improved property to a public sewer
system shall be considered "imminent" hereunder when:
(1) A project to construct a public sewer system to which the improved
property will be able to connect has been authorized by the
issuance of a notice to proceed by the Township Sewer Authority;
(2) The applicant has agreed to connect the improved property to the
public sewer system as soon as such connection is possible.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a holding tank in Middletown
Township unless and until the person obtains a permit to do so from the
Township. A separate permit application must be made and a separate
permit obtained for each holding tank proposed to be used.
B. Any person proposing to use a holding tank in Middletown Township
shall first apply for a permit by written application on a form furnished
by the Township. The applicant must be the owner of the property
where the holding tank is proposed to be used. The application shall be
signed by a responsible applicant or by a fully authorized officer,
partner or employee of the applicant and submitted to the Township
§ 180-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-25
C:226
Sewage Enforcement Officer who shall either approve or disapprove
the same. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee which
shall be established by Township resolution.44
C. If the Sewage Enforcement Officer approves the application, then the
Township, acting through the Sewage Enforcement Officer, shall issue
the permit. Whenever the Township issues a permit for a holding tank,
it may impose conditions it deems necessary for the operation and
maintenance of the tank to prevent a nuisance or public health hazard.
An applicant shall be entitled to appeal from the disapproval of a
holding tank application to the Council within 30 days after the
disapproval. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall set forth the decision
appealed from and the reason for the appeal and shall be verified by
affidavit and shall be filed with the Township Manager. It shall be the
duty of the Township Manager to bring said appeal to the attention of
the Council, who shall proceed to consider said appeal at the next
regular or special meeting of Township Council, to be held within 30
days after the date of filing of such appeal. The person appealing shall
have the right to appear and to be heard if he states such desire in his
written appeal. The action of the Council with respect to such appeal
shall be final. A holding tank permit holder shall have similar rights of
appeal with respect to any revocation of a holding tank permit.
D. Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall post an adequate
escrow account with the Township, the amount of which shall be
determined by the Sewage Enforcement Officer and/or Township
resolution. If required by the Township, the applicant shall execute an
escrow agreement with the Township which must be approved by the
Township Solicitor. The escrow account shall be used for the repayment
of costs incurred by the Township for inspections of the holding tank for
which the permit is issued, and for any costs incurred by the Township
under § 180-27 hereof and for any and all costs, expenses, charges and
fees incurred by the Township in connection with or on account of the
use of the holding tank on the improved property. As soon as the escrow
account has been 50% depleted, it shall be replenished by the applicant
to the original amount. Any amount remaining in the escrow account
after the Township costs are repaid shall be returned to the applicant
upon connection of the improved property to a public sewer system and
the removal of the holding tank from the improved property in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
E. No permit for the use of a holding tank shall be issued hereunder
unless:
(1) The Township is provided with evidence satisfactory to it that all
approvals and permits for the use of the holding tank which are
required by law have been obtained from DEP and any other
agency or entity with jurisdiction; and
44.Editor's Note: The current resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 180-25 CHARTER § 180-25
C:227
(2) The connection of the improved property for which the holding tank
permit is sought to a public sewer system is imminent as required
hereunder and the applicant has provided the Township with
evidence satisfactory to the Township of the same, including but
not limited to an agreement by the applicant to:
(a) Connect the improved property to the public sewer system as
soon as such connection is possible.
(b) Permit the Township, the Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer and its, his or their authorized representatives or
agents to enter the improved property to inspect the holding
tank and to take any other action authorized hereunder.
(c) Permit the use of the escrow account in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
(d) Indemnify and hold the Township harmless from and against
any and all claims, liabilities, losses, actions, suits or
proceedings at law or in equity which it may incur or with
which it may be threatened resulting in whole or in part from
the use, operation and maintenance of the holding tank or the
collection, transportation and disposal of sewage therefrom,
except in the case of the willful misconduct, gross negligence
or sole negligence of the Township.
(e) Comply with the provisions of § 180-26 hereof, which
agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township and
the Township Solicitor.
F. Expiration of permit.
(1) Any permit issued hereunder shall be valid until the earlier to occur
of:
(a) The date which is one year from the date the permit is issued.
(b) Any earlier date required by DEP.
(c) The connection of the improved property to a public sewer
system.
(d) Revocation by the Township.
(2) The Township may extend the permit period upon the written
request of the applicant and upon the approval of such extension by
DEP, if required.
G. The submission of an application for a holding tank permit and the use
of a holding tank within the Township shall be deemed to constitute an
agreement by the applicant to:
(1) Comply with the provisions of § 180-26 hereof.
§ 180-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-25
C:228
§ 180-26. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
(2) Permit the Township and/or its representatives or agents, including
but not limited to the Sewage Enforcement Officer, to enter the
improved property to inspect the holding tank and/or to take any
action permitted hereunder.
(3) Connect the improved property to a public sewer system as soon as
such connection is possible.
(4) Permit the use of the escrow fund for the purposes set forth herein.
(5) Indemnify and hold the Township harmless from and against any
and all claims, liabilities, losses, actions, suits or proceedings at
law or in equity which it may incur or with which it may be
threatened resulting in whole or in part from the use, operation and
maintenance of the holding tank or the collection, transportation
and disposal of sewage therefrom, except in the case of the willful
misconduct, gross negligence or sole negligence of the Township.
A. Install the holding tank in accordance with all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to Chapter 73 of
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code regarding standards for sewage
disposal facilities. Such installation shall be inspected by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
B. Use, operate and maintain the holding tank in conformance with this
article and any other applicable ordinance of this Township, and the
provisions of any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation.
C. Arrange for the collection, transportation and disposal of all sewage
from any holding tank on the improved property. The collection,
transportation and disposal of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done in accordance with all applicable
laws, ordinances and regulations, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by DEP. Such
collection and transportation shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control or with the approval of the Township and the
Sewage Enforcement Officer.
D. Permit only the Township or its representatives or agents, including but
not limited to the Sewage Enforcement Officer or an entity approved by
the Township, to inspect holding tanks.
E. Permit only the Township or its representatives or agents, including but
not limited to the Sewage Enforcement Officer, or an entity approved by
the Township, to collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 180-25 CHARTER § 180-26
C:229
§ 180-27. Inspection, reports, maintenance and revocation of
permit.
§ 180-28. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Township
or the Sewage Enforcement Officer by either seeking mitigation of the
nuisance or appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
F. Keep a log relating to the use and operation of the holding tank, noting
such matters as dates checked and pumped and approximate quantity
of sewage pumped.
G. Provide and maintain a visible and audible level indicator/alarm system
to alert concerning the need for sewage to be hauled.
A. The Township and/or its representatives or agents, including but not
limited to the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, shall be permitted
to enter into any improved property for the purpose of inspecting the
holding tank(s) being used thereon and for engaging in any other act
authorized hereunder.
B. The Township, acting through its Sewage Enforcement Officer, will
receive, review and retain pumping receipts from permitted holding
tanks, which pumping receipts shall be provided to him or her by the
applicant.
C. The Township, acting through its Sewage Enforcement Officer, will
complete and retain inspection reports for each permitted holding tank.
D. All holding tanks, including but not limited to the installation, use,
operation and maintenance thereof and the collection, transportation
and disposal of sewage therefrom, shall be subject to inspection by the
Township.
§ 180-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-28
C:230
ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Treatment
[Adopted 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 584 (Ch. VI, Art. 6, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 180-29. Title and general intent.
This article is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and other aspects of the general welfare. These
general goals include the specific enforcement of the various regulations
promulgated by the Southwest Delaware County Municipal Authority
(SWDCMA), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA),
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), and
such other agencies which may succeed the aforementioned agencies. This
article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Middletown
Wastewater Treatment Ordinance," and said Township shall be referred to
hereinafter as the "municipality."
§ 180-30. Violations.
It is intended that this article provide for the enforcement and prosecution
of the standards, rules and regulations adopted by SWDCMA, USEPA and
PADEP. The municipality hereby ordains and establishes that any person,
firm or corporation who fails or refuses to comply with the standards, rules,
and regulations of the Southwest Delaware County Municipal Authority,
which are set forth herein in §§ 180-31 through 180-45, shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in this article.
§ 180-31. General provisions.
A. Purpose and policy.
(1) This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
wastewater collection and publicly owned treatment works (POTW)
for this municipality to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The
objectives of this article are to:
(a) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW.
(b) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which
will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into
receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW.
(c) Ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant
sludge is maintained at a level.
(d) Ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant
sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and
§ 180-29 CHARTER § 180-31
C:231
disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and
regulations.
(e) Protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater
and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect
the general public.
(f) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater
and sludge from the POTW.
(g) Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW.
(h) Enable the POTW to comply with its NPDES permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or
state laws to which the POTW is subject.
(2) This article shall apply to all industrial users of the POTW. This
article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits;
authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial
user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
B. Administration. The administration and enforcement of this article shall
be by an officer or person appointed by the governing body. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon such officer or person may be
delegated to other personnel.
C. Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following
terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:
ACT OR THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The appropriate Regional Administrator of
the USEPA, or his designee, or the appropriate state authority when the
state has been delegated an approved pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER —
If the industrial user is a corporation, "authorized representative"
shall mean:
The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; specifically, any delegate of the
corporation identified by "Signature of Official" affixed to
either initial wastewater survey for nonresidential
establishments or permit renewal applications. Such delegate
shall personally oversee and coordinate duties or obligations
as required by the POTW's pretreatment program. Change in
(a)
(1)
§ 180-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-31
C:232
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of mass
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of
industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405 to 471.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One-hundred-percent
transmittance is equivalent to 0.0 optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The person designated by this municipality
to supervise the operation of the POTW and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this article.
delegation shall be granted when a written request to do is
submitted to the POTW by the IU's president, vice president or
secretary.
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in
second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents
has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.
(b)
If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an
"authorized representative" shall mean a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental
facility, an "authorized representative" shall mean a director or
highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or his/
her designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3) above may
designate another "authorized representative" if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which
the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to this POTW.
(4)
§ 180-31 CHARTER § 180-31
C:233
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
term may also be used as a designation for the Regional Water
Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such
source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307 of the Act.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of
(nondomestic) pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER ("IU") or USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT —
The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete
or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate
and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment process or operations or its sludge processes, use
or disposal and therefore is a cause of a violation of this municipality's
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions
or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II, commonly referred to as the
"Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)"; any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood by-products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
MUNICIPALITIES — Legal entity adopting this article.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
(1)
§ 180-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-31
C:234
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which
does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product or finished product.
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production of wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
(c)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces or adds to an existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source, as defined under this definition, has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly
or installation of new source facilities or equipment.
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 180-31 CHARTER § 180-31
C:235
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state or local governmental entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
agricultural and industrial wastes and the characteristics of the
wastewater [i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical
oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, odor].
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants,
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user,
other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibitive
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 180-32A of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment
works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
owned by the SWDCMA. This definition includes any devices or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal
authority having jurisdiction over the industrial users and the
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment
works.
§ 180-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-31
C:236
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dish-washing operations, etc.).
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive or discretionary. The use
of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural
shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER ("SIU") — Shall apply to:
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
§ 180-32A of this article or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic
nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A
classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — One of 126 pollutants, or combination of those
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under
the provisions of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. § 1317) of the Act.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT — Any discharge of pollutants from
the POTW into waters of the state.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
(1) Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and
Any other industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater;
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as significant by the POTW on the basis that
the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
(c)
(2)
§ 180-31 CHARTER § 180-31
C:237
§ 180-32. General sewer use requirements.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and
industrial waste.
D. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
(1) BOD: biochemical oxygen demand.
(2) CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
(3) COD: chemical oxygen demand.
(4) EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(5) gpd: gallons per day.
(6) l: liter.
(7) mg: milligrams.
(8) mg/l: milligrams per liter.
(9) NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(10) O&M: operation and maintenance.
(11)POTW: publicly owned treatment works.
(12) RCRA: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
(13) SIC: standard industrial classifications.
(14) SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.).
(15) TSS: total suspended solids.
(16) USC: United States Code.
A. Prohibited discharge standards.
(1) No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into
the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial
users of the POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirement except hauled waste as
permitted under § 180-33. Furthermore, no industrial user may
contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the
municipal wastewater collection and POTW, including but not
limited to waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less
§ 180-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-32
C:238
than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21.
(b) Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or more than 9.0,
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW
or equipment or endangering personnel.
(c) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference,
but in no case solids greater than three inches or 7 1/2
centimeter(s) in any dimension.
(d) Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen
demanding pollutants (BOD or TSS, etc.), released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with either the POTW or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process or which will constitute a hazard
to humans or animals. The POTW reserves the right to affix
surcharges for excess BOD or TSS discharge concentrations.
(e) Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 90° F.
(32.2° C.) or which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction
into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F. (40° C.).
(f) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through and/or otherwise result in total fats, oils and
greases in excess of 100 mg/l.
(g) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems.
(h) Any nonpermitted trucked or hauled waste. Permitted waste
shall be discharged at points designated by this POTW in
accordance with § 180-33.
(i) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to
life or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and
repair.
(j) Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye waste
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts
color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating this
POTW's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity)
shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth
§ 180-32 CHARTER § 180-32
C:239
of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by bore
than 10% from the seasonably established norm for aquatic
life.
(k) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes,
except as specifically approved by the enforcing officer or as
delineated in the wastewater discharge permit in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(l) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and
unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the enforcing officer.
(m) Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.
(n) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
enforcing officer in a wastewater discharge permit.
(o) Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a
toxicity test.
(p) Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or
other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
POTW.
(q) Any discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable
origin is limited to 100 mg/l.
(2) Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored
in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All
floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must
discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before
connecting with the POTW.
B. Federal categorical pretreatment standards. The national categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated herein.
C. State requirements. In the event that state pretreatment standards are
approved by the EPA, the same shall be incorporated herein.
D. Specific pollutant limitations.
(1) Effective immediately, all nonresidential users shall be subject to
effluent testing parameters, methods and limits. Failure to comply
with the requirements will be considered a violation of the POTW's
rules and regulations and, in accordance with the provisions of
local, state and federal law, is punishable by a minimum daily fine
of $1,000 per day and a maximum daily fine of $25,000 per day.
§ 180-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-32
C:240
§ 180-33. Pretreatment of wastewater.
(2) The pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through
and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing
in excess of the limits delineated in the significant industrial user
discharge permit. A copy of the pollutant limits established and
approved by the POTW and the EPA are available on request from
the POTW.
(3) Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances
are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. At his discretion, the
enforcing officer may impose mass limitations in addition to or in
place of the concentration-based limitations above.
E. Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water
or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement. The enforcing officer may
impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
A. Pretreatment facilities. Industrial users shall provide necessary
wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall
achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits and the prohibitions set out in § 180-32A above within the time
limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the enforcing officer,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to this POTW shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to this POTW for review and shall be acceptable to
this POTW before construction of the facility. The review of such plans
and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from
the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge to this POTW under the provisions of this article.
B. Additional pretreatment measures.
(1) Whenever deemed necessary, the enforcing officer may require
industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow
periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into
specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge,
separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams and
such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the industrial user's compliance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 180-32 CHARTER § 180-33
C:241
(2) Each person discharging into the POTW greater than 25,000
gallons per day or greater than 50% of the average daily flow in the
POTW, whichever is lesser, shall install and maintain, on his
property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow control
facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty-four-hour
period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least 50% of the
daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a
rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be
directed by the enforcing officer. A wastewater discharge permit
may be issued solely for flow equalization. As an alternative, the
industrial user may, with the consent of the enforcing officer,
develop and implement a discharge/slug control plan.
(3) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the enforcing officer, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease
and oil or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required
for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the enforcing officer and shall be so located
as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as
needed, by the owner at his expense.
(4) Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved
combustible gas detection meter.
(5) At no time shall two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into the POTW be more than 10% nor any single
reading over 5% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
C. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
(1) The enforcing officer may require any industrial user to develop
and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least
once every two years, the enforcing officer shall evaluate whether
each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial
user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/
control slug plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a
minimum, the following:
(a) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(b) Description of stored chemicals.
(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any
accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be
given for any discharge which would violate any of the
prohibited discharges in § 180-32A of this article.
§ 180-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-33
C:242
§ 180-34. Wastewater discharge permit eligibility.
(d) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.
(2) In the event of an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall be
required to comply with the reporting requirements of § 180-36F.
D. Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to
any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if
either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may
be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article.
Both generators and transporters of hauled waste may be held jointly
and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this
article.
E. Hauled wastewater.
(1) Hauled wastewater may be accepted into the POTW at a designated
receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such
times as are established by the enforcing officer, provided that such
wastes do not violate § 180-32 of this article or any other
requirements established or adopted by this POTW. A general
wastewater discharge permit for individual transporters to use
such facilities shall be issued by the enforcing officer. A letter of
intent shall also be issued by the enforcing officer to the
transporter, specifically to addend the general permit.
(2) The discharge of hauled nonresidential waste requires prior
approval from the enforcing officer. The enforcing officer shall have
authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if such disposal
would interfere with the treatment plant operation. Waste haulers
are subject to all other sections of this article.
(3) Fees for discharging hauled wastewater will be established in the
waste hauler's agreement, with an addendum by the letter of
intent. Other fees may apply as established in § 180-44.
F. Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any
structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any
person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the
sanctions set out in §§ 180-40 through 180-42, below.
A. Wastewater survey. When requested by the enforcing officer, all
industrial users must submit information on the nature and
§ 180-33 CHARTER § 180-34
C:243
characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey
prior to commencing their discharge. The enforcing officer is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this
survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the
industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this article.
B. Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the enforcing officer. Any violation of the
terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be
deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in § 180-40 through
180-42. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state and local law.
(2) The enforcing officer shall require other industrial users, including
waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as
necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
C. Wastewater discharge permitting existing connections. Any significant
industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the POTW prior
to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such
discharges in the future shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to
the POTW for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with
Subsection F below and shall not cause or allow discharges to the
POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of this article,
except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the
enforcing officer.
D. Wastewater discharge permitting new connections. Any significant
industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging
industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge
permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An
application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least
90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin.
E. Wastewater discharge permitting extrajurisdictional industrial use.
(1) Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the POTW's
limits shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in
accordance with Subsection F below, within 30 days of the effective
date of this article. New significant industrial users located beyond
the POTW's limits shall submit such applications to the enforcing
officer 30 days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.
(2) Alternately, the enforcing officer may enter into an agreement with
the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user
§ 180-34 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-34
C:244
is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of
pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user.
F. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
(1) In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all
industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge permit
must submit the information required by § 180-36A(2) of this
article. The enforcing officer shall approve a form to be used as a
permit application. In addition, the following information may be
requested:
(a) A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals
used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or
intentionally be discharged to the POTW.
(b) The number and type of employees, hours of operation and
proposed or actual hours of operation of the POTW.
(c) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(d) The type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(e) The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances, by
size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge.
(f) Time and duration of the discharge.
(g) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
enforcing officer to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.
(2) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the industrial user for revision.
G. Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the
following certification statement and be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user. "I certify under penalty of law that
this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction
or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge
and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
§ 180-34 CHARTER § 180-34
C:245
§ 180-35. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
H. Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The enforcing officer will
evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require
additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the enforcing officer will
determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The
enforcing officer may deny any application for a wastewater discharge
permit.
I. Decertification. The enforcing officer may decertify an industrial user
out of the POTW's wastewater discharge permit requirements upon
application by the industrial user, completion of a certification
statement and fulfillment of all requirements and conditions mandated
by the enforcing officer. The decision as to whether an industrial user
meets the requirements for decertification shall be determined at the
discretion of the enforcement officer.
A. Wastewater discharge permit duration. Wastewater discharge permits
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed one year. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than
one year, at the discretion of the enforcing officer. Each wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
B. Wastewater discharge permit contents. Wastewater discharge permits
shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by
the enforcing officer to prevent pass through or interference, protect
the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and
disposal, protect ambient air quality and protect against damage to the
POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following
conditions:
(a) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed one year.
(b) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from
the POTW and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge
permit.
(c) Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable
standards in federal, state and local law.
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include
an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling
location, sampling frequency and sample type based on
federal, state or local law.
§ 180-34 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-35
C:246
(e) Statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such
schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable federal, state or local law.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following:
(a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
(b) Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified
wastewater pollutants or properties.
(c) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
(d) Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions, including management practices necessary
to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or routine
discharges.
(e) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
(f) The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees
for the management of the wastewater discharged to the
POTW.
(g) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment.
(h) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater discharge permit.
(i) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the enforcing
officer to ensure compliance with this article and state and
federal laws, rules and regulations.
C. Wastewater discharge permit appeals. Any person, including the
industrial user, may petition this POTW to reconsider the terms of a
wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
§ 180-35 CHARTER § 180-35
C:247
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If the POTW fails to act within 60 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit or not to modify a wastewater
discharge permit shall be considered final administrative action for
purposes of judicial review.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Court of Common Pleas within 30 days.
D. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
(1) The enforcing officer may modify the wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character
since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge.
(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the POTW, POTW personnel or the receiving waters.
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting.
(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation
to a new owner/operator.
§ 180-35 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-35
C:248
(2) The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit
condition.
E. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to
a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60
days' advance notice to the enforcing officer and he approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to him must
include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator
which:
(a) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes.
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
(2) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility
transfer.
F. Wastewater discharge permit and letter of intent revocation.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits and letters of intent may be revoked
for the following reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the POTW of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge.
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the POTW of changed
condition pursuant to § 180-36E.
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application.
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(f) Refusing to allow the POTW personnel timely access to the
facility premises and records.
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(h) Failure to pay fines.
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
§ 180-35 CHARTER § 180-35
C:249
§ 180-36. Reporting requirements.
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility.
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse,
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership except
through § 180-35E. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon
the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit.
G. Wastewater discharge permit reissuance.
(1) A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge
permit application in accordance with § 180-34F a minimum of 60
days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to secure a renewal
application from the enforcing officer and thereafter submit an
executed application, along with the appropriate fees, in
accordance with § 180-34F.
A. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing significant industrial users subject to such
categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to
or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit
to the POTW a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection A(2) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard shall be required to submit to the POTW a report which
contains the information listed in Subsection A(2) below. A new
source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment
it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new
source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity
of pollutants discharged.
(2) The industrial user shall submit the information required by this
section including:
§ 180-35 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-36
C:250
(a) Identifying information: the name and address of the facility
including the name of the operator and owners.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits: a list of any environmental
control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the
facility.
(c) Description of operations: a brief description of the nature,
average rate of production and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial
user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
(d) Flow measurement: information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to
the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(e) Measurement of pollutants:
[1] Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.
[2] Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by
the standard or by this POTW) of regulated pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous,
daily maximum and long-term average concentrations
(and flow, required for SIU) shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operation and shall be
analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
Subsection J.
[3] Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in Subsection K.
(f) Certification: a statement reviewed by the industrial user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are
being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards
and requirements.
(g) Compliance schedule: if additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide
such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
§ 180-36 CHARTER § 180-36
C:251
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in § 180-34F of this article.
(h) All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 180-34G.
B. Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall
apply to the schedule required by Subsection A(2)(g). The schedule
shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. (Such events
include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and
completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation.)
No increment referred to above shall exceed six months. The industrial
user shall submit a progress report to the enforcing officer no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and (if appropriate)
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than six months elapse between such
progress reports to the enforcing officer.
C. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to this POTW a report containing the
information described in Subsection A(2)(d) through (f). For industrial
users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in
accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall
contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term
production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with § 180-34G.
D. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard
shall, at a frequency determined by the enforcing officer, but in no
case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 180-34G.
§ 180-36 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-36
C:252
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial
user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement
facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in
good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to
keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
(3) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required
by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in § 180-36K of this
article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
E. Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify
the enforcing officer of any planned significant changes to the industrial
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
(1) The enforcing officer may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under § 180-34F.
(2) The enforcing officer may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 180-34H or modify an existing wastewater discharge
permit under § 180-35D.
(3) No industrial user shall implement the planned changed
condition(s) until and unless the enforcing officer has responded to
the industrial user's notice.
(4) For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of 10% or greater
over the self-monitoring period, as specified in the wastewater
discharge permit, and the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants shall be deemed significant.
F. Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load which may cause
potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards in § 180-32A of this article), it is the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and
notify the POTW of the incident. This notification shall include the
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
Notification shall be given to the offices of SWDCMA (24 hours per
day). The telephone number is provided in the wastewater
discharge permit.
§ 180-36 CHARTER § 180-36
C:253
(2) Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the enforcing officer, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to
be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user
of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article.
(3) Failure to notify the POTW of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this article.
(4) A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees to call
in the event of a discharge described in Subsection F(1) above.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer
such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.
G. Reports from nonsignificant industrial users. All industrial users not
subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports
to the POTW as the enforcing officer may require.
H. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by an industrial user or the POTW indicates a violation, the
industrial user must notify the POTW within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The industrial user shall be required to repeat
the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis
to the POTW within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The
enforcing officer shall be given a minimum of 72 hours' notice by the
industrial user of the date, time and place of the resample.
I. Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
(1) Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing,
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial
user discharges more than 10 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged
§ 180-36 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-36
C:254
during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later
than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification
under this subsection needs to be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under Subsection E above. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of
Subsections A, C and D above.
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection I of
this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no
more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are
acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which
the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of
such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce
the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.
J. Analytical requirement. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does
not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with
procedures approved by the EPA. The analytical method selected must
be of equal or greater sensitivity than the general sewer use
requirements of § 180-32.
K. Sample collection.
(1) Except as indicated in Subsection K(2) below, the industrial user
must collect wastewater samples using flow-proportional
composite collection techniques. In the event that flow-
§ 180-36 CHARTER § 180-36
C:255
§ 180-37. Compliance monitoring.
proportional sampling is infeasible, the enforcing officer may
authorize the use of time-proportional sampling or through a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that
this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
(3) The industrial user shall be required to demonstrate the accuracy
of the sample results, including, but not limited to reanalysis.
Should there continue to be discrepancies between the sample
results of the industrial user and the POTW, the POTW shall have
the discretion to authorize a referral to a third-party laboratory
whose results shall be final. All costs for such referral shall be
borne by the industrial user.
L. Determination of noncompliance. The enforcing officer may use a grab
sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards if
such sample exceeds the product of the permit limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria. (See § 180-39B.)
M. Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern.
N. Recordkeeping. Industrial users shall retain and make available for
inspection and copying all records and information required to be
retained under this article. These records shall remain available for a
period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with
this article, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of
a longer retention period by the enforcing officer.
A. Inspection and sampling. The POTW shall have the right to enter the
facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article,
and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the
industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial
users shall allow the enforcing officer or his representatives ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
(1) Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements
§ 180-36 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-37
C:256
§ 180-38. Confidential information.
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit application, wastewater discharge permits
and monitoring programs and from inspection and sampling activities shall
with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from this POTW, state and the EPA will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
their specific responsibilities.
(2) The POTW, state and the EPA shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations. The POTW shall also have the right to conduct offpremises
sampling and/or metering of the industrial user's
operations, with the option of splitting samples with the industrial
user.
(3) The POTW may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all time in a safe and proper
operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be
promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal
request of the enforcing officer and shall not be replaced. The costs
of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the POTW's personnel access to
the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this article.
B. Search warrants. If the enforcing officer has been refused access to a
building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the enforcing
officer has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a
routine inspection program of this POTW designed to verify compliance
with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder or to protect
the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then,
upon application by the POTW's attorney, the Magisterial District Judge
having proper jurisdiction shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant
describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The
warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized
on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable
hours by the enforcing officer in the company of a uniformed police
officer of the municipality. In the event of an emergency affecting public
health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a
warrant.
§ 180-37 CHARTER § 180-38
C:257
be available to the public without restriction, unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
POTW that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the
industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as
defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.
§ 180-39. Publication of industrial users in significant
noncompliance.
The POTW shall publish annually, in a daily newspaper published in the
municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the industrial users which,
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a sixmonth
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the
same pollutant parameter by any amount.
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violation, defined here as those in which
33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of
the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH).
C. Any other discharge violation that the POTW believes has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public).
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise
of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction
or attaining final compliance.
§ 180-38 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-39
C:258
§ 180-40. Administrative enforcement remedies.
F. Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
H. Any other violation(s) which the POTW determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
A. Notification of violation. Whenever the enforcing officer finds that any
user has violated or is violating this article, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
requirements, the enforcing officer or his agent may serve upon said
user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted by the user to the enforcing officer. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in
this section shall limit the authority of the POTW to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
B. Consent orders. The enforcing officer is hereby empowered to enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible
for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken
by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and
effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Subsections D
and E below and shall be judicially enforceable. Consent orders,
including milestone dates, may be incorporated as a part of the terms
and conditions of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit.
C. Show cause hearing. The enforcing officer may order any user which
causes or contributes to violation(s) of this article, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the enforcing
officer and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action and a request that the user show cause why this proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the
user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be
§ 180-39 CHARTER § 180-40
C:259
pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be
a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
D. Compliance orders. When the enforcing officer finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate this article, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within 30 days.
If the user does not come into compliance within 30 days, sewer service
shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability
for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action
against the user. Compliance orders, including milestone dates, may be
incorporated as part of the terms and conditions of the industrial user's
wastewater discharge permit.
E. Cease-and-desist orders.
(1) When the enforcing officer finds that a user is violating this article,
the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the enforcing
officer may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements.
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge.
(2) Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a prerequisite to
taking any other action against the user.
F. Administrative fines.
(1) Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user that is
found to have violated any provision of this article, its wastewater
discharge permit and orders issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be fined in a minimum
amount of $1,000, up to the maximum amount of $25,000, or the
maximum fine allowed under state law, whichever is higher. Such
fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis.
§ 180-40 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-40
C:260
(2) Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer
service charge, and the enforcing officer shall have such other
collection remedies as may be available for other service charges
and fees.
(3) Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days,
be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1/2% per month. A lien
against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines and penalties.
(4) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the enforcing officer to reconsider the fine along with full payment
of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the enforcing officer shall convene a
hearing on the matter within 14 days of receiving the request from
the industrial user. In the event that the user's appeal is successful,
the payment together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the industrial user. The POTW may add costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and
orders to the fine.
(5) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against the user.
G. Emergency suspensions.
(1) The enforcing officer may immediately suspend a user's discharge
(after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is
necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The enforcing
officer may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after
notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with
the operation of the POTW or which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment.
(a) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the enforcing officer shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The
enforcing officer shall allow the user to recommence its
discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the POTW that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings set forth in Subsection H
are initiated against the user.
(b) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
§ 180-40 CHARTER § 180-40
C:261
§ 180-41. Judicial enforcement remedies.
written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence to the enforcing officer, prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under Subsections C and H.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
H. Termination of discharge.
(1) In addition to those provisions in § 180-35F of this article, any user
that violates the following conditions of this article, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder is subject to
discharge termination:
(a) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
(b) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
(c) Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to
discharge.
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.
(e) Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 180-32 of this
article.
(2) Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
Subsection C of this section why the proposed action should not be
taken.
A. Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard
or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this article,
wastewater discharge permits and orders issued hereunder or any
other pretreatment requirement, the POTW may petition the Court of
Common Pleas, through the POTW's Attorney, for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or
compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit,
order or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the
industrial user. Such other action, as appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief, may also be sought by the POTW. A petition for
injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other
action against a user.
B. Civil penalties.
§ 180-40 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-41
C:262
(1) Any user which has violated or continues to violate this article, any
order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the POTW
for a minimum civil penalty in the amount of $1,000, up to the
maximum amount of $25,000, or the maximum allowed under state
law, whichever is higher. The penalty may be imposed on a perviolation,
per-day basis. In the case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during
the period of the violation.
(2) The POTW may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the POTW.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user
and any other factor, as justice requires.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking
any other action against a user.
C. Criminal prosecution.
(1) Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
article, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $25,000 or the maximum fine allowed under state law,
whichever is higher, and imprisonment for not more than one year.
The penalty may be imposed for each day of violation.
(2) Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
penalty of at least $25,000, or the maximum allowable under state
law, and/or be subject to imprisonment for one year. This penalty
shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury
or property damage available under state law or federal law.
(3) Any user that knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certifications in any application, record, report,
plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained,
pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit or order, or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one year, or
both.45
§ 180-41 CHARTER § 180-41
C:263
§ 180-42. Supplemental enforcement action.
(4) In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $25,000 per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
D. Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in §§ 180-40 through 180-42 are
not exclusive remedies. This POTW reserves the right to take any, all or
any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with this POTW enforcement response plan. However, this POTW
reserves the right to take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, this POTW is empowered to take more
than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These
actions may be taken concurrently.
A. Performance bonds. The enforcing officer may decline to reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply
with the provisions of this article, any orders or previous wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, payable to this POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the enforcing officer to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
B. Liability insurance. The enforcing officer may decline to reissue a
wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply
with the provisions of this article, any order or a previous wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof
that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
C. Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this article, orders or wastewater discharge
permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed.
Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
D. Public nuisances. Any violation of this article, wastewater discharge
permits or orders issued hereunder is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the enforcing
officer or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall
be subject to the provisions of Pennsylvania law governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in
removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
E. Contractor listing (optional). Users which have not achieved consistent
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirement
are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or
services to the POTW. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or
45.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 180-41 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-42
C:264
§ 180-43. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
services to the POTW held by a user found to be in significant
noncompliance with pretreatment standards may be terminated at the
discretion of the POTW.
A. Upset.
(1) For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An
upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or
careless or improper operation.
(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of Subsection A(3) are met.
(3) An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset.
(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures.
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
[1] A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue.
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(5) Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination of any claim of upset only in an enforcement action
§ 180-42 CHARTER § 180-43
C:265
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards.
(6) The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative
method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
B. General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in § 180-32A
of this article if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know
that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: a
local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user
was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass
through or interference, or no local limit exists, but the discharge did
not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior
discharge when the POTW was regularly in compliance with its NPDES
permit and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with
applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
C. Bypass.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2) An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of
Subsection C(3) and (4) of this section.
(3) Need for bypass.
(a) If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the POTW at least 10 days before
the date of the bypass if possible.
§ 180-43 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-43
C:266
§ 180-44. Miscellaneous provisions.
(b) An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
POTW within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five
days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of
the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.
(4) Bypass prohibited.
(a) Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement
action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
[3] The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Subsection C(3) of this section.
(b) The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection C(4)(a) of
this section.
A. Pretreatment charges and fees. The POTW may adopt reasonable
charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the POTW pretreatment program which may include:
(1) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the
cost of processing such application.
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures,
including the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user's
discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by
industrial users.
§ 180-43 CHARTER § 180-44
C:267
§ 180-45. Prosecution.
(3) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction.
(4) Fees for filing appeals.
(5) Other fees as the POTW may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees,
fines and penalties chargeable by the POTW.
B. Conflicts. All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances
inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this article are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.
A. The Township may appoint the Southwest Delaware County Municipal
Authority (SWDCMA) as its agent having the power of the Township to
institute proceedings in the name of the Township against any and all
persons, firms or corporations who violate the provisions of this article.
B. In cases involving the prosecution of this article, the Solicitor of the
Southwest Delaware County Municipal Authority (SWDCMA) shall
subpoena all witnesses for the prosecution and conduct the hearing on
behalf of the Township, if authorized and appointed to do so by the
Township.
§ 180-44 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 180-45
C:268
Chapter 186
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 198.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
§ 186-1. Purpose.
§ 186-2. Applicability.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the modification of natural
terrain and the alteration of stormwater runoff by providing for certain
soil erosion and sediment control management measures within the
Township in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
general public. It is the intent of this chapter to implement the current
Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Part 1, Department of Environmental
Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article II Water
Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion Control.
B. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, there is a Department of
Environmental Protection requirement for a NPDES permit (National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System). Persons proposing earth
disturbance activities which disturb five or more acres, or an earth
disturbance on any portion, part, or during any stage of, a larger
common plan of development or sale that involves five or more acres of
earth disturbance over the life of the project, or persons proposing
earth disturbance activities with a point source discharge to surface
waters of the commonwealth that disturb from one to less than five
acres, or an earth disturbance on any portion, part, or during any stage
of, a larger common plan of development or sale that involves one to
less than five acres of disturbance with a point source discharge to
surface waters of the commonwealth over the life of the project, must
apply for the general NPDES permit for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activities. A point source is defined as any
discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited
to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, well, discrete fissure, or container
from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
C. Reference to "soil erosion and sedimentation control" shall also mean
"grading and excavating" in Chapter 186 and all references herein.
[Added 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 814]
A. Any person engaging in activities which disturb the nature topography
and vegetation of their land or the land of others shall submit a soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan to the Township for review and
§ 180-45 CHARTER § 186-2
C:269
§ 186-3. Exemptions.
The following activities are specifically exempt from this chapter:
§ 186-4. General.
approval, and ensure compliance with § 275-198A through F, if
applicable. [Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 795]
B. The following activities are specifically included under this chapter,
which shall be known and may be cited as the Middletown Township
"Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Regulations."
(1) Alteration of any existing grade or ground cover as a result of
excavation, paving, filling, stripping, clearing, and the like over
1,000 square feet.
(2) Disturbance of natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater
by diversion, blockage, or alteration of flow rate by grading
operations.
(3) Obstruction of the natural drainage of land by the construction of
dams, retaining walls, ditches, culverts, bridges or other
structures.
A. Use of land for gardening primarily for home consumption.
B. Agricultural use of lands in accordance with a farm conservation plan
approved by the Delaware County Conservation District.
C. Individual lot grading permits shall not be required if the finally
approved and recorded subdivision and land development plan contains
an approved grading plan for the entire tract to be developed, and if in
the opinion of the Township Engineer, the proposed development of the
individual lots does not sufficiently deviate from the overall grading
plan. If the Township Engineer determines that an individual lot
grading permit is required because of change in ownership or other
circumstances, the applicant shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. In all cases where a proposed activity does not require a permit under
this chapter, the landowner shall at all times comply with the applicable
provisions of this chapter and the soil erosion and sedimentation
control provisions. All bare earth shall be promptly seeded, sodded or
otherwise stabilized and effectively protected from soil erosion.
A. The permittee, who shall be the landowner of record identified in the
application, shall be responsible for any property damage or personal
injury which occurs in the performance of any activity under this
chapter, even if the activity requires no permit. Escrow shall be posted,
in accordance with a resolution adopted by the Township, from time to
time, to ensure completion of any activity.
§ 186-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 186-4
C:270
§ 186-5. Soil erosion and sedimentation control standards.
B. No person, firm, corporation or entity shall modify, fill, excavate, pave,
grade or regrade or otherwise disturb land within the Township, in any
manner as to endanger or damage public or private property, or to
cause physical damage or personal injury. All precautions shall be taken
to prevent any damage to adjoining streets, sidewalks, buildings and
other structures which could be caused by settling, cracking, soil
erosion or sediment deposition.
C. The management and the control of accelerated soil erosion on the site,
both during and upon completion of the disturbances associated with
grading, a proposed subdivision and/or land development, shall be
accomplished in accordance with the standards and criteria of this
chapter. The design of any temporary or permanent facilities and
structures and the utilization of any natural drainage systems shall be
in full compliance with these provisions.
D. No person, firm, corporation or entity shall fail to adequately maintain
in good operating order any drainage facility on his premises. All
watercourses, drainage ditches, culverts, drain pipes and drainage
structures shall be kept open and free flowing at all times.
E. A landowner or developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all disturbed areas, soil erosion and sedimentation control devices,
drainage facilities, stormwater management structures, and other
related structures during and after construction is completed.
F. All graded surfaces shall be seeded, sodded, planted or otherwise
protected from erosion within 20 days, weather permitting, and shall be
watered, tended and maintained until growth is well established. The
disturbed area and duration of exposure shall be kept within the
identified limits of disturbance.
G. Adequate provisions shall be made for dust control as determined by
the Township Engineer.
H. Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. These
measures shall include such actions and are required:
(1) To insure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is not
greater after development than prior to development activities; and
(2) To manage the quantity, velocity, quality and direction of the
resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise
adequately protects health and property from possible injury.
A. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted for all
subdivisions, land developments and/or any other regulated land
§ 186-4 CHARTER § 186-5
C:271
disturbance activity within the Township. The Township or its
designated representative shall ensure and enforce compliance with
the appropriate standards.
B. Measures used to control soil erosion and reduce sedimentation shall as
a minimum meet the latest revised standards, specifications and/or
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection in its Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Manual.
C. Any land disturbance activity whether subdivision, land development
and/or other project shall be conducted only in compliance with the
following principles:
(1) There shall be no increase in or redirection of discharge of
sediment or other solid materials from the site as a result of
stormwater runoff; and any increase shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
(2) Erosion and sedimentation control devices, such as temporary
vegetation and mulch, temporary earthen berms, interceptor dikes,
ditches, diversion terraces, rock filter berms, crushed stone tire
scrubbers, silt basins, silt fences, and the like, appropriate to the
scale of operations, shall be installed concurrent with earthmoving
activities and whenever any situation is created which would
contribute to increased soil erosion.
(3) Earthmoving operations shall be minimized where possible and
practicable to preserve desirable natural features and the
topography of the site. No cut or fill shall be steeper than 3:1 and
should be blended into the existing topography.
(4) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will minimize soil erosion.
(5) To the maximum extent practicable, mature, healthy trees of at
least 12 inches in caliper and other significant existing vegetation
shall be retained and protected. Such trees shall not be removed,
except as provided on the approved plan accompanying the land
disturbance activity. The filling of soil more than five inches over
the roots of trees to be preserved is prohibited. (The roots are
presumed to extend out from the tree as far as the branches of the
tree extend outward.)
(6) Land disturbance shall be limited to the actual construction site
and an access strip. The amount of disturbed area and the duration
of exposure shall be kept to a minimum. Disturbed areas shall be
stabilized with vegetation, mulch, erosion control fabric, and the
like, as soon as possible after earthmoving procedures.
(7) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
§ 186-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 186-5
C:272
after development. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained
on-site wherever possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
(8) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas during development ("Critical areas" shall be
construed to mean those portions of a site which are extremely
vulnerable to soil erosion.)
(9) The permanent final vegetation and structural soil erosion control
and drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development in accordance with the approved plans.
(10) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris and sediment basins, silt
fences or other approved measures. Sediment deposits in basins,
silt fences, and the like, shall be removed at periodic intervals
during the construction period.
(11) Soils and rock or geologic formations with water supply potential
shall be protected from contamination by surface water or other
source or disruption caused by construction activity. Prior to any
work, protective procedures shall be developed and submitted to
the Township Engineer for review and approval.
(12) A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit shall be obtained
as required from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for all developments in which more than one acre will be
disturbed.
D. The following practices shall be required for all subdivisions, land
developments and/or other regulated land disturbance activity, unless
the Township determines that they are not applicable.
(1) Silt fences shall be utilized in lieu of straw bale silt barriers and
shall be securely anchored in place.
(2) Approved silt fences or silt traps shall be placed at all inlets,
headwalls, basin outlets and similar drainage structures during the
construction period in order to prevent sediment from entering any
watercourse, storm drainage system, or other areas downstream.
(3) Temporary on-lot berms shall be required during construction. The
top width of the berms shall be a minimum of three feet in width,
with side slopes of 3:1 maximum.
(4) Crushed stone tire scrubbers shall be placed at all entrances to
construction areas immediately at the time of commencement of
construction. Tire scrubbers shall be of sufficient width and length
to prevent the transportation of sediment off of the construction
site.
(5) Temporary and permanent seeding and mulch specifications shall
be noted on all plans. The specifications shall include lime and
§ 186-5 CHARTER § 186-5
C:273
§ 186-6. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
fertilizer rates of application, as well as other provisions regarding
procedures and materials. The Township shall require hydroseeding
of all graded areas associated with street construction and
stormwater management basins. Seeding and mulch must be done
within 20 days of disturbance, unless otherwise specified.
(6) During roadway grading, interceptor dikes shall be installed on all
roadway subgrades with slopes in excess of 5% to prevent soil
erosion of the subgrade. The interceptor dikes shall divert runoff
through silt traps or silt fences.
(7) The crushed stone base course for driveways, roadways and
parking areas shall be applied as soon as possible after grading
procedures, in order to prevent soil erosion of the subgrade.
(8) Drainage swales and ditches, and all slopes greater than 4:1 shall
be protected against erosive velocities with soil erosion control
measures such as erosion control fabric and other material as
approved by the Township.
(9) Energy dissipaters and/or stilling basins shall be installed at the
outlet end of all storm drainage facilities.
(10) All road rights-of-way and stormwater management basins shall be
hydro-seeded within seven days of final grading.
A. General requirements for subdivisions and/or land developments. For
all subdivisions and/or land developments, a soil erosion and sediment
control plan and report shall be submitted containing but not limited to
the information required below. For any other regulated land
disturbance activity, see Subsection B below. The determination of the
need for additional information shall be made by the Township Engineer
after conducting a review of the following:
(1) A map depicting the total watershed. A USGS Quadrangle Map is
suitable as the source for such a map. However, the watershed area
must be highlighted or otherwise distinguished from other areas
outside the watershed.
(2) Maps and drawings showing all existing and proposed drainage
facilities affecting the subject property.
(3) A plan of the site, at a scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet,
prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor and including the
following:
(a) All existing topographic features with a contour interval of at
least two feet.
(b) Boundary survey information.
§ 186-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 186-6
C:274
(c) Location and description of all vegetative and land cover
characteristics.
(d) All existing utilities.
(e) Soil types.
(f) All existing natural or man-made features as more fully
required in Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
(g) All proposed improvements, including but not limited to
proposed buildings, driveways, swimming pools, stormwater
drainage systems, sewage disposal systems, wells, stormwater
management facilities, grading, soil erosion and sedimentation
controls and procedures, and the like.
(h) Profiles of all proposed sewers, including elevations, sizes,
slopes and materials, at a scale of no less than one inch equals
50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical.
(i) Staging of earthmoving activities and program of operation.
(j) Locations, dimensions and design details required for the
construction of all facilities.
(k) All soil erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, and sufficient detail in order
to clearly indicate effectiveness of the plan.
(l) Project specifications relative to stormwater control, soil
erosion and sedimentation.
(m) When major control facilities, such as detention/retention
basins, are planned, soil structures and characteristics shall be
investigated and analyzed. Plans and data shall be prepared
and submitted by a licensed professional engineer or geologist
with experience and education in soil mechanics. These
submissions should consider and offer design solutions for
frost heave potential, shrink-swell potential, soil bearing
strength, water infiltration, soil settling characteristics,
suitability of existing soils for placement of fill, fill and
backfilling procedures and soil treatment techniques as
required to protect the improvements or structures.
(4) The design computations for the stormwater drainage systems
including storm drain pipes and inlets, runoff control measures,
and culverts and drainage channels.
(5) A narrative report of the project stating the proposed and
engineering assumptions and calculations for control measures and
facilities. The following information shall be included:
(a) General description of the project.
§ 186-6 CHARTER § 186-6
C:275
(b) General description of accelerated runoff control plan.
(c) General description of soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan.
(d) Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start
and completion dates.
(e) The stormwater characteristics of the project as related to its
location within the watershed(s).
(f) On-site detention methods.
(g) Methodology and basis of design computations.
(h) Brief description of soils and their characteristics.
(6) The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall comply with
all other applicable provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable Township ordinances, codes or regulations.
B. General requirements for any other regulated land disturbance activity.
(1) An area plan or plans describing existing and proposed features of
the area surrounding the site of the work, including topography,
existing vegetation, watercourses, man-made features, the affected
watersheds and other pertinent natural features.
(2) A topographical survey plan of the site, at a suitable scale of no less
than one inch equals 50 feet, and contour interval of no more than
two feet, prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor, also
including a boundary line survey, the location and description of
vegetative cover, soil types and any other pertinent existing natural
or man-made features.
(3) An improvements plan at the same scale as the topographic survey
plan showing and describing all changes to the site including cuts,
fills, structures, paving, utilities, all erosion and sedimentation
controls, stormwater management facilities, details, procedures,
etc. (This information may be combined with the topographic
survey plan, provided the combined plan is clear and legible.)
(4) A time schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion
dates of the development sequence, and the time of exposure of
each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment
control measures.
(5) Special requirements. The Township may require any additional
information when the area of a site to be disturbed exceeds one
acre, or when smaller sites are environmentally sensitive because
of the presence of watercourses, steep slopes, woodland and the
like.
§ 186-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 186-6
C:276
§ 186-7. Approvals from regulating agencies.
All requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Delaware County Soil
Conservation Service, with regards to erosion and sediment control, shall
be followed, and evidence of approvals by those agencies shall be submitted
to the Township.
§ 186-8. Soil erosion and sedimentation control maintenance and
responsibilities.
§ 186-9. Stormwater management requirements.
In addition to the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations of
this chapter, any land disturbance activity whether subdivision, land
development and/or other project shall also comply with Chapter 198,
Stormwater Management. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency
between the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 198, regarding
stormwater management, the requirements of Chapter 198 shall control.
§ 186-10. Application for permit.
(6) All plans required pursuant to this chapter shall be prepared and
sealed by a registered engineer, land surveyor or landscape
architect licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the person
causing such sedimentation to remove the accumulated sediment from
all adjoining or downstream properties, surfaces, drainage systems,
watercourses and roadways and to repair any damage at his expense as
quickly as possible.
B. All necessary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures installed
under this chapter, shall be adequately maintained by the landowner or
developer during and after completion of the approved plan.
A. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity
requiring a permit hereunder shall apply for a permit by written
application on a form furnished by the Township.
B. A separate application shall be required for each grading permit. Three
copies of the proposed plan, including specifications and timing
schedules, shall be submitted with each application for a permit. One of
the copies, at the discretion of the Township, shall be submitted to the
Delaware County Conservation District for comment and review.
C. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee,
which shall be established by Township resolution, as adopted by
Township Council from time to time.
§ 186-6 CHARTER § 186-10
C:277
§ 186-11. Inspections.
All earthwork and materials shall be subject to inspection for conformity
with the terms of this chapter and Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development.
D. Before any permit is granted, the applicant shall post an escrow
account with the Township. The exact sum shall be determined by
Township resolution. For larger tracts of land, an escrow agreement
shall be signed by the applicant and approved by the Township
Manager and/or Engineer, the condition of which shall be a full and
complete compliance with this chapter, and all terms of the permit.
Among other items, the escrow account shall be used for the repayment
of the costs incurred by the Township for inspections, to reestablish the
erosion, sediment and stormwater control features, and to repair any
damage done to adjacent properties. Once the escrow account is 50%
depleted, it shall be replenished to the original amount.
E. The permit shall be valid for the time period indicated on the permit, or
two years, whichever is less. The applicant may request the permit
period be extended by giving 30 days written notice to the Township
prior to expiration of the permit. At this time, the Township shall review
the status of the permit and shall decide whether or not to grant or deny
the extension.
A. The Township may inspect any earth disturbing or water flow alteration
activities covered by this chapter on a random basis to assure full
compliance with the soil erosion and sedimentation control plans on file
in the Township.
B. During inspections, if it is found that the soil or other conditions are not
as stated or shown in the application and plans approved or the work is
not proceeding in accord with the plans, the Township may refuse to
approve further work and revoke and or all permits and/or agreements
until approval is obtained for a revised soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan conforming to existing conditions.
C. If, at any stage of the work, the Township shall determine by inspection
that the nature of the work is such that further work as authorized by
an existing permit is likely to endanger property, streets, or create
hazardous conditions, the Township may require as a condition to
allowing the work to be done that such reasonable safety precautions
shall be implemented by the permittee as the Township considers
advisable to avoid such likelihood of danger.
D. No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or
from any such site or premises by an authorized representative or agent
of the Township engaged in the inspection of work for compliance with
the approved plans.
§ 186-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 186-11
C:278
§ 186-12. Costs of inspection.
All applicants shall bear all costs of inspections required hereunder. Such
costs shall be deducted from the escrow account as established under
§ 186-10D above. The costs of inspections shall be charged at the rate
established by Township resolution, adopted by Township Council from time
to time, or actual costs incurred. The Township shall have the right to seek
outside consultants to provide independent inspections, plan review and
inspection reports.
§ 186-13. Waivers.
For applications not involving subdivision or land development review and
approval, one or more provisions of this chapter may be modified by the
Township Council, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, if the
literal enforcement of the provisions will exact undue hardship because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose
and intent of this chapter is observed.
E. All plans must be kept on the site during construction and through to
inspection.
F. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Township Engineer to
certify compliance with this chapter. Compliance with this chapter and/
or Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be necessary
before issuance of an occupancy permit.
G. For any work authorized by the Township under this chapter that
remains uncompleted, the permittee may request a temporary
certificate of occupancy from the Township. If approved, the temporary
certificate shall contain a written list of uncompleted items and is valid
for no more than 30 days from the date of issuance. In addition, the
permittee shall post additional escrow with the Township sufficient to
satisfy the cost of completing the uncompleted items listed on the
temporary certificate. No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until all of the uncompleted items have been completed. In the
event that the permittee fails to satisfy the uncompleted items within
the time stated on the temporary certificate, the Township, may, in
addition to any other remedies available to it in law or equity, draw
upon said escrow funds and cause the outstanding items to be
completed.
A. All requests for a modification shall be in writing. The request shall
state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on
which the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter
involved and the minimum modification necessary.
B. The Township shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for
modifications.
§ 186-11 CHARTER § 186-13
C:279
§ 186-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon summary conviction before any Magisterial District Judge, be
fined an amount not exceeding $500 and costs of prosecution, and in default
thereof, may be imprisoned in the county jail for a term of not more than 30
days. Each and every day in which any person, firm or corporation shall be
in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 192
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 139. Littering — See Ch. 148.
C. In granting any modification, the Township Council shall prescribe any
conditions that they deem necessary to or desirable for the public
interest. In making their findings, the Township Council shall take into
account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of
land in the vicinity, the probable effect of the proposed subdivision and/
or upon traffic conditions, fire, police protection and other utilities and
services in the vicinity. No modification shall be granted unless the
Township Council finds:
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the
land.
(2) That the modification is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which
said property is situated.
§ 186-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 186-14
C:280
ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse
[Adopted 6-13-1960 by Ord. No. 59; amended 8-26-1985 by Ord. No.
378; 8-27-1990 by Ord. No. 473 (Ch. VI, Art. 1, Sec. 101, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 192-1. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereby
ascribed thereto, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GARBAGE — All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from meat,
fish and fowls, fruits, vegetables and parts thereof and other articles and
materials ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for such use or
which are for any reason discarded.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
REFUSE — All discarded articles or materials, except sewage and liquid
waste, and including garbage, ashes and combustible and noncombustible
waste.
§ 192-2. Disposal regulations.
All garbage and/or refuse originating within the Township of Middletown
shall be disposed of only by removal beyond the limits of the Township by
a licensed collector. In no case may garbage be brought into the Township
for the purpose of disposal therein, nor may garbage be disposed within the
limits of the Township by burning. Pending disposal as hereby authorized,
garbage may be stored in covered containers only and in such limited
quantities and for such limited period of time as shall ensure that no
annoyance, nuisance or health hazard shall be created or maintained
thereby. Except for such temporary storage as is hereby specifically
authorized, no person shall keep, have, maintain, store upon or allow to
exist in any manner whatsoever any garbage upon any lot or piece of
ground within the limits of the Township. Materials designated as recyclable
materials shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of Article III,
Recycling.
§ 192-3. Hauler license and standards.
A. License and regulations. No person shall remove, haul or convey any
refuse through or upon any of the streets or alleys of the Township of
Middletown and dispose of the same in any manner or place without
first obtaining a license from the Township Manager of said Township.
The fee for such license shall be $50 per annum, and all licenses shall
be issued for the calendar year or such portion thereof which shall
remain after issuance thereof. There shall be no reduction in the fee for
a person who shall apply for a license issued after the beginning of any
§ 192-1 CHARTER § 192-3
C:281
§ 192-4. Unlicensed collectors.
No person shall permit any unlicensed collector to take any refuse from
premises owned or occupied by him.
§ 192-5. Hours specified for collection.
All collections made by licensed collectors pursuant to the provisions hereof
shall be made between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or dusk,
whichever shall occur first. In the event that collections in residential areas
result in noise which creates a disturbance, the Township Manager shall
have the discretion to direct licensed collectors to withhold collection until
7:00 a.m.
§ 192-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $25 and costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, to
undergo imprisonment for no more than five days, provided that each day's
continuance of a violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense,
and provided, further, that a violation may result in revocation of the license
of said collectors.
calendar year. Every person who shall apply for a license under this
section shall, in applying therefor, state the type or types of refuse to be
collected, the manner and place of disposal of all refuse to be collected
under such license and any other information deemed necessary by
the Township to enforce the terms of this article. The applicant shall
provide certification that all vehicles to be used in such collection are
properly insured. No such license shall be granted by the Township
Manager if the manner or place of disposal of such refuse shall not
conform in every respect to the requirements of this article. No licensed
collector shall make any change in the arrangements for disposal of
refuse collected by him without securing the approval of the Township
Manager. Said license shall at all times be displayed by the collector in
the cab of his truck.
B. No licensed collector shall permit any outfallings from the conveyance
of refuse to lie upon any of the streets or alleys in the Township.
Collection vehicles shall have closed bodies or shall have sufficient
covers to prevent the blowing and spillage of refuse during collection
and transportation.
§ 192-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 192-6
C:282
ARTICLE II
Municipal Solid Waste Disposal
[Adopted 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 409 (Ch. VI, Art. 5, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 192-7. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid
waste for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including
the municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid
waste directly, and any business or institution within the municipality
which generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and
equipment for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — Shall mean one or more contractors with whom
the county or the Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter
referred to as "Authority") contracts for construction and operation of
the proposed resource recovery plant or plants, or other solid waste
facilities.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, and other material including solid or
semisolid material generated in residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and other
solid waste which is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as
set forth in the Act and which the county, Authority, or contractor by its
ordinance or regulations is willing to accept at the plant, but excluding:
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Middletown.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority, or
designated contractor.
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities,
transfer station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority
or the contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority, or its designated contractor for the purpose of transfer,
(1) Any liquid waste or sludge;
All wastes which are defined by existing or future federal or state
law or regulations as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste;
(2)
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for the purposes of recycling; and
(3)
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county
ordinances.
(4)
§ 192-7 CHARTER § 192-7
C:283
§ 192-8. Prohibitions.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality, any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this article, and other
applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations.
§ 192-9. County/authority operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the solid waste plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county in accordance with
all applicable laws and regulations, and also that the contractor and/or the
county will impose reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all
classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 192-10. Operations by licensed collectors.
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be licensed by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of properties.
§ 192-11. Disposal at designated site.
All collectors shall deliver and dispose all municipal solid waste collected
within the municipality at the solid waste plant designated by the county
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be
established by the county and/or contractor. Delivery and disposal at any
other place shall be a violation of this article and cause for revocation of
the collector's license, except in special circumstances approved in advance
by the municipality and the county and/or contractor. All collectors shall
comply in their operations with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations pertaining to the collection and transportation of municipal
solid waste.
§ 192-12. Private dumps, transfer stations, and landfills prohibited.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station,
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
processing, or disposal of municipal solid waste, including landfills,
resource recovery plants, and transfer stations.
B. Certain terms used herein are also defined in the recitals hereto.
§ 192-7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 192-13
C:284
§ 192-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial District
Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in default
of payment thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days; and each day's continuance of any other violation of this
article as well as each truckload of illegally delivered trash shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 192-14. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 192-14 herein, any continued
violation of this article or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact, or which in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality shall constitute a nuisance, may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 192-15. Regulations.
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations
as may from time to time be promulgated by the governing body of the
municipality, including, but without limitation, regulations as to the form of
license application, the amount of fee to be charged for said license, and
the terms of licenses and license issuance procedures; provided, however,
that no such rules and regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this
article, the county solid waste plan, or applicable law.
§ 192-16. Amendments; contract.
The municipality reserves the right to amend this article or repeal it at any
time; provided, however, that the requirement for use of the designated
solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste from the
municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the prior express
written approval of the county during the term of the contract between
the county (or Authority) and contractor providing for the construction
and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a term of 25 years.
For the purposes of securing the contractor's financing, such requirement
shall be deemed to be a contract between the county, the contractor, and
the municipality, which the municipality (subject to the terms of the joint
cooperation agreement set forth below) agrees to enforce so that the
municipal solid waste from the municipality will be available to provide a
source of energy for the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but
in the future it becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid
waste so collected to the plant.
A. Municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered during the term
of this agreement all municipal solid waste, as defined herein,
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
§ 192-13 CHARTER § 192-16
C:285
§ 192-17. Adoption of solid waste management plan.
B. County agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above upon completion and commencement
of operation of the plant in accordance with a contract, containing
terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor providing for
construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of this agreement shall be for a period of 25 years, and said
term shall commence on January 1, 2017. The municipality, at its
option, may terminate this agreement with 30 days' written notice to
the county in the event that the municipality will incur substantial costs
over and above the costs generally accepted by the other municipalities
in delivering municipal solid waste to the county during the term of this
agreement, provided the municipality has first obtained final approval
from the Department of Environmental Protection for its own plan
under the act, or an approval from the Department for a modification
that brings the municipality under another plan that has already
obtained final approval. It is understood, however, that (upon any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality) the County, the
Authority, and/or the county's contractor shall be relieved of any
responsibility to accept and dispose of municipal solid waste generated
within the municipality. It is further understood that any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality shall constitute a
repeal, whether express or implied, of § 192-18 of this article.
[Amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 767]
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this article against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in said defense and
shall give the county solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. DEP has recommended that the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act can best be accomplished on a county-wide basis.
B. The municipality, by formal resolution dated May 14, 1987, authorized
the county to prepare the solid waste management plan on the
municipality's behalf.
C. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission, and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
Consulting Engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for solid waste
management.
D. The appropriate municipal officials of this municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the plan as it affects this
§ 192-16 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 192-17
C:286
§ 192-18. When effective.
This article shall become effective 31 days after adoption. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, this municipality shall have neither the right nor the
obligation to dispose of its municipal solid waste at the plant which is
contemplated under this article until said plant is constructed and fully
operational.
municipality, have found the plan acceptable, and have recommended
that the plan be adopted.
E. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the solid
waste management study prepared by the County as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.
F. The county is hereby authorized to submit the plan to DEP for the final
approval on behalf of the municipality.
G. All other provisions, terms and conditions of the 1987 ordinance not
specifically amended hereby shall remain in full force and effect. The
SWA and the municipality hereby reaffirm the 1987 ordinance as
amended hereby. [Added 4-25-2016 by Ord. No. 767]
§ 192-17 CHARTER § 192-18
C:287

ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 8-27-1990 by Ord. No. 473 (Ch. VI, Art. 4, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 192-19. Title.
The title of this article shall be the "Municipal Recycling Program."
§ 192-20. Definitions. [Amended 8-23-1993 by Ord. No. 525]
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them by this section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling residential
buildings containing more than four dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and porcelain
and ceramic products.46
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers and nursing
homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, but not grass clippings.[Added 7-27-2009 by
Ord. No. 706]
MIXED PAPER — All white paper, colored paper, newspaper, card stock,
grayboard, brochures, junk mail, envelopes with and without windows,
magazines, etc., used in commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.[Added 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 706]
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having more than
four dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPALITY — Middletown Township.47
46.Editor's Note: The former definition of “high-grade office paper,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 706.
47.Editor's Note: The former definition of “newspapers,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 706.
§ 192-19 CHARTER § 192-20
C:289
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences, commercial
or institutional establishments, multifamily housing properties of more than
four dwelling units or operators or sponsors of community activities.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic beverage containers
manufactured of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or high-density
polyethylene (HDPE).
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS (RECYCLABLES) — Source-separated reusable
materials, including materials listed in Section 1501 of Act 10148 and
materials identified by the municipality to be recycled, which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as waste.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Any occupied single- or multifamily dwelling
having up to and including four dwelling units per structure.49
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed of.
The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
YARD WASTE — Shrubbery, tree trimmings, twigs, sticks, and branches, but
not grass clippings.[Added 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 706]
§ 192-21. Establishment of program.
§ 192-22. Separation of recyclables and placement for removal.
All recyclables shall be kept separate from other garbage and refuse and
shall be collected by the Township or by its designated agent. Recyclables
A. There is hereby established a recycling program for the mandatory
separation of recyclables from garbage and refuse in Middletown
Township. All residences, as well as commercial, institutional, and
municipal facilities located within the Township, are required to recycle
in the manner set forth in the regulations adopted by resolution of the
Council of Middletown Township, as amended from time to time. The
items to be recycled and the specific instructions for recycling shall be
contained within the recycling program regulations. Recycling program
regulations shall ensure that the minimum requirements of the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (Act 101
of 1988),50 as may be amended, and the Delaware County Solid Waste
Management Plan, as may be amended, are met. [Amended
7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 706]
B. The Township Council or its authorized agent is empowered to
designate the day or days of the month on which recyclables shall be
collected, removed and disposed of from the Township or any
designated area within the Township.
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.100 et seq., particularly § 4000.1501.
49.Editor's Note: The former definition of “source-separated recyclable materials,” which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 706.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 192-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 192-22
C:290
shall be sorted and placed for collection in the manner described in the
recycling program regulations. These materials shall be placed either at the
curbside in such a manner that prevents the blowing or scattering of these
materials so as to cause littering or they shall be placed in specific recycling
collection locations as may be designated in the recycling program
regulations from time to time. Nothing shall prevent the municipality from
establishing different recycling requirements and procedures for different
classes of use within the municipality.
§ 192-23. Separation and disposal of leaf and yard waste. [Amended
7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 706]
Leaf and yard waste shall be separated from garbage and refuse in
accordance with requirements established by the Municipal Waste
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (Act 101 of 1988)51 and the
Delaware County Solid Waste Management Plan, as amended from time to
time. All property owners shall make provision for the on-lot composting or
collection of leaf waste. All residents, if not composting, shall place leaf and
and waste curbside for collection for composting purposes by Middletown
Township under recycling program regulations. Nonresidential facilities, if
not composting, shall make arrangements for the collection and composting
of leaf waste.
§ 192-24. Municipal ownership of recyclable materials.
From the time of placement of recyclable materials at the curb or at
specified recycling collection points for collection in accordance with the
terms of the Middletown Township recycling program regulations, these
items shall be and become the property of Middletown Township or its
authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this article for any person
unauthorized by the Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected
or picked up any such items. Any and each such collection in violation
hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 192-25. Recycling of materials.52
It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains recyclable materials designated by recycling program
regulations with other forms of solid waste or refuse.
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
52.Editor's Note: Former § 192-25, Existing recycling operations, was repealed 7-27-2009 by
Ord. No. 706. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 192-26
through 192-29 as §§ 192-25 through 192-28, respectively.
§ 192-22 CHARTER § 192-26
C:291
§ 192-26. Residential collection fee. [Amended 10-29-1990 by Ord.
No. 479; 8-23-1993 by Ord. No. 525; 4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 566;
6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 602]
The owner of each residential property served by the curbside recycling
program shall be billed by the Township on an annual basis at an amount
established by the Township Council. Said billing shall be sufficient to cover
the cost of the residential collection, administrative and billing costs and
any tipping fees, disposal costs or shipping charges involved in marketing
the recyclables collected.
A. Annual billing system.
(1) The annual bill for recycling will be set forth as a separate item on
the Township annual tax bills which are mailed to each residential
property owner, as so listed in the real estate and interim tax
duplicate. The entire tax bill, including but not limited to the
recycling item, must be paid in full. Partial payments will not be
accepted by the Township.
(2) Each bill will be payable with a 2% discount if paid in full on or
before March 31 of each year and will be payable at the face
amount of the bill if paid between April 1 and May 31 of each year.
Payments received in full, either at the Township Finance Office or
at the bank designated on the bill, on or prior to the end of the
period during which the bills are payable, will be deemed to be a
payment within such period. For the purposes of this section, the
residential property owner shall be deemed to have made payment
within such period if the letter transmitting the payment is
postmarked by the United States Postal Service on or prior to the
final day in which the payment is to be received. Presentation of the
receipt indicating that payment was mailed by registered or
certified mail on or before the due date shall also be evidence of
timely payment. Failure to receive such bills will not be considered
an excuse for nonpayment and will not permit an extension of the
period during which the bills are payable.
(3) All moneys collected or recovered under the provisions of this
article shall be paid into the Treasury of the Township of
Middletown for the use and benefit of the Township of Middletown.
(4) The face amount of the annual recycling charge shall be set by
ordinance or resolution of Township Council.
(5) All recycling bills remaining unpaid after May 31 of each year will
be subject to a ten-percent penalty to be added to the face amount
of the bill. Such bills will be deemed to be delinquent recycling bills
and must be paid by the 31st day of December of the year in which
the bill is dated. All delinquent recycling bills and the penalties
thereon which are not paid by December 31 shall continue to be
deemed delinquent and a lien shall be entered in the Office of
Judicial Support against the property served by the recycling
§ 192-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 192-26
C:292
§ 192-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-23-1993 by Ord. No.
525]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with any
provision hereof or with any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 or the
maximum fine allowed by law, except that the maximum fine for failure to
comply with § 192-27 hereof shall not exceed $10 for the first offense or $50
for any succeeding offense.
§ 192-28. Additional method of disposal.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to any other person,
partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit,
for recycling purposes. Said other person, partnership or corporation may
not, however, under any circumstances pick up recyclable materials placed
for collection in accordance with Township recycling program regulations
unless express authorization is received from the Township to do so.
program for which the recycling bill remains unpaid and shall
be collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and
collection of municipal claims or liens. The Township shall assess
each property against which a lien is filed, a Township lien
processing fee of $30 or other amount as may be provided by
ordinance or resolution of Township Council. The amount of the
Township lien processing fee, together with the amount of any
county filing and satisfaction fees, an interest charge of 9% per
annum on the overdue amount and any other charges, expenses
and/or fees permitted by law to be included shall be included in the
amount of the lien.
§ 192-26 CHARTER § 192-28
C:293
Chapter 198
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 192-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 192-28
C:294
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 198-1. Statement of findings.
The Middletown Township Council finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, degrades water
quality, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and
manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood
reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Township and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Through project design, impacts from stormwater runoff can be
minimized to maintain the natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high
water quality, groundwater recharge, stream baseflow, and aquatic
ecosystems. The most cost effective and environmentally advantageous
way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project
design, minimizing impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoiding sensitive
areas (i.e., stream buffers, riparian corridors, floodplains, steep slopes,
very steep slopes, etc.), and designing to topography and soils to
maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
D. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of stream beds and stream banks thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens.
E. The aforementioned impacts happen mainly through a decrease in
natural infiltration of stormwater.
F. Stormwater is an important water resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
G. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
§ 198-1 CHARTER § 198-1
C:295
§ 198-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this comprehensive stormwater management ordinance is
to promote health, safety, and welfare within Middletown Township by
maintaining the natural hydrologic regime and by minimizing the harms
and maximizing the benefits described in § 198-1 of this chapter through
provisions designed to:
H. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a federal permit for stormwater discharges from
their municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and are required to
reduce sediment and other pollutants from entering the MS4.
I. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
(MS4) can contribute to pollution of surface waters of the
commonwealth by the Township.
A. Meet water quality requirements under state law, including regulations
at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain "existing uses"
and maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all
streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in "special
protection" streams.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMP).
C. Minimize increases in stormwater volume and control peak flow.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
F. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
G. Maintain the pre-development volume of groundwater recharge and
prevent degradation of groundwater quality.
H. Maintain the pre-development peak and volume of stormwater runoff
and prevent degradation of surface water quality.
I. Minimize nonpoint source pollutant loadings to the ground and surface
waters.
J. Minimize impacts on stream temperatures.
K. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
Township and the commonwealth.
L. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
§ 198-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-2
C:296
§ 198-3. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff
by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32
P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater Management Act; by the
authority of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended by Act 170 of 1988, as further amended by Act 209 of 1990 and
Act 131 of 1992, 53 P.S. § 10101; and by the authority of Home Rule, 53
Pa.C.S.A., § 2961 et seq.
§ 198-4. Applicability and regulated activities.
M. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and best management practices that
are implemented in the Township.
N. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
O. Provide review procedures, performance standards, and design criteria
for stormwater planning and management.
P. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
Q. Infiltrate stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent
degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
R. Prevent stream bank and stream bed scour and erosion.
S. Provide standards to meet National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements.
T. Address certain requirements of the Municipal Separate Stormwater
Sewer System (MS4) NPDES Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
U. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the MS4.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the Township that are located
within the Ridley Creek and Chester Creek Watersheds.
B. All construction and development activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
C. This chapter shall apply to temporary and permanent stormwater
management facilities constructed as part of any of the regulated
activities listed in this section. Stormwater management and erosion
and sedimentation control during construction activities which are
specifically not regulated by this chapter shall continue to be regulated
under existing laws and ordinances.
§ 198-2 CHARTER § 198-4
C:297
D. This chapter contains the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a
watershed-wide perspective. Stormwater management design criteria
(e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details,
outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by
applicable ordinances, where not specifically identified herein.
E. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter, except as may be exempt from provisions
of this chapter pursuant to § 198-5:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Prohibited or polluted discharges.
(4) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
(5) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (refer to
Article II) which cumulatively exceed 500 square feet in area since
August 28, 2012.
(6) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings
which cumulatively exceed 500 square feet of impervious surface
area since August 28, 2012.
(7) Redevelopment (Refer to Article II.) proposing demolition and/or
removal of more than 50% of existing structures and impervious
surfaces on a site, excluding sites maintaining existing singlefamily
detached or single-family semidetached residential dwelling
uses. In the event a proposed development fails to meet the
thresholds necessary to constitute redevelopment hereunder, an
applicant may request a modification (waiver of modification)
approved the requirements of under § 198-9, subject to the
recommendation of the Township Manager, or their designee,
where the Applicant can demonstrate that the development
proposes an overall enhancement to the Middletown Township
community, including, but not limited to, development proposing a
multimodal transportation enhancement for Township residents or
a proposed alternative redevelopment which is consistent with the
Township Comprehensive Plan or other plan adopted by the
Township.
(8) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
stream channel.
(9) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) or appurtenances thereto.
(10) Temporary storage of impervious or pervious material (rock, soil,
etc.) where ground contact exceeds 5% of the lot area or 5,000
§ 198-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-4
C:298
§ 198-5. Exemptions.
square feet (whichever is less), and where the material is placed on
slopes exceeding 8%.
(11) Any activity requiring a grading and excavating permit pursuant to
Township Code Chapter 186, Grading and Excavating (aka "Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control"), as amended.
F. All regulated activities which result in earth disturbance shall comply
with the requirements of the Middletown Township Code, Chapter 186,
Grading and Excavating (aka "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control"), as amended.
A. Exemption from any provision of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from all other applicable requirements of this chapter, as
identified herein or any applicable state or federal regulations.
B. If approved by the Township pursuant to § 198-5E of this chapter, the
following regulated activities are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter (except as identified in § 198-5D or as otherwise specifically
identified, herein):
(1) Installation of 1,200 square feet or less of cumulative impervious
surface area since August 28, 2012.
(2) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(3) Agricultural activities when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan, nutrient management plan, or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Delaware County
Conservation District, including activities such as growing crops,
rotating crops, tilling of soil, and grazing animals. Installation of
new, or expansion of existing, farmsteads, animal housing, waste
storage, production areas, or other areas having impervious
surfaces shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter unless
exempt pursuant to § 198-5.
(4) Lot line adjustment subdivisions are exempt where no new lots are
proposed and when no increase in impervious surface is proposed.
(5) Public road replacement, replacement paving, repaving and/or
maintenance, and roadway shoulder improvements. This includes
shoulder improvements conducted within the existing roadway
cross section of municipally owned roadways, provided said
improvements do not result in the construction of a new lane of
travel. However, if the shoulder improvements require an NPDES
permit, the proposed work must comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 198-4 CHARTER § 198-5
C:299
(6) Any aspect of BMP maintenance to an existing SWM system made
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
Township.
(7) Repair and reconstruction of on-lot sewage disposal systems where
work is performed in accordance with a valid permit issued by the
Township or county.
(8) Lots that are part of an approved subdivision containing overall
subdivision stormwater management facilities, such as detention
basins, rain gardens, etc., are exempt from additional individual lot
controls if the total quantity of impervious surface area on the lot
(existing plus proposed) is equal to or less than that quantity
allocated to the lot, in the stormwater management design
approved in conjunction with the subdivision. Stormwater runoff
from impervious surface area must be directed to on-lot
stormwater controls and overall subdivision stormwater controls
consistent with that shown on the approved subdivision plan.
(9) Construction or reconstruction of buildings or additions to existing
buildings or other impervious surface (regulated activities) is
exempt where the following conditions are met:
(a) An area of impervious surface is removed from the site so that
upon completion of the regulated activity, the total increase of
impervious surface area is 1,200 square feet, or less.
(b) The area where existing impervious surface is removed
pursuant to § 198-5B(9)(a) above must be restored in
accordance with § 198-19J of this chapter.
(10) Grading and excavating permit applications (pursuant to Chapter
186 of the Middletown Township Code) where the addition of
impervious surface area is 1,200 square feet or less.
(11) A high tunnel (Refer to Article II.) shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter if:
(a) The high tunnel conforms to all applicable Township Code
requirements except as otherwise exempted by Pennsylvania
Act 15 of 2018 (Act of April 18, 2018, P.L. 91, No. 15); and
(b) The high tunnel or its flooring does not result in an impervious
area exceeding 25% of all structures located on the owner's
total contiguous land area; and
(c) The high tunnel meets one of the following:
[1] The high tunnel is located at least 100 feet from any
perennial stream or watercourse, public road or
neighboring property line; and
§ 198-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-5
C:300
[2] The high tunnel is located at least 35 feet from top of bank
of any perennial stream or watercourse, public road or
neighboring property line and located on land with a slope
not greater than 7%; and
[3] The high tunnel is supported with a buffer or diversion
system that does not directly drain into a stream or other
watercourse by managing stormwater runoff in a manner
consistent with requirements of Stormwater Management
Act 167.
C. Except as identified in § 198-5D (or as otherwise identified in this
chapter), regulated activities in Middletown Township creating a
cumulative amount of additional impervious surface area [on a "parent
tract" - refer to § 198-5D(4)] in excess of 1,200 square feet but less than
the quantities identified in table 198-5.1, and satisfying the setback
criteria identified in Table 198-5.2, are only exempt from certain
provisions of this chapter and must comply with the requirements of the
Simplified Stormwater Management Approach, including submission
and approval of a simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP)
pursuant to Article IV of this chapter. Regulated activities creating
impervious surface area greater than the quantities referenced in
Tables 198-5.1 and 198-5.2 are not exempt from any requirements of
this chapter and shall submit for approval a stormwater management
site plan (SMSP) pursuant to Article IV of this chapter.
(1) Regulated activities included within § 198-5C are exempt from
certain provisions of this chapter where the cumulative amount of
additional proposed impervious surface area and the location of the
impervious surface area conform to the following tables, 198-5.1
and 198-5.2.
Table 198-5.1 - Maximum Exempt Impervious Surface Area
Total Parcel Area
(acres)
Maximum Exempt
Impervious Surface Area
(square feet)
Less than 0.50 1,200
0.50 to 1.0 2,500
Greater than 1.0 to 2.0 4,000
Greater than 2.0 to 5.0 5,000
Greater than 5.0 7,500
(2) Maximum amount of impervious surface area permitted (pursuant
to Table 198-5.1) within a setback (excluding driveway access),
measured from the downslope property boundary, shall conform to
the following table:
§ 198-5 CHARTER § 198-5
C:301
Table 198-5.2 - Maximum Exempt Impervious Surface Area
Permitted Within the Setback
Minimum Setback*
(feet)
Maximum Exempt
Impervious Surface Area
Permitted Within the
Setback
(square feet)
10 None permitted
20 1,200
50 2,500
100 4,000
200 5,000
500 7,500
NOTES:
* The "minimum setback" is defined as that distance between
the downslope property boundary (where surface stormwater
runoff from the regulated activity crosses that boundary) to
the nearest point of the proposed impervious improvements,
or the stormwater control structure discharge point,
whichever is closer. Setback distances may be adjusted at the
discretion of the Township Engineer based upon factors such
as topography, surface flow path, soil conditions, and location
of structures.
(3) Projects meeting the exemption criteria established by Tables
198-5.1 and 198-5.2 must comply with the requirements of the
Simplified Stormwater Management Approach and shall construct
a stormwater management infiltration facility (BMP) capable of
capturing, storing and infiltrating the first two inches of rainfall
generated by the net increase in impervious surface area (or the
equivalent, thereof). The physical surface area of infiltration BMPs
(the surface on which water is infiltrated) shall be no less than 20%
of the net increase of impervious surface area. Infiltration BMPs
must be constructed in accordance with Middletown Township
standards and specifications and provisions of § 198-19 of this
chapter, unless an alternative construction specification is
approved by the Township Engineer. Regulated activities subject to
the Simplified Stormwater Management Approach must submit to
the Township for approval a simplified stormwater management
site plan (SSMSP) conforming to the requirements of this chapter.
Refer to § 198-23, § 198-24 and Middletown Township standards
and specifications for plan content requirements, construction
details for required infiltration BMPs, design and calculation
criteria and submission and approval requirements.
§ 198-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-5
C:302
D. Conditions and eligibility.
(1) Subdivision and/or land development activities are not eligible for
exemption and are not eligible for the Simplified Stormwater
Management Approach (§ 198-5C).
(2) Nonresidential development activities and development activities
disturbing one acre or more of ground are not eligible for
exemption and are not eligible for the Simplified Stormwater
Management Approach (§ 198-5C), except for municipal activities
that do not require state or federal permits or subdivision and/or
land development approval. Development activities on a site
involving residential properties containing three or more separate
residential units constitutes nonresidential development activity
hereunder.
(3) Regulated activities as defined in § 198-4E(8) and (9) of this
chapter are not eligible for exemption and are not eligible for the
Simplified Stormwater Management Approach (§ 198-5C).
(4) All impervious surface area constructed on a parcel or tract
("parent tract") after August 28, 2012, shall be considered
cumulatively in determining the eligibility of a regulated activity for
exemption. Impervious surface area existing on a parent tract prior
to this date shall not be included in cumulative impervious surface
area summation. Any area designated to be gravel or crushed stone
shall be considered impervious surface unless it is part of an
approved BMP. This requirement shall apply to the total
development of the parcel even if development is to take place in
phases.
(5) Any regulated activity that does not create new or additional
impervious surface area, but would create additional stormwater
runoff as compared to the pre-development condition [e.g.,
removing woods or forest (or other dense vegetation) and replacing
with nonwooded vegetation such as meadow or lawn], is not
eligible for exemption and is not eligible for the Simplified
Stormwater Management Approach (§ 198-5C).
(6) An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from compliance with
§ 198-16D of this chapter related to "riparian corridor" and other
Middletown Township Code requirements, including but not limited
to Chapter 275, Article XXIX (Floodplain Conservation District),
Chapter 275, Article XXX (Steep Slope Conservation District),
Chapter 186 (Grading and Excavating, aka Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control) and Middletown Township standards and
specifications.
(7) An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and property.
§ 198-5 CHARTER § 198-5
C:303
(8) Drainage problems. Where drainage problems are documented or
known to exist downstream of, or is expected from, the proposed
activity, the Township may deny an exemption.
(9) HQ and EV streams. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting state or county requirements for watersheds draining
to high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters.
(10) Forest management (timber harvesting) operations are not eligible
for exemption.
E. Middletown Township, upon written request by an applicant, may grant
an exemption from the provisions of this chapter for a regulated activity
qualifying for an exemption identified pursuant to § 198-5B. The
Township shall require the applicant to pay a fee to the Middletown
Township Stormwater Management Capital Fund, in an amount
established by separate resolution of Middletown Township Council, for
any exemption identified pursuant to § 198-5B(1), (9) and/or (10) of this
chapter.
F. All applicants seeking an exemption of stormwater management
requirements based upon criteria contained in § 198-5B and E shall, at
a minimum, submit the following documentation to the Township for
approval of an exemption:
(1) Two copies of the completed Township stormwater management
exemption application form.
(2) Exemption application fee as established by separate resolution of
Township Council.
(3) Two copies of a plan containing, at a minimum, the following
information:
(a) Name and address of owner and tax folio number.
(b) Property boundaries and acreage of the parcel including a copy
of the parcel deed.
(c) Location map identifying the site relative to streets and other
parcels in the vicinity of the site.
(d) Location of existing site features within 100 feet of the
proposed impervious surface area, including but not limited to
wetlands, watercourses, surface waters, riparian corridor,
floodplains, woods, forest, steep slopes and very steep slopes
(as defined by the Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance53),
structures, parking areas, driveways, utilities, wells, and on-lot
septic systems, regardless of the location of the property
boundary.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning.
§ 198-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-5
C:304
§ 198-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the Township inconsistent with any
of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 198-7. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the viability
of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 198-8. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
§ 198-9. Modification (waiver).
A Modification of the requirement of one or more provisions of this chapter
may be granted by the Township Manager upon the recommendation of
the Township Engineer or other Township professional staff, as applicable,
if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose
and intent of this chapter is observed. In the event a requested modification
is denied by the Township Manager, the Middletown Township Council may
grant a waiver of a modification upon submission of a written request,
which specifically sets forth the justification of modification of the
requirement(s). In granting a waiver of a modification hereunder,
Middletown Township Council may impose such conditions upon the waiver
as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of this chapter.
(e) Location and dimensions of existing and proposed impervious
surface and other improvements on the property (that do not
absorb rainfall), with setbacks drawn to relate the location of
same to property lines, streets, and other existing features.
Impervious surface area tabulation must be provided
identifying existing area of impervious surface, existing
impervious surface area to be removed, and proposed
impervious surface areas. Impervious surface areas removed
shall be restored in accordance with § 198-19J of this chapter.
This restoration must be verified by the applicant for an
exemption, if approved by the Township.
(f) Other information deemed necessary by the Township to
determine compliance with exemption criteria contained in
§ 198-5B.
§ 198-5 CHARTER § 198-10
C:305
§ 198-10. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 198-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-10
C:306
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 198-11. Word usage; terms defined.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended,"
"designed," "maintained," or "arranged to be used," "occupied" or
"maintained."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activity and the natural
processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
also, the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be
more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in § 198-4
of this chapter.
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:307
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS (As-Built Plan) — Drawings that are maintained
during construction of the project and which document the actual
locations of the site improvements. An as-built plan must be prepared
by a professional land surveyor, landscape architect, or professional
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and must be
signed and include seal of the responsible professional preparing the
plan.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top of bank or point where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — The portion of stream flow that is sustained by
groundwater discharge.
BIORENTENTION — A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody
and herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration
occurs.
BMP (Best Management Practice) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian corridor or forested buffers, sand filters, detention
basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are
permanent appurtenances to the project site.
BMP MANUAL — Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, December 2006, as amended.
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater
flows. Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and manmade
watercourses, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes that
convey continuously or periodically flowing water.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate
to large floods.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — Delaware County Conservation District.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by a planner certified by
NRCS that identifies conservation practices and includes site-specific
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:308
BMPs for agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use
areas.
CONVEYANCE — A natural or man-made existing or proposed facility,
feature or channel used for the transportation or transmission of
stormwater from one pace to another. For the purposes of this chapter,
"conveyance" shall include pipes, drainage ditches, channel and swales
(vegetated and other), gutters, stream channels, and like facilities or
structures.
COUNTY — Delaware County.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit, or similar structure including appurtenant
works which conveys surface water under or through an embankment,
driveway, street or road.
CURVE NUMBER (CN) — Value used in the Soil Cover Complex
Method. It is a measure of the percentage of precipitation which is
expected to run off from the watershed and is a function of the soil,
vegetative cover, and tillage method.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway,
railroad, or other purposes which does or may impound water or
another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP).
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL, QUALIFIED — A Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, or a registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop stormwater management
site plans or simplified stormwater management site plans or any
person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or qualified
by law to perform the work required by this chapter.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DESIGNEE — The agent of Middletown Township, Delaware County,
Delaware County Conservation District and/or governing body involved
with the administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions of this
chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
soon after a rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the surface waters of the commonwealth at a controlled
rate.
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:309
DETENTION/RETENTION BASIN WATERSHED — All land area whose
surface runoff is captured by a detention and/or retention basin.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter. The developer is the
applicant for approval of a stormwater management plan as described
in this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction or placement
of buildings or other structures, mobile homes, streets and other
paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations, and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written
and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge not
confined to a single point location or channel, such as sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious surface
that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage or conveyance
system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area, which allows
for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration.
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed, located such that
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin
or other point of interest;
(1)
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (CFS).
(2)
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:310
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials. Grinding or
milling of bituminous or concrete paving is not considered earth
disturbance.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands
or diminishes the course, current or cross section of a watercourse,
floodplain or body of water.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional civil engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN (Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan) — A plan which is designed to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. Except where specifically indicated
otherwise in this chapter, farm field, disturbed earth, or undeveloped
cover conditions of a site or portions of a site used for modeling
purposes shall be considered "meadow" in "good" condition unless the
natural groundcover generates lower curve numbers (CN) or Rational
coefficient (C), such as a wooded or forested land.
EXISTING RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or
depression where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates
and replenishes the groundwater.
EXISTING RESOURCES AND SITE ANALYSIS MAP (ERSAM) — A base
map which identifies environmentally sensitive areas subject to
restrictions as defined by the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,54 Zoning Ordinance55 and this chapter, including, but not
limited to, steep slopes, very steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, hydric
soils, wetlands, vernal pools, floodplains, riparian corridors, woods
(forest), surface waters of the commonwealth regulated by the state
or federal government, topography, vegetated site features, natural
areas, any areas supportive of endangered species, existing stormwater
recharge areas or other stormwater management facilities, on-lot
septic systems and wells.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning.
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:311
FLOOD — Stormwater that temporarily inundates land areas not
normally covered by water.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area, adjoining a river,
stream, watercourse or body of water, which area is subject to partial
or complete inundation; an area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source, e.g., stormwater
drainage courses and basins. Also refer to Middletown Township Code
Chapter 275, Article XXIX.
FOREST — Refer to "woods."
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATIONS —
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forest land.
These include timber inventory and preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GEOTEXTILE — A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used
to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between
different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.
GRADE —
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies
wells and springs and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS — The US Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC)-Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania
Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HIGH TUNNEL — A structure which meets the following:
(noun) A slope usually of a street, other public way, land area,
drainage facility or pipe, specified in percent;
(1)
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
(2)
Is used for the production, processing, keeping, storing, sale or
shelter of an agricultural commodity as defined in Section 2 of
the Act of December 19, 1974 (P.L. 973, No. 319), known as the
"Pennsylvania Farmland and Forest Land Assessment Act of
1974,"56 or for the storage of agricultural equipment or supplies.
(1)
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:312
HOT SPOT — An area where land use or activity generates highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of
those typically found in stormwater. Typical pollutant loadings in
stormwater may be found in Chapter 8, Section 6 of the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002
(2006).
HYDRIC SOILS — A soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long
enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic condition in
the upper part and as more specifically identified by the Delaware
County Conservation District and/or NRCS Soil Survey.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME, NATURAL — The hydrologic cycle or balance
that sustains quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and
groundwater supplies under the natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation
Service, into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils,
which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (Impervious Area) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface area shall
include, but not be limited to, buildings, parking areas, driveways,
roads, and sidewalks. Any areas containing concrete, asphalt, crushed
stone, gravel, compacted soils, or other equivalent surfaces shall be
considered impervious. Decks that do not prevent infiltration shall not
be considered as impervious surface. Pool water surfaces are shall be
considered impervious area. In addition, other areas determined by
the Township Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this
definition shall be classified as impervious surface. Any area designated
to be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious unless
it is part of an approved BMP.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
Is constructed consistent with all of the following:
(a) Has a metal, wood or plastic frame.
When covered, has a plastic, woven textile or other flexible
covering.
(b)
Has a floor made of soil, crushed stone, matting, pavers or a
floating concrete slab.
(c)
(2)
56.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5490.2.
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:313
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground [e.g., french drains, underdrain (that is level) seepage
pits, seepage trench, biofiltration swale].
INFILTRATION ZONE — The soil elevation at which infiltration testing
is completed and the approved bottom elevation of at-grade or
underground infiltration basins.
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES — Plant species that are non-native to
the area and tend to spread to a degree that causes harm to the
environment, local species, or human interests.
INVERT — The inside bottom of a culvert or other conduit.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether purposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(a)
The addition of a residential accessory building, including farm
building, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building; or
(b)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For the purposes of this subsection, an
amusement park is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by the proper authorities.
(c)
(3)
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:314
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE (Earth Disturbance) — Any activity
involving grading, tilling, digging, or filling of ground or stripping/
removal of vegetation or any other activity that causes an alteration to
the natural condition of the land.
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata which includes one of the following:
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES — Practices that will
minimize proposed conditions' runoff rates and volumes, which will
minimize the need for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Pursuant
to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(8), municipal separate storm sewer system is a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains):
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional,
determined by direct observation of the water table or indicated by
soil mottling.
(1)
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to
fill the voids between the fragments.
(2)
A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which is so slowly
permeable that is effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
(3)
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, township, county, parish,
district, association, or other public body (created to or pursuant
to state law), including special districts under state law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal
organization, or a designated and approved management agency
under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges into
waters of the United States;
(1)
(2) Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
(3) Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined
at 40 CFR 122.2.
(4)
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:315
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NOXIOUS PLANTS (Noxious Weeds) — Plants that are determined to be
injurious to public health, crops, livestock, agricultural land, and other
properties.
NPDES — National Pollution Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point
where Middletown Township's storm sewer system discharges to
surface waters of the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater
or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development
or subdivision originates as of August 28, 2012.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT (PADOT) — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Middletown
Township.
PMF (Probable Maximum Flood) — The flood that may be expected
from the most severe combination of critical meteorological and
hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The
PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as
determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POLLUTANT REDUCTION PLAN (PRP) — A plan required by PADEP
for the reduction of sediment and nutrients to impaired surface waters,
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:316
from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), under the
Township's NPDES permit, under the Clean Water Act of 1972.
POST-DEVELOPMENT — Period after construction during which
disturbed areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and
functioning, and all improvements in the approved stormwater
management plan are completed.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to
provide storage or filtering to help trap coarse materials and other
pollutants before they enter the system.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Refer to "design professional,
qualified."
RATIONAL METHOD — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression where
stormwater collects, and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the underground and groundwater.
RECHARGE VOLUME — A calculated volume of stormwater runoff from
impervious areas which is required to be infiltrated at a site and may
be achieved through use of structural or nonstructural BMPs.
RECORDATION (Record) — The recordation of a subdivision, land
development, NPDES permit, NPDES permit notice of termination,
stormwater operation and maintenance agreement, deed, declaration
of restrictions and covenants, or similar document at the Delaware
County Recorder of Deeds.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any regulated activity that involves demolition,
removal, reconstruction, or replacement of existing impervious
surface(s).
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any activity to which this chapter is
applicable pursuant to § 198-4.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, the Clean Streams Law, or as indicated in
Township Code Chapter 186, Grading and Excavating (aka Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control).
REGULATED WATERS (Regulated Waterway) — Surface waters
regulated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or waters of the
United States.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of pre-development peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the post-development peak rate
of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retain stormwater runoff so
that a permanent pool is established.
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:317
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected
to recur on the average once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — A vegetative ecosystem along surface waters
(consisting of predominantly native trees, shrubs, and forbs) that is
maintained in a natural state or sustainably managed to protect and
enhance water quality, stabilize stream channels and banks, provide
recharge rate attenuation, volume reduction and water quality filtering,
and shading of the surface waters to promote cooling of runoff.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section and right-of-way, such as grading and
repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning
or clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff
from a roof and leads it away from a structure.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the surface waters of the commonwealth
occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the underground water. (Refer to PA BMP
Manual, December 2006, Chapter 6, Section 4.)
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SLOPES, STEEP — Refer to Middletown Township Code, Chapter 275,
Article XXX.
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:318
SLOPES, VERY STEEP — Refer to Middletown Township Code, Chapter
275, Article XXX.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a curve number (CN).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the NRCS
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which
are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not
very permeable and produce much more runoff.
SPECIAL PROTECTION WATERSHEDS — Watersheds of streams that
have been designated in Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental
Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards as being exceptional
value (EV) or high quality (HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. Refer
to "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER CONVEYANCE FACILITY (Runoff Conveyance Facility)
— A stormwater management facility designed to transmit stormwater
runoff which shall include streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits,
culverts, storm sewers, etc.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) — The control of surface runoff
generated by precipitation reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT APPROVAL — A written approval
issued by the Township after the stormwater management site plan
(SMSP) or the simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP)
has been reviewed. Said approval is confirmed as part of the final
approval by the Township and recordation of a subdivision and/or land
development plan, or through the issuance of a grading and excavating
permit (aka soil erosion and sedimentation control permit) pursuant to
Township Code Chapter 186.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:319
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and
retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN —
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SMSP) — The written
stormwater management site plan submitted by the applicant
(prepared by a qualified design professional), indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular site of interest
according to this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN, SIMPLIFIED (SSMSP) —
The written simplified stormwater management site plan submitted by
the applicant (prepared by a qualified design professional), indicating
how stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular site of interest
according to this chapter.
STREAM — Rivers, creeks, springs, and other perennial or intermittent
watercourses containing water at least on a seasonal basis during an
average water year. The term "stream" shall include all "intermittent
streams" and all "perennial streams."
The plan for managing stormwater runoff within the Township
adopted as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167);
(1)
A stormwater management site plan (SMSP) or simplified
stormwater management site plan (SSMSP), as applicable, as
required by this chapter.
(2)
SPRINGS or SEEPS — The point where groundwater discharges to
become surface water.
(1)
STREAM, EPHEMERAL — A reach of stream that flows only during
and for short periods following precipitation and flows in low areas
that may or may not be a well-defined channel. Ephemeral stream
beds are located above the water table year round. Groundwater is
not a source of water for the stream. Some commonly used names
for ephemeral streams include stormwater channel, drain, swale,
gully, dry stream channel, hollow, or saddle.
(2)
STREAM, HEADWATER — The beginning reach of a stream, which
collects water from springs and seeps and provides a hydrologic
connection to a perennial stream. These channels may be ill defined
and may move from year to year depending upon groundwater
input, snowmelt, and runoff, but are typified by hydric soils and
hydric vegetation.
(3)
STREAM, INTERMITTENT — A reach of stream that flows only
during wet periods of the year and flows in a continuous welldefined
channel. During dry periods, when the water table is
(4)
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:320
STREAM BANK EROSION — The widening, deepening or headward
cutting of channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or
bankfull flows.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream,
essential to maintaining water quality.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure, as
defined by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, which encloses a regulated water
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SUBAREA (Subwatershed) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in
the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATER (Surface Waters) — Any and all perennial and
intermittent streams, rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments,
ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,
ponds, springs, natural seeps, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
commonwealth (aka waters of the commonwealth), including any
feature identified as waters of the United States.
depressed by seasonal aridity or drought, intermittent streams may
go down to a trickle of water and appear dry, when in fact there is
water flowing within the stream bottom or substrate.
STREAM, PERENNIAL or WATERCOURSE, PERENNIAL — A body
of water in a channel that flows throughout a majority of the year
in a defined channel and is capable, in the absence of pollution,
drought, or man-made stream disturbances, of supporting a
benthic macroinvertebrate community that is composed of two or
more recognizable taxonomic groups of organisms, large enough to
be seen by the unaided eye and can be retained by a U.S. Standard
No. 30 sieve (28 meshs per inch, 0.595 mm openings) and live at
least part of their life cycles within or upon available substrates
in a body of water or water transport system. A perennial stream
can have Q7-10 flow of zero. For the purposes of this document,
a perennial stream includes lakes, ponds and other areas of
permanently impounded water, unless such areas of impounded
water are not classified as surface waters regulated by the state or
federal government.
(5)
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:321
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATIONS — Refer to "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of
overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP OF BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the
channel and over the floodplain.
TOWNSHIP — Middletown Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and appointed by Middletown
Township pursuant to the authority of Home Rule, 53 Pa.C.S.A.
TRIBUTARY AREA — The portion of a watershed that contributes runoff
to a particular point in that watershed.
VERNAL POOL — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring, but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
VOLUMETRIC RUNOFF COEFFICIENT — A variable indicative of
stormwater runoff volume and dependent on the impervious coverage
for a site.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME — A calculated volume of stormwater runoff
from impervious areas which is required to be captured and treated at
a site and may be achieved through use of structural or nonstructural
BMPs.
WATERCOURSE — An intermittent, ephemeral or perennial stream of
water, river, brook, creek, or swale identified on USGS, SCS or state
mapping; and/or delineated waters of the commonwealth.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed
water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth, including all such features identified in the USGS
National Hydrography Dataset (NHD), Hydrologic Unit Code HUC-12.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES (or WATERS OF THE US) —
All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may
be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including
all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
(1)
(2) All interstate waters, including interstate "wetlands";
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:322
WET BASIN — Pond for runoff management that is designed to detain
runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.
WETLAND DELINEATION — The process by which wetland limits are
determined. Wetlands must be delineated by a qualified specialist
according to the 1989 Federal Manuals (as amended) for the
Delineation of Jurisdictional Wetlands (whichever is greater) or
according to any subsequent federal or state regulation. "Qualified
specialist" shall include those persons being certified professional soil
scientists as registered with the Registry of Certified Professionals
in Agronomy Crops and Soils (ARCPACS); or as contained on a
consultant's list of Pennsylvania Association of Professional Soil
Scientists (PAPSS); or as registered with the National Society of
Consulting Soil Scientists (NSCSS); or as certified by state and/or
federal certification programs; or by a qualified biologist/ecologist.
WOODS (Forest) — Any land area of at least 0.25 acre with a natural
or naturalized ground cover (excluding manicured turf grass) that has
an average density of two or more trees of six-inch caliper or greater,
per 1,500 square feet and where such trees existed within three years
of application to the Township for development approval or permit. An
All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including
intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, "wetlands," sloughs,
prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the
use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could
affect interstate or foreign commerce, including any such waters:
Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers
for recreational or other purposes;
(a)
From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in
interstate or foreign commerce; or
(b)
Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by
industries in interstate commerce;
(c)
(3)
All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition;
(4)
Tributaries of waters identified in Subsections (1) through (4) of
this definition;
(5)
(6) The territorial sea; and
"Wetlands" adjacent to waters (other than waters that are
themselves wetlands) identified in Subsections (1) through (6) of
this definition.
(7)
§ 198-11 CHARTER § 198-11
C:323
area shall be considered wooded if there is a contiguous canopy of trees
measured from the outer driplines.
§ 198-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-11
C:324
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 198-12. General requirements.
A. All applicants proposing regulated activities in the Township that do not
fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 198-5B and C of this
chapter shall submit a stormwater management site plan (SMSP),
consistent with this chapter, to the Township for review. All applicants
proposing regulated activities that fall under the exemption criteria
identified in § 198-5C are subject to the Simplified Stormwater
Management Approach and shall submit a simplified stormwater
management site plan (SSMSP), consistent with this chapter, to the
Township for review. The plan shall be submitted by an applicant and
reviewed by the Township in accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
All impervious surface area constructed on a parcel or tract ("parent
tract") after August 28, 2012, shall be considered cumulatively in
determining the eligibility of a regulated activity for exemption.
Impervious surface area existing on a parent tract prior to this date
shall not be included in cumulative impervious surface area summation.
Any area designated to be gravel or crushed stone shall be considered
impervious surface unless it is part of an approved BMP. This
requirement shall apply to the total development of the parcel even if
development is to take place in phases. Refer to the definition of
"impervious surface" within Article II of this chapter.
B. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Create, maintain, repair or extend riparian corridors and
stream buffers.
(c) Stabilize eroded stream banks.
(d) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(e) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(f) Disconnect impervious surfaces [i.e., create disconnected
impervious areas (DIAs)] by directing runoff to pervious areas,
wherever possible.
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices (e.g., protecting existing trees,
reducing area of impervious surface, cluster development, and
protecting open space) described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
§ 198-12 CHARTER § 198-12
C:325
Best Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002 (December
30, 2006, as amended). Refer to § 198-12I of this chapter.
C. No approval of any subdivision or land development plan, or issuance of
any building, zoning, grading and excavating permit (aka soil erosion
and sedimentation control permit), certificate of occupancy for a
structure, or the commencement of any regulated earth disturbance at
a project site within the Township shall proceed until the requirements
of this chapter are met, including written approval of a stormwater
management plan pursuant to Article IV and a permit under PADEP
regulations, where applicable. A stormwater management plan shall be
construed to mean either a stormwater management site plan (SMSP)
or simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP), as applicable,
as required in this chapter.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
(E&S) control best management practices (BMPs) shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth
disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various
BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual (March 2012), as amended and
updated.
E. The Township may, after consultation with PADEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements, other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.
F. Erosion and sediment control during land disturbance shall be
addressed as required by § 198-20.
G. Infiltration and water quality protection shall be addressed as required
by §§ 198-15 and 198-16.
H. All best management practices (BMPs) shall conform to the design
criteria of this chapter and Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, December 30, 2006, as amended, whichever is more
stringent.
I. Low-impact development techniques as described in Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (December 30, 2006,
as amended) are encouraged to reduce the costs of complying with the
requirements of this chapter and state water quality requirements. Use
of nonstructural BMPs is encouraged and design and applicability of
such BMPs is identified pursuant to Chapter 5 of the Pennsylvania BMP
Manual.
§ 198-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-12
C:326
(1) For all proposed nonstructural BMPs, the applicant shall utilize and
submit applicable checklists included in Chapter 8, Section 8.8, of
the Pennsylvania BMP Manual, to demonstrate that the BMPs are
applicable to the project and to determine the amount of volume
credit that may be applied to the development activity.
(2) When conversion of existing impervious surfaces is primarily to be
utilized as a low-impact development technique to control surface
runoff rate and volume, post-construction, from a development site,
the applicant must demonstrate, through submission of soil testing
by a qualified technical professional, that existing impervious
surface areas to be converted to vegetative cover can achieve the
same or greater capability to absorb water than the original ground
cover condition prior to installation of impervious/compacted
surfaces. Impervious surfaces to be converted to vegetative cover
shall be accomplished in accordance with Middletown Township
requirements or as recommended by a qualified technical
professional, whichever is more stringent.
J. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to minimize the use of natural on-site infiltration features
while still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
K. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities designed to encourage infiltration,
groundwater recharge, and improved water quality.
L. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without written approval of the affected
property owner(s) and shall be subject to discharge criteria specified in
this chapter.
M. Areas of existing sheet flow discharge shall be maintained wherever
possible. If sheet flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged
onto adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge as verified by the Township Engineer; and submit written
approval from the affected adjacent property owner(s) if required by
the Township.
N. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The width of the easement shall be adequate to provide
for the unimpeded flow of stormwater runoff from the 100-year storm
event and shall include the riparian corridor required as specified in
this chapter. Terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement.
§ 198-12 CHARTER § 198-12
C:327
Periodic maintenance of the easement shall be required by the
landowner to ensure proper runoff conveyance and control of invasive
plant species and noxious weeds, as defined by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. With the exception of invasive plants and noxious weeds,
no vegetation shall be removed from within the riparian corridor.
O. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP through the Chapter 105 permit
process or, where deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general
permit process.
P. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located in or adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth,
waters of the United States or wetlands shall be subject to approval by
PADEP through the Chapter 105 permit process or, where deemed
appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there is a
question whether wetlands or regulated surface waters may be
involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant to prove that the land in
question cannot be classified as wetlands, surface waters of the
commonwealth or waters of the United States, otherwise approval to
work in the area must be obtained from PADEP.
Q. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way, or discharge
stormwater to facilities located within a state highway right-of-way,
shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
R. Site disturbance and impervious surface shall be minimized. Infiltrating
stormwater runoff through seepage beds, infiltration basins, etc., shall
be required, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or
eliminate the need for retention/detention facilities.
S. Roof drains, foundation drains, underdrains and sump pumps shall
discharge to an infiltration structure, natural watercourse, storm sewer
system, drainage swale, or stormwater easement. Roof drains and sump
pumps shall not be connected to the storm sewer unless the storm
sewer is designed as part of a stormwater BMP facility. In no case shall
roof drains, foundation drains or sump pumps be connected to the
sanitary sewer or be permitted to discharge directly across a sidewalk
or walkway, or onto a street. If curbing is present, no drainage pipes
shall pass through the curb to discharge onto the street. Sump pump,
foundation drain, underdrain and roof drain discharge pipes shall not
extend beyond the building envelope for the lot unless they are directly
connected to an infiltration facility, detention basin, storm sewer pipe
or as approved by the Township.
§ 198-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-12
C:328
T. All storm sewer inlets must be identified with a storm drain marker.
Storm drain markers shall be stainless steel affixed to the inlet hood
with adhesive, rivets, or bolts. (Markers may be bolted to the grate in
off-road locations.) Markers shall have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2
inches and include "No Dumping - Drains to Waterway" and a fish
symbol. Alternate designs/sizes may be used if approved by the
Township.
U. Whenever a watercourse is located within a development site, it shall
remain open in the natural state and location and shall not be piped,
impeded, or altered (except for permitted crossings). It is the
responsibility of the applicant, where applicable, to stabilize existing
eroded stream/channel bed and banks. (Refer to § 198-17.)
V. The temperature and quality of water of streams that have been
declared as exceptional value (EV) and high quality (HQ) are to be
maintained as defined in Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, Title 25,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Rules and
Regulations. All regulated development activities within HQ or EV
watersheds must provide volume controls and water quality controls
pursuant to the requirements of §§ 198-15 and 198-16 of this chapter.
W. All stormwater runoff shall be pretreated for water quality prior to
discharge to surface or groundwater as required by § 198-16 of this
chapter.
X. Hot spots.
(1) Hot spots are sites where the land use or activity produces a higher
concentration of trace metals, hydrocarbons, or priority pollutants
than normally found in urban runoff. Use of infiltration BMPs is
prohibited on hot spot land use areas. Examples of hot spots
include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes defined by
the U.S. Department of Labor).
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
§ 198-12 CHARTER § 198-12
C:329
§ 198-13. Stormwater management performance standards and
peak rate control.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Contaminated sites ("brownfield" sites).
(n) Other land uses and activities as designated by the Township.
(2) Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In
no case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement. Guidance regarding acceptable methods of pretreatment
is located in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual.
Y. West Nile guidance requirements. All wet basin designs shall
incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West Nile guidance
found in Appendix C of this chapter.57
Z. Artificial wetlands, wet ponds, and bioretention structures designed to
retain water shall incorporate geese damage/nuisance prevention
techniques, including but not limited to those identified in
§ 198-19I(3)(a)[10] of this chapter.
AA. Where there are surface features or facilities carrying and conveying
stormwater runoff (not including storm sewer), no development activity
shall be permitted which impacts the area inundated by the 100-year
frequency rainfall event in a manner which would result in the increase
in depth or extent of the area of inundation on an adjoining property or
that would encroach upon an existing structure.
A. Each watershed has been divided into stormwater management release
rate districts as shown on the map in Appendix E.58 Standards for
managing runoff from each subarea in a watershed for the one-, two-,
five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year design storms are shown in
Tables 198-13.1, 198-13.2 and 198-13.3. Development sites located in
each of the management/release rate districts must control proposed
conditions runoff rates to existing conditions runoff rates for the design
storms in accordance with the tables. In all other cases where
unretained stormwater directly discharges from the site by bypassing
the stormwater management facilities, the post-development runoff
rate shall not exceed pre-development runoff rate. The preceding
requirements shall apply to each location of concentrated or diffused
drainage discharge from the development site. Refer to § 198-18 for
requirements related to calculation of pre-development peak flow rates.
57.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
58.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-13
C:330
B. For all subareas set forth in Table 198-13.2, the proposed two-year peak
rate storm condition shall be reduced at a minimum to the existing oneyear
storm condition.
C. Release rate district boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater
management release rate districts are shown on an official map that is
available for inspection at the Township and County Planning offices. A
copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix E.59
The exact location of the stormwater management district boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using two-foot topographic contours (or most
accurate data required) provided as part of the stormwater
management plan.
D. Sites located in more than one district or watershed. For a proposed
development site located within two or more stormwater management
district subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet
the management district criteria in which the discharge is located. The
natural hydrology of each respective subarea shall be maintained.
E. The tributary area discharging surface runoff to any location along the
development site property boundary shall not increase by more than
25% over the pre-development condition without written approval from
the adjacent affected property owner(s) receiving runoff from the site,
or any other downstream property owner as required by the Township.
F. Site areas. Where the area of a site being impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area as
determined by the Township Engineer, the Township may, but is not
required to, permit only the proposed impacted area, which includes
areas of the site that would be disturbed, graded, cleared of vegetation
and/or compacted due to construction activity, to be subject to the peak
rate control requirements (performance standards).
G. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to peak rate control (release rate) requirements when
determining allowable peak runoff rates or volume reduction. However,
on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site
flows through the development site.
H. Hardship option for regulated activities less than one acre, excluding
subdivisions, land developments and nonresidential development
activities. There may be certain instances where the peak rate criteria
are too restrictive for a particular landowner or applicant. The existing
drainage network in some areas may be capable of safely transporting
slight increases in flows without causing a problem or increasing flows
elsewhere. This must be demonstrated as per § 198-13I below in order
for the hardship option to be considered. If an applicant or homeowner
cannot meet the stormwater standards due to lot conditions or if
59.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-13 CHARTER § 198-13
C:331
conformance would become a hardship to an owner, the hardship option
may be applied. The applicant would have to plead their case to
Middletown Township Council with the final determination made by the
Township. Any landowners pleading the "hardship option" will assume
all liabilities that may arise due to exercising this option. Cost or
financial burden cannot be considered as a hardship. The applicant
may consider off-site management controls as long as the stormwater
management controls are within the same subwatershed.
I. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream hydraulic
capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year storm event within
their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the channels
from erosion. Velocities shall be based upon criteria and
methodologies acceptable to the Township.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year storm event runoff without creating any
increased hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other hydraulic facilities
which must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be
designed in accordance with PADEP Chapter 105 regulations (if
applicable) and, at a minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year
storm event runoff.
(4) Water quality requirements defined in § 198-15 must be met.
(5) Post-construction peak rates shall not exceed the existing peak
rates for the respective subarea.
J. For "redevelopment" sites, one of the following minimum design
parameters shall be accomplished, whichever is most appropriate for
the given site conditions as determined by the Township Engineer.
Refer to Article II for definition of "redevelopment" and § 198-4E(7) of
this chapter for regulated activities that qualify for the "redevelopment"
standard described in this section.
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 198-13.1 for the
Ridley Creek Watershed or Table 198-13.2 for the Chester Creek
Watershed, as applicable to the site, and § 198-13A through I; or
(2) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 30%
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface. In this case, calculations must be
provided that show the peak rate of runoff for all design storms has
not increased. Impervious surfaces to be converted to vegetative
§ 198-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-13
C:332
cover shall be accomplished in accordance with § 198-12I of this
chapter.
K. Peak rates of runoff from a development site during construction when
the ground is disturbed must conform to § 198-20G of this chapter for
all design storm events, one-year through 100-year frequency. Peak rate
of runoff during construction, prior to permanent stabilization of a
development site shall not exceed the corresponding pre-development
peak rate of runoff. Calculations demonstrating compliance with this
requirement shall be based on actual ground cover conditions for the
pre-development condition.
Table 198-13.1 - Peak Rate Control Standards in the Chester
and Ridley Creek Watersheds
Peak flow rate of the post-construction design storm shall be reduced
to the peak flow rate of the corresponding pre-development design
storm shown in the following table:
Post-Construction Design
Storm Frequency
Pre-Development Design
Storm Frequency
1-year 1-year
2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
Table 198-13.2 - Control Criteria for Chester Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Districts
District Control Criteria
90% Post-development peak discharge
for all design storms must be no
greater than 90% of the predevelopment
peak discharges.
75% Post-development peak discharge
for all design storms must be no
greater than 75% of the predevelopment
peak discharges.
50% Post-development peak discharge
for all design storms must be no
greater than 50% of the predevelopment
peak discharges
§ 198-13 CHARTER § 198-13
C:333
§ 198-14. Project design (sequencing to minimize stormwater
impacts).
Table 198-13.3 - Control Criteria for Ridley Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Districts
District Control Criteria
90% Post-development peak discharge
for all design storms must be no
greater than 90% of the predevelopment
peak discharges
A. The design of all regulated activities shall include the following steps in
sequence to minimize stormwater impacts.
(1) The applicant is required to find practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious
surfaces, and the degradation of surface waters of the
commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural
hydrologic regime of the site.
(2) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of being
completed after considering cost, existing technology, and logistics
in light of overall project purposes, and other Township
requirements.
(3) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of
surface waters of the commonwealth unless otherwise
demonstrated.
B. All applicants proposing regulated activities in the Township that do not
fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 198-5B and C of this
chapter shall demonstrate that regulated activities are designed in the
following sequence to minimize the increases in stormwater runoff and
impacts to water quality:
(1) Prepare an Existing Resources and Site Analysis Map (ERSAM),
showing environmentally sensitive areas subject to restrictions as
defined by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,60
Zoning Ordinance61 and this chapter, including, but not limited to,
steep slopes, very steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, hydric soils,
wetlands, vernal pools, floodplains, riparian corridors, woods
(forest), surface waters of the commonwealth regulated by the
state or federal government, topography, vegetated site features,
natural areas, any areas supportive of endangered species, existing
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning.
§ 198-13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-14
C:334
§ 198-15. Volume control and infiltration BMPs.
stormwater recharge areas or other stormwater management
facilities, on-lot septic systems and wells.
(2) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas identified in
§ 198-14B(1) and minimizing total site earth disturbance as much
as possible. The ratio of disturbed area to the entire site area and
measures taken to minimize earth disturbance shall be included in
the ERSAM.
(3) Identify site-specific existing conditions, drainage areas, discharge
points (points of interest), recharge areas, and hydrologic soil
groups A and B.
(4) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
(Refer to the Pennsylvania BMP Manual.)
(a) Minimize earth disturbance.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(c) Break up large impervious surface areas.
(d) Protect existing trees [not within protected areas as described
in § 198-14B(1)].
(e) Direct rooftop runoff to pervious areas.
(f) Revegetate and reforest disturbed areas.
(g) Utilize natural flow pathways.
(5) Satisfy volume control standards (§ 198-15).
(6) Satisfy water quality objective (§ 198-16).
(7) Satisfy stream bank erosion protection objective (§ 198-17) and
riparian corridor vegetation objective (§ 198-16D).
(8) Prepare final project design to maintain pre-development drainage
areas and discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance and
impervious surfaces, to reduce runoff to the maximum extent
possible, and to minimize the use of surface or point discharges.
(9) Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the final
design, to meet the release rate criteria (performance standards)
including during-construction (land disturbance) release rate
criteria. (Refer to § 198-20.)
(10) Manage any remaining runoff through treatment prior to
discharge, as part of detention, bioretention, direct discharge or
other structural control.
§ 198-14 CHARTER § 198-15
C:335
A. For all regulated activities that are not exempt from requirements of
this chapter pursuant to § 198-5B and C, water volume mitigation
controls shall be implemented. The total volume of runoff that must be
infiltrated (Rev) shall be equal to or greater than the difference
between the post-development runoff volume and the pre-development
runoff volume for the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation
event [aka Control Guidance 1 (CG-1)]. The post-development total
runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than the two-year, twentyfour-
hour duration precipitation shall not be increased from the existing
condition. For the purposes of existing (pre-development) conditions
flow rate determination for all development activity, undeveloped land
shall be considered as "meadow" in "good" condition, unless the natural
ground cover generates a lower curve number (CN) or Rational
coefficient (C) (e.g., woods, forest). Areas of woods shall use a ground
cover of "woods" in "good" condition. All existing (pre-development)
impervious surface area, when present, shall be considered "meadow"
in "good" condition. For "redevelopment" sites, no less than 30% of
existing (pre-development) impervious surface area, when present,
shall be considered "meadow" in "good" condition. (Refer to § 198-18,
Calculation methodology.) Refer to Article II for the definition of
"redevelopment" and § 198-4E(7) of this chapter for regulated activities
that qualify for the "redevelopment" design criteria described in this
section. The recharge volume (Rev) must either be reused,
evapotranspired or infiltrated through structural and/or nonstructural
means.
(1) Alternative standards for runoff volume (Rev) control. Alternative
standards are allowed in this chapter where it can be demonstrated
that due to existing natural site conditions, substantial infiltration
and recharge are not feasible. If it can be demonstrated that
compliance with § 198-15A (CG-1) cannot be accomplished, then
applicants may request from Middletown Township that an
alternative standard be applied. Use of an alternative standard
shall be permitted by the Township only after thorough scrutiny has
been directed toward all possible stormwater management options
at all possible locations at the site, consistent with the process set
forth in § 198-15A(1)(e) and (f).
(a) If CG-1 cannot be accomplished as indicated in § 198-15A, and
if approved by the Township, at least the first one inch of runoff
from new or replacement impervious surface areas shall be
infiltrated. This recharge volume (Rev) shall be calculated as
follows:
Rev = (1 inch x IA) ÷ 12
Rev (recharge volume in cubic feet)
IA (impervious surface area in square feet)
(b) If infiltration of the recharge volume identified in § 198-15A
and § 198-15A(1)(a) cannot be accomplished, and if approved
§ 198-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-15
C:336
by the Township, at least the first 0.50 inch of runoff from new
or replacement impervious surface areas shall be infiltrated.
This recharge volume (Rev) shall be calculated as follows:
Rev = (0.50 inch x IA) ÷ 12
Rev (recharge volume in cubic feet)
IA (impervious surface area in square feet)
If the volume of runoff that can actually be infiltrated is
greater than that calculated in § 198-15A(1)(b), but less than
that calculated in § 198-15A(1)(a), the larger volume shall be
infiltrated.
(c) For development activities where it can be demonstrated that
the recharge volume requirement of § 198-15A,
§ 198-15A(1)(a), and § 198-15A(1)(b) cannot be accomplished,
the Township may approve a stormwater volume control design
after consultation with and evaluation by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) and
confirmation that such an alternative stormwater volume
control design is consistent with the requirements of Chapter
102 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and meets the current
PADEP design guidelines for managing runoff volume, where
infiltration is not feasible (infiltration-challenged sites).
(d) The recharge volume derived from the method/calculations
identified in § 198-15A, § 198-15A(1)(a), and § 198-15A(1)(b) is
the minimum volume the applicant must control through
infiltration BMPs. If site conditions preclude capture of surface
runoff from portions of the impervious surfaces, capture of
surface runoff volume from the remaining area of the
development site shall be increased as necessary to capture
and infiltrate an equivalent volume of runoff to conform to the
recharge volume requirement.
(e) Required analysis for allowing use of an alternative standard
for runoff volume control. The alternative standard shall be
used only in those situations where it is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Township that due to natural site conditions
infiltration is not occurring in the pre-development condition,
resulting in greater runoff volumes (than would normally be
anticipated) due to bedrock near or at the surface (less than
two feet in depth); presence of seasonal high water table
(SHWT) (less than two feet in depth); and soils with low
permeability (e.g., 0.20 inch per hour or less). Alternate
standard shall be permitted by the Township only in those
cases where the applicant has demonstrated that one or all of
the above described conditions exist throughout the site, such
that there is no reasonable means of infiltrating required
stormwater volumes and that the property cannot be
§ 198-15 CHARTER § 198-15
C:337
reasonably developed utilizing a stormwater management
system which infiltrates the two-year frequency storm event
volume (difference between the pre- and post-development
storm). The applicant must demonstrate that there is no area
of the site where the runoff volume requirement can feasibly
be infiltrated. It is not grounds for approval of the alternate
standard that infiltrating the runoff volume requirement will
utilize areas that could otherwise be developed to obtain the
most building area or lots.
(f) Applicants requesting to utilize the alternative standard must
provide a feasibility study for infiltration utilizing BMPs as well
as other runoff volume stormwater management systems and
provide the following information:
[1] Site plan demonstrating the extent of site area with
seasonal high water table (SHWT) (less than two feet): The
site will be evaluated both as to the extent of site with
SHWT and the actual locations of SHWT areas. Use of the
alternate standard shall be permitted by the Township only
in those cases where it is demonstrated that site areas free
of SHWT are not feasible for use as stormwater BMPs (i.e.,
they are located upgradient from reasonable site building
areas).
[2] Site plan demonstrating extent of site area with less than
two feet to bedrock: The site will be evaluated both as to
the extent of site with shallow depth to bedrock and actual
locations of shallow bedrock areas. Use of the alternate
standard shall be permitted by the Township only in those
cases where it is demonstrated that site areas free of
shallow bedrock constraints are not feasible for use as
stormwater BMPs (i.e., they are located upgradient from
reasonable site building areas).
[3] The site plan shall demonstrate the extent of site area with
less than 0.20 inch/hour of permeability in accordance
with the soil testing protocol set forth in § 198-15D and
Appendix B.62
[4] In order to utilize the alternative standard, the applicant
must demonstrate that the sum total of limited infiltration
areas (the total of areas described in § 198-15A(1)(f)[1]
through [3]) exceed the following percentages of the total
site:
[a] Sites less than five acres: 75%.
[b] Sites five to 10 acres: 80%.
62.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-15
C:338
[c] Sites greater than 10 acres: 85%.
In addition, the applicant must demonstrate that there is no
feasible site area free of the above described infiltration
constraining features which exist in a location such that the
runoff volume requirement can be achieved.
B. If it is determined to the satisfaction of the Township that the recharge
volume standard set forth in § 198-15A cannot be achieved, then the
peak rate standards for post-development runoff are modified so that
peak rate discharges from the site for all storms up to the ten-year
frequency design storm must be additionally reduced to be equal to or
less than 75% of the design peak rates permitted pursuant to § 198-13.
C. Water volume controls will mitigate increased runoff impacts, protect
stream channel morphology, maintain groundwater recharge, and
contribute to water quality improvements. The applicant must
demonstrate how the required recharge volume is controlled through
stormwater best management practices (BMPs) which shall provide the
means necessary to capture, reuse, evaporate, transpire or infiltrate
the total runoff volume. The low-impact development practices
provided in the Pennsylvania BMP Manual shall be utilized for all
regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable. Volume
controls provided through nonstructural BMPs may be subtracted from
the required recharge volume to determine the volume of structural
BMPs necessary for compliance with § 198-15A of this chapter. Design
and applicability of nonstructural BMPs is identified pursuant to
Chapter 5 of the Pennsylvania BMP Manual and § 198-12I of this
chapter, as applicable. For all proposed nonstructural BMPs, the
applicant shall utilize and submit applicable checklists included in
Chapter 8, Section 8.8 of the Pennsylvania BMP Manual, to
demonstrate that the BMPs are applicable to the project and to
determine the amount of volume credit that may be applied to the
development activity.
D. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall
be selected based on the suitability of soils and site conditions. All
applicants proposing regulated activities that are not exempt from
preparation and submission of a stormwater management site plan
(SMSP) are required to perform a detailed soils evaluation of the
project site by a qualified geotechnical engineer, geologist and/or soil
scientist, pursuant to Appendix B63 of this chapter, which at minimum
addresses soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole
formation, and subgrade stability. Infiltration/permeability tests shall
be completed (in conjunction with the soils evaluation) with an
infiltrometer or other method approved by the Township Engineer,
pursuant to Appendix B, to determine the saturated hydraulic
conductivity of the soil [at the location and the level of the proposed
63.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-15 CHARTER § 198-15
C:339
§ 198-16. Water quality requirements.
infiltration surface(s)]. "Percolation" tests (as utilized for septic system
design) are not permitted for design of infiltration BMPs, unless
approved by the Township Engineer.
E. Infiltration BMPs must include safeguards against groundwater
contamination for uses where it is anticipated that pollutants may enter
the facility, by mishap or spill or where salt or chloride might be a
nonpoint source contaminant since soils do little to filter this pollutant.
If it is anticipated that pollutants may enter the infiltration facility (or
other stormwater facility impounding water), resulting in potential
groundwater contamination, Middletown Township may require the
applicant to submit a hydrogeologic justification study of the site and
proposed infiltration BMPs, prepared by a qualified design professional,
to determine the risk for such contamination. The Township may
require the installation of a mitigative layer or an impermeable liner in
the BMP and/or detention basins where the possibility of groundwater
contamination exists.
F. Infiltration BMPs within high quality/exceptional value waters shall be
subject to PADEP's Title 25, Chapter 93, Antidegradation Regulations.
G. The requirements for volume control and infiltration are applied to all
disturbed areas, even if they are ultimately to be a pervious or
permeable land use given the extent to which development-related
disturbance leads to compaction of the soils and reduces their
infiltrative capacity.
H. If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed, it must be demonstrated
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
I. Infiltration BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the design
criteria and specifications of the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual
(2006) and as additionally identified pursuant to § 198-19I(1) of this
chapter.
A. In addition to the performance standards and design criteria
requirements of Article III of this chapter, adequate storage and
treatment facilities must be provided to capture and treat stormwater
runoff from developed or disturbed areas, unless otherwise exempted
by provisions of this chapter. The recharge volume computed under
§ 198-15 may be a component of the water quality volume if the
applicant chooses to manage both components in a single facility. Only
if the recharge volume is less than the water quality volume may the
remaining water quality volume be captured and treated by methods
other than recharge/infiltration BMPs. The required water quality
volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to capture and to treat a
portion of stormwater runoff from the developed areas of the site
produced from 90% of the average annual rainfall (P). The following
§ 198-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-16
C:340
calculation formula is to be used to determine the required water
quality storage volume (WQv) in acre-feet of storage:
Equation 198-16.1
WQv
=
[(P)(Rv)(A)]/12 (inches/foot), where:
P = Rainfall amount equal to 90% of events producing this rainfall
(in) - the volume of rainfall for 90% of the storm events which
produce runoff in the watershed annually
A = Area of the project contributing to the water quality BMP
(acres)
Rv = Volume runoff coefficient 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is the
percent of the area that is impervious surface (impervious
area ÷ total project study area) x 100%
B. Provisions shall be made (such as adding a small orifice at the bottom of
the BMP facility outflow control structure) so that the proposed
condition, one-year frequency design storm takes a minimum of 24
hours to drain from the facility from a point where the maximum volume
of water from the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). The design of the facility
shall minimize clogging and sedimentation. Trash racks are required
for any primary orifice. Orifices smaller than three inches in diameter
are not permitted. [Refer to § 198-19H(13).] However, if the design
engineer can verify that a smaller orifice is protected from clogging by
use of trash racks, etc., smaller orifices may be permitted. Should it be
verified by the design engineer that the requirement to release the oneyear
frequency design storm over a twenty-four-hour period is not
feasible using an orifice of three inches in diameter [or the equivalent
thereof - refer to § 198-19H(13)] or greater, this requirement shall be
considered satisfied by utilizing a three-inch diameter outflow control
orifice to achieve the maximum release time feasible for a given basin
tributary drainage area.
C. To accomplish the requirements in Subsections A and B above, the
applicant may submit original and innovative designs to the Township
Engineer for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the water
quality objectives through a combination of BMPs. Infiltration BMPs
shall be used wherever feasible. Wet ponds, artificial wetlands, or other
permanent BMP acceptable to the Township shall be used to the extent
that infiltration BMPs are proven not to be feasible.
D. Riparian corridor.
(1) A riparian corridor shall be created along surface waters as defined
by this chapter, within all development sites in accordance with the
following criteria:
§ 198-16 CHARTER § 198-16
C:341
(a) All area within 50 feet of either side of a surface water as set
back from the top-of-bank (of a stream, channel, watercourse,
etc.), permanent water surface (of a pond, lake, etc.) or
wetland, as applicable. For subdivisions, land developments
and construction activities requiring a PADEP Chapter 102
permit and/or NPDES permit, studies conducted by qualified
technical professionals must be completed to identify the limit
of wetlands and/or waters of the United States, or to verify
such features do not exist on a development site (or on a
nearby site, whereby the existence of such a feature would
result in the riparian corridor area extending into the
development site).
(b) The width of the riparian corridor shall be increased to be
consistent with that required in conjunction with any federal
and/or state permits required for development of a site.
(c) The width of the riparian corridor shall be increased to the
limit of the floodplain where the floodplain extends further
from the surface waters than the boundary requirement
indicated in § 198-16D(1)(a) and (b).
(2) Uses and development activities permitted within the riparian
corridor area shall include the following, subject to Township
approval and provided that they comply with all federal, state, and
local regulations and applicable provisions of this chapter. Any
permitted activity within the riparian corridor shall be conducted in
a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing floodplain,
improve or maintain the stream stability, and preserve and protect
the ecological function of the floodplain:
(a) Recreational trails conforming to all applicable PADEP
regulations and permit requirements.
(b) Utility rights-of-way and utility installation when no viable
alternative alignment or location is feasible.
(c) Bridges.
(d) Roads and driveways, including related stormwater culverts
and storm sewer, when no viable alternative alignment or
location is feasible, provided that such roads and driveways are
aligned predominantly perpendicular to the surface water and
topography.
(e) Removal of invasive and noxious plant species and debris in
accordance with state regulations.
(f) Stream bank stabilization including construction access and
erosion controls for such stabilization efforts, in accordance
with state regulations.
§ 198-16 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-16
C:342
(g) Revegetation and planting of trees, shrubs, or ground cover
vegetation approved by the Township.
(h) Other nondestructive uses subject to Township approval.
(3) Uses and development activities prohibited within the riparian
corridor area shall be cuts, fills, soil/rock/mineral extraction and/or
removal, removal of topsoil, structures, stormwater management
facilities, removal of vegetation (excluding removal of downed
trees), forestry, timber harvesting, ground disturbance and on-lot
septic system drainfields, tanks and related components.
(4) The following provisions also apply to riparian corridor areas on
lots in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter:
(a) If the applicable rear or side yard building setback pursuant to
applicable zoning regulations, is less than 50 feet, the riparian
corridor area setback may be reduced within the zoning
setback to 25% of the setback or 25 feet, whichever is greater.
(b) If a surface water traverses a site in a manner that significantly
reduces the use of the site, the riparian corridor area setback
may be reduced to 25 feet with the approval of a waiver by
Middletown Township Council.
(c) Reduction of the riparian corridor area as described in this
section shall only be considered for approval upon the
applicant verifying, through analysis by qualified technical
professional, that reduction of the setback would not result in a
riparian corridor width that is less (at any point on the
development site) than the floodplain of the surface water or
the extent of any existing wetlands or waters of the United
States on the property or on nearby properties (but impacting
the development site). Riparian corridor area may not be
reduced to less than that width required by federal or state
regulations.
(d) If an existing riparian corridor area (or a stream buffer), or the
equivalent thereof, is legally prescribed (i.e., established by
deed, covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the
requirements of this section, the existing buffer (riparian
corridor area) shall be maintained and may not be reduced in
width.
(5) The riparian corridor area shall be maintained in a vegetated state,
except where vegetation is otherwise permitted to be removed
from within the riparian corridor area pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter. Invasive plant species and noxious
weeds shall be carefully removed from the riparian corridor on a
continual basis.
§ 198-16 CHARTER § 198-16
C:343
(6) For subdivisions, land developments and construction activities
requiring a PADEP Chapter 102 permit and/or NPDES permit, the
riparian corridor area shall be planted with Pennsylvania native
vegetation unless the applicant demonstrates, through submission
of documentation, reports, studies and/or expert technical analysis
prepared by a qualified professional, that existing vegetation is
sufficient to satisfy the purpose of a riparian corridor as defined in
this chapter. The priority goal of the riparian vegetation will be the
reduction of thermal impacts on stormwater runoff associated with
impervious areas, with a secondary goal being the protection of
capacity of existing stormwater conveyance channels. Planting/
revegetation shall be accomplished in a manner satisfactory to the
Township, utilizing the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, December 2006, as amended. Also refer to
http://www.docs.dcnr.pa.gov/cs/groups/public/documents/
document/dcnr_20029752.pdf for a guide book titled "Common
Trees of Pennsylvania" for a native tree list. The requirements of
this section shall be in addition to any other Township Code
requirements.
(7) For subdivisions or land developments, an easement shall be
established to encompass the entire riparian corridor area and
shall be recorded with the Delaware County Recorder of Deeds so
that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property
located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private
ownership of the riparian corridor area, and the area of this
easement shall count toward the minimum lot area required by
zoning regulations. The recording plan of subdivision and land
development shall identify the boundary of such easement
including description of the metes and bounds. The recording plan
shall clearly reference by notation, all restrictions on use of, and
activity within the riparian corridor area as defined in this chapter
and within a floodplain (as defined by the Township Code).
E. Design of BMPs used for water quality control shall be in accordance
with design specifications outlined in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
BMP Manual or other applicable manuals. The following factors must
be considered when evaluating the suitability of BMPs used to control
water quality at a given development site:
(1) Total contributing drainage area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Topographic slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
§ 198-16 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-16
C:344
§ 198-17. Stream bank erosion requirements.
§ 198-18. Calculation methodology.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) Volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) Nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
(16) Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
A. In addition to the water quality volume, to mitigate the impact of
stormwater runoff on downstream stream bank erosion, BMPs must be
designed to detain the proposed conditions two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm to the existing conditions one-year flow using the SCS
Type II distribution.
B. Whenever a watercourse is located within a development site, it shall
remain open in the natural state and location and shall not be piped,
impeded, or altered (except for permitted crossings). The applicant
shall stabilize all eroded stream/channel beds and banks within a
subdivision or land development site and/or within the limit of
disturbance of a development activity requiring an NPDES permit (for
discharge of stormwater during construction activities) and obtain all
permits necessary from PADEP to do so. The applicant must submit a
report, prepared by a qualified professional, of existing stream/channel
banks, including photo documentation, to assess the condition of
existing watercourses and determine whether existing banks must be
stabilized.
A. Stormwater runoff calculations shall use generally accepted calculation
technique that is based on the NRCS soil cover complex method. Table
198-18.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods. Method must
be selected by the applicant based on the individual limitations and
suitability of each method for a particular site. The Rational Method
may be used to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that
contain less than 200 acres. The Rational Method is recommended for
drainage areas under 100 acres.
§ 198-16 CHARTER § 198-18
C:345
Table 198-18.1 Acceptable Computation Methodologies for
Stormwater Management Designs
Method
Method Developed
by Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20
USDA NRCS Applicable where use
of full hydrology
computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans
within limitations
described in TR-55
HEC-1, HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use
of full hydrologic
computer model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State University Applicable where use
of a hydrologic
computer model is
desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or
HEC-1
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling (1889) Applicable sites less
than 200 acres, or as
approved by the
Township engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies
approved by the
Township engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0,
rain data corresponding to the Media, Pennsylvania, rain gage as
presented in Table A-1 of Appendix A64 of this chapter. This data may
also be directly retrieved from the NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version
3.0 website: https://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/. If a hydrologic
computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24
hours.
64.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-18
C:346
C. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table A-2 in Appendix A65 of this chapter.
D. Runoff coefficients (C) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method are contained in Table A-4 in Appendix A66 of
this chapter. If approved by the Township Engineer, coefficients from
other credible published sources may be utilized.
E. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate time-of-concentration for overland flow and
return periods from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, rain data
corresponding to the Media, Pennsylvania, rain gage as presented in
Table A-3 of Appendix A67 of this chapter. This data may also be directly
retrieved from the NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0 website:
https://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/. Times-of-concentration for
overland flow shall be calculated using the methodology presented in
Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as
amended or replaced from time to time by NRCS). Times-ofconcentration
for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's Equation.
F. Existing (pre-development) condition peak flow rate calculation.
(1) Undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" in "good"
condition, unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve
number (CN) or Rational coefficient (C) (e.g., woods, forest), as
listed in Tables A-2 and A-4 in Appendix A68 of this chapter. Areas of
woods shall use a ground cover of "woods" in "good" condition.
(2) No less than 30% of existing (pre-development) impervious surface
area, when present, shall be considered "meadow" in "good"
condition. Stormwater calculations shall clearly identify the
existing impervious surface area to be modeled as meadow, as
"existing impervious surface as meadow." Stormwater calculations
shall clearly identify the existing impervious surface area to be
modeled as meadow, as "30% existing impervious surface as
meadow." Calculations must include a detailed tabulation of total
existing impervious surface area, existing impervious surface area
modeled as "meadow" and existing impervious surface area
modeled using Rational coefficient or curve numbers for
impervious surface, or the equivalent thereof.
(3) For "redevelopment" sites, the ground cover used in determining
the existing conditions (pre-development) flow rates shall be based
upon actual land cover conditions. Refer to Article II for the
65.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
67.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
68.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-18 CHARTER § 198-18
C:347
definition of "redevelopment" and § 198-4E(7) of this chapter for
regulated activities that qualify for the "redevelopment" design
criteria described in this section.
(4) Any portion of the site that is designed to discharge runoff to
proposed stormwater management facilities/BMPs (thus is within
the calculation study area), but is not proposed to be
reconstructed, regraded, or redeveloped, the ground cover used in
determining the existing conditions flow rates shall be based upon
actual land cover conditions.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table A-5 in Appendix A69 of this
chapter.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater management facilities intended to meet
the performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing
the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in area,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph.
J. The time of concentration (Tc) is the time required for water to flow
from the hydraulically most remote point of the drainage area to the
point of interest (design point). Use of the rational formula requires
calculation of a Tc for each design point within the drainage basin.
Travel time estimation for the Rational Method shall be based on NRCS
Technical Release No. 55 (2nd Edition). For design purposes, the time
of concentration may not be less than five minutes. Travel time (Tt) is
the time it takes runoff to travel from one location to another in a
watershed (subreach) and is a component of time of concentration. Tc is
computed by summing all the travel times for consecutive components
of the drainage conveyance system.
K. Water moves through a watershed as sheet flow, shallow concentrated
flow, open channel flow, or some combination of these. Sheet flow rates
shall be calculated using the NRCS TR-55 (1986) variation of the
kinematic wave equation. Sheet flow length may not exceed 50 feet
over paved surfaces and 150 feet over unpaved surfaces. Maximum
permitted sheet flow length shall be 150 feet unless site-specific
conditions exist (that can be demonstrated and proven) that warrant an
increase of the sheet flow length. Under no circumstances shall sheet
flow length exceed 300 feet. Shallow concentrated flow time and open
69.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-18
C:348
§ 198-19. Design and construction criteria for stormwater
management facilities and best management practices.
channel flow time shall be calculated using standard engineering
methodologies.
A. Stormwater runoff which may result from regulated activities identified
in § 198-4 shall be controlled by permanent stormwater runoff BMPs
that will provide the required standards within Article III. The methods
of stormwater control or best management practices (BMPs) which may
be used to meet the required standards are described in this chapter
and the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
December 30, 2006, as amended, and are the preferred methods of
controlling stormwater runoff. The choice of BMPs is not limited to the
ones appearing in this chapter and the BMP Manual; however, any
selected BMP must meet or exceed the runoff peak rate requirements of
this chapter.
B. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
C. Collection system standards.
(1) Curb inlets. Curb inlets shall be located at curb tangents on the
uphill side of street intersections, and at intervals along the
curbline to control the maximum amount of encroachment of runoff
on the roadway pavement so that same does not exceed a width of
four feet during the design storm event. Design and location of
curb inlets shall be approved by the Township.
(2) Pipe materials. All storm sewer piping shall be Class III reinforced
concrete pipe, except when pipe class and strength is required to
be increased in accordance with PennDOT Specification. Piping
shall be saw-cut at ends, as needed, and not hammered or broken.
All pipe joints and lift holes must be mortared except where
designed for infiltration. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) or
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, as approved by the Township
Engineer, may be utilized for underdrain, infiltration basins or
combination storm sewer underdrain (outside of public right-ofway).
(3) Minimum pipe size. Minimum pipe diameter shall be 18 inches (or
an equivalent flow area of 1.77 square feet).
(4) Inlet and manhole construction. Inlet and manhole castings and
concrete construction shall be equivalent to PennDOT Design
Standards. Manhole castings and covers shall have the word
"STORM" cast in two-inch letters on the top of the cover. All inlet
grates shall be "bicycle safe" heavy duty structural steel. All storm
sewer inlets must be identified with a storm drain marker
("environmental" type). Storm drain markers shall be stainless
§ 198-18 CHARTER § 198-19
C:349
steel affixed to the inlet hood with adhesive, rivets or bolts.
(Markers may be bolted to the grate in off-road locations.) Markers
shall have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2 inches and include "No
Dumping - Drains to Waterway" and a fish symbol. Alternate
designs/sizes may be used if approved by the Township.
(5) Open-end pipes must be fitted with concrete endwalls or wing walls
in accordance with PennDOT Standards.
(6) Flow velocity. Stormwater collection systems shall be designed to
produce a minimum velocity of three feet per second when flowing
full. The maximum permissible velocity shall be 15 feet per second.
Pipe slopes shall not be less than 1/2 of 1% (0.005 ft/ft), with the
exception that terminal sections of pipe shall have a minimum slope
of 1% (0.01 ft/ft).
(7) Inlets and manholes shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 300
feet, and shall be located wherever branches are connected or sizes
are changed, and wherever there is a change in alignment or
grade. For drainage lines of at least 36 inches in diameter, inlets
and manholes may be spaced at intervals of 400 feet. Manholes
shall be equipped with open grate lids.
(8) Storm sewer bedding/backfill requirements shall conform to the
Middletown Township standards and specifications.
(9) Inlets shall be located to intercept concentrated runoff prior to
discharge over public/private rights-of-way, sidewalks, streets, and
driveways.
(10) The capacity of all Type "C" inlets shall be based on a maximum
surface flow to the inlets of four cubic feet per second (cfs),
calculated based on the 100-year frequency design storm event.
The maximum flow to Type "C" inlets located in low points (such as
sag vertical curves) shall include the overland flow directed to the
inlet as well as all bypass runoff from upstream inlets. The bypass
flow from upstream inlets shall be calculated using inlet efficiency
curves included in PennDOT Design Manual Part 2, latest edition. If
the surface flow to an inlet exceeds four cfs, additional inlets shall
be provided upstream of the inlet to intercept the excessive surface
flow. A Type "C" inlet at a low point of a paved area may be
designed to accept a maximum of six cubic feet per second (CFS).
Type "M" inlets shall be designed to accept a maximum surface
flow of six CFS based on the 100-year frequency design storm
event, unless otherwise approved by the Township. Double inlets
will not be permitted where additional pipe and inlets can be
placed upstream to intercept excessive surface flow. A maximum of
12 CFS shall be permitted to be collected by a Type "M" inlet
located in an isolated pervious area provided the designer can
verify that such an inlet would not cause stormwater to accumulate
(pond/flood) on any adjoining public or private property, outside of
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:350
a storm sewer easement, and that the depth of the accumulated
stormwater would not exceed 12 inches. Double inlets (two single
collection inlets closely positioned side by side or front to back)
must be separated by at least one segment of connecting pipe, no
less than three feet long.
(11) A minimum drop of two inches shall be provided between the inlet
and outlet pipe invert elevations within all inlets and manholes.
When varying pipe sizes enter an inlet or manhole, the elevation of
crown of all pipes shall be matched. Storm sewer pipes shall enter
and exit the sides of inlet boxes and shall not encroach into the
corner, wherever possible. Where pipe is designed to encroach the
corner of a collection inlet box, the design engineer must verify the
box has sufficient strength to withstand PennDOT vehicle loading
requirements.
(12) Stormwater pipes shall have a minimum depth of cover of 18 inches
(including over the bell) or as designated by the American Concrete
Pipe Association (whichever is greater), and in no case shall any
part of the pipe project into the road subbase or curb. Where cover
is restricted, equivalent pipe arches may be specified in lieu of
circular pipe, to achieve required cover. Stormwater pipes
conveying swale flow under driveway crossings shall have a
minimum cover of 12 inches, including over the bell, but in no case
shall the cover be less than that required for the anticipated traffic
loading. For driveway culverts, cover may be less than 12 inches if
the design engineer verifies proposed pipe has sufficient strength
to withstand PennDOT vehicle loading requirements. Where cover
is restricted, concrete trench drain with bolt-down metal grates
may be used, as approved by the Township Engineer.
(13) The capacity of all stormwater pipes shall be calculated utilizing
the Manning Equation for open channel flow as applied to closed
conduit flow. The Manning's roughness coefficient shall be 0.13 for
all concrete pipe. In cases where pressure flow may occur, the
hydraulic grade line shall be calculated throughout the storm
sewer system to verify that at least one foot of freeboard will be
provided in all inlets and manholes for the design storm event.
(14) Culverts shall be designed based on procedures contained in
Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts, HDS No. 5, U.S.
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
Where pressure flow is anticipated in storm sewer pipes (non-open
channel flow), the applicant's designer shall be required to
calculate the elevation of the hydraulic grade line through the
storm sewer system. Wherever the hydraulic grade line elevation
exceeds the pipe crown elevation for the design flow, pipes with
watertight joints must be specified.
(15) Storm sewer structures (e.g., endwalls, inlets, pipe sections, etc.)
may not be located on top of, or within 10 feet of, electric,
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:351
communication, water, sanitary sewer, or gas services and/or
mains, and structures, unless approval is received from the
Township and the authority or utility having jurisdiction over same.
(16) Stormwater pipes must be oriented at right angles to electric,
water, sanitary sewer, and gas utilities when crossing above or
beneath same. Crossing angles of less than 90° will only be
permitted at the discretion of the Township. When skewed
crossings are permitted, interior angles between alignment of the
storm sewer pipe and utility may not be less than 45°. Vertical and
horizontal design of storm sewers must be linear.
(17) Roadway underdrain is required along both sides of all proposed
roadways, existing roadways proposed to be widened, and within
existing or proposed roadside swales as directed by the Township.
(18) Where a public storm sewer system is not located within a right-ofway,
or dedicated public property, a twenty-foot-wide easement
shall be established to encompass the storm sewer system and any
required access from a public road (or other area designated for
public use that is accessible to maintenance vehicles and
equipment). For multiple pipes or utilities, the width of the
easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet.
(19) A minimum of one-foot of freeboard, between the inlet grate and
the design flow elevation, shall be provided in all storm sewer
systems (inlets and manholes) for the 100-year frequency design
storm event.
(20) Stormwater roof drains and sump pumps shall not discharge water
directly onto a sidewalk, street, driveway or pavement area and
shall be constructed to discharge to a dry well/seepage pit or
aboveground entirely on the subject property, except where such
discharge could flow across sidewalk or onto a street, driveway or
pavement area. If approved by the Township Engineer, roof drains
and sump pumps may be discharged directly to a storm sewer
system if such system discharges to a stormwater BMP or water
quality facility.
D. Open swales and gutters. Open swales shall be designed on the basis of
Manning's Formula as indicated for collection systems with the
following considerations:
(1) Roughness coefficient. The roughness coefficient shall be 0.040 for
earth swales.
(2) Bank slopes. Slopes for swale banks shall not be steeper than one
vertical to four horizontal.
(3) Flow velocity. The maximum velocity of flow as determined by
Manning's Equation shall not exceed the allowable velocities as
shown in the following table for the specific type of material, unless
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:352
otherwise approved by the Township and the Delaware County
Conservation District. Note: Source of the following design criteria
is the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation Publication, Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (Document No.
363-2134-008).
Allowable Velocity
Material
Velocity in Feet Per Second
(fps)
Well established grass on good
soil
Short pliant bladed grass 4.0 to 5.0
Bunch grass - soil exposed 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff stemmed grass 3.0 to 4.0
Earth without vegetation
Fine sand or silt 1.0
Ordinary firm loam 2.0 to 3.0
Stiff clay 3.0 to 5.0
Clay and gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Coarse gravel 4.0 to 5.0
Soft shale 5.0 to 6.0
Shoulders
Earth (as defined above)
Stabilized 6.0
Paved 10.0 to 15.0
(4) Swales shall be stabilized with biodegradable erosion control
blanket to permit establishment of permanent vegetation. Swales
shall be of such shape and size to effectively contain the 100-year
(or greater), Rational Method design storm, and to conform to all
other specifications of the Township.
(5) To minimize sheet flow of stormwater across lots located on the
lower side of driveways, roads or streets, and to divert flow away
from building areas, the cross section of the street as constructed
shall provide for parallel ditches or swales which shall discharge
only at drainage easements, unless otherwise approved by the
Township.
(6) Gutters and swales adjacent to road, driveway or other paved area
shall be permitted to carry a maximum flow of four cubic feet per
second prior to discharge away from the paved surface, unless it is
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:353
proven to the satisfaction of the Township by engineering
calculations that the road slopes or other factors would allow
higher gutter or swale capacity.
(7) Concentrated runoff greater than that permitted in gutters,
roadside swales or along driveways may be conveyed in swales
outside the required road right-of-way or driveway easement area,
in separate drainage easements, or may be conveyed in pipes or
culverts inside or outside the required road right-of-way or
driveway easement area.
(8) Existing and proposed swales shall be provided with underdrains
as deemed necessary by the Township should it be anticipated that
overland seepage, swale flow or groundwater may result in
potential maintenance problems and or deterioration. Underdrains
must discharge into a natural drainage channel or stormwater
management system.
(9) Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away
from buildings, they shall be sodded, landscaped, or otherwise
protected as required and shall be of a slope, shape, and size
conforming to the requirements of the Township. Concentration of
surface water runoff shall be permitted only in swales,
watercourses, retention or detention basins, bioretention areas, or
other areas designed to meet the objectives of this chapter.
(10) Except for culverts required for roadway or driveway crossings of
surface waters, artificial swale discharge shall be set back at least
75 feet from a receiving waterway, and shall be diffused or spread
out to reduce and eliminate high-velocity discharges to the
impacted ground surface.
E. Bridge and culvert design. Any proposed bridge or culvert to convey
flow within a watercourse, channel, perennial stream, intermittent
stream, ephemeral stream or other surface water shall be designed in
accordance with the following principals:
(1) Culverts and bridges shall be designed with an open bottom to
maintain natural sediment transport and bed roughness, avoiding
acceleration of water velocity above the natural (preexisting)
condition. Rock (riprap) lining (native material if possible) shall be
installed within the culvert as needed to prevent erosion within the
structure. Approximate top of rock lining must be at the level of the
existing stream bottom so as to maintain unimpeded movement of
native animal species and a normal water depth of 12 inches unless
a greater depth is required by PADEP.
(2) Bottom of opening shall be designed to match the bankfull channel
condition in terms of width and depth. The cross-sectional area of
the bankfull channel (measured at a reference location upstream of
the structure) shall be matched with area in the crossing structure.
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:354
(3) Above the bankfull elevation, the width shall increase a minimum of
30% to disperse the energy of higher flow volumes and avoid
undermining of the supporting structure by secondary currents.
(4) The total cross-sectional area of the structure opening must be
equal to or greater than the flood-prone area (cross-sectional
stream area at a depth of twice the maximum bankfull depth,
measured at a reference location upstream of the structure). The
flood-prone area is approximately equal to the area flooded by a
fifty-year return period runoff event.
(5) All bridges, culverts, and drainage channels shall be designed to
convey a flow rate equal to a 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm as
defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, Technical Release No. 55. All bridges and culverts shall be
designed to convey the 100-year design storm without increasing
the extent and depth of the 100-year floodplain, upstream or
downstream of the structure.
F. Storm sewer design.
(1) Design flow rate. The storm sewer system shall be designed to
carry the 100-year frequency design storm peak flow rate. The
drainage area and runoff coefficient to each inlet shall be indicated
on the stormwater management plan. The 100-year flow rate shall
be determined by the Rational Method formula:
Q = CIA
Where:
Q = Peak runoff rate measured in cubic feet per second
(cfs)
C = Runoff coefficient - The coefficient of stormwater
runoff includes many variables, such as ground slope,
ground cover, shape of drainage area, etc.
I = Intensity - average rainfall intensity in inches per hour
for a time equal to the time of concentration
A = Area - drainage area in acres
Values for the rainfall intensity shall be based on NOAA Atlas 14,
Volume 2, Version 3.0, rain data found in Table A-3, Appendix A70
of this chapter.
(2) Consideration shall be given to future land use changes in the
drainage area in selecting the Rational ("C") coefficient. For
drainage areas containing several different types of ground cover, a
weighted value of "C" shall be used.
70.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:355
(3) In determining the peak flow rate to individual storm sewer inlets
(or other collection structures) the time of concentration method
(as referenced in § 198-18) shall be used for inlet drainage areas in
excess of one acre, unless otherwise approved by the Township. For
inlet drainage areas less than one acre, a five-minute time of
concentration shall be used unless otherwise approved by the
Township.
(4) In determining the required design flow rate through a storm
sewer piping system, if a five-minute time of concentration (storm
duration) results in a pipe size exceeding a thirty-inch diameter
pipe (or equivalent flow area of 4.9 square feet), the time of
concentration approach (as defined herein) shall be used in
determining storm duration.
(5) In determining the required design flow rate through a storm
sewer piping system, if a five-minute time of concentration results
in a pipe size exceeding 30 inches, within any run of pipe, the time
of concentration approach may be used for sizing of pipes from that
point on by adjusting the time of concentration.
(6) Overflow system. An overflow system shall be provided to carry all
bypass flow and/or flow in excess of storm sewer pipe and
collection inlet design capacity, to the detention basin (or other
approved collection or outlet point) when the capacity of the
system is exceeded. Stormwater runoff will not be permitted to
surcharge from storm sewer structures. [Refer to § 198-19C(19).]
(7) Except for drainage at roadway or driveway crossings of surface
waters, pipe discharge shall be set back at least 75 feet from a
receiving surface water, and the pipe discharge shall be diffused or
spread out to reduce and eliminate high-velocity discharges to the
impacted ground surface.
G. Grading and drainage.
(1) After completion of rough grading, a minimum of eight inches of
topsoil shall be returned to remaining disturbed areas prior to final
grading and seeding.
(2) Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from buildings
and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools. Minimum twopercent
slopes shall be maintained away from and around all
structures. Separation between the top of foundation wall (or slab)
and final grade shall comply with Middletown Township Building
Code requirements, but in no case shall it be less than nine inches
in the case of a foundation wall.
(3) Construction. The applicant shall construct and/or install such
drainage structures and/or pipe as are necessary to prevent
erosion damage and to satisfactorily disperse, infiltrate or carry off
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:356
such surface runoff to the nearest practical stormwater BMP, storm
drain or surface water.
(4) Excavation. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in
slope than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1 = 33%), except
under one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than 3:1 and a written
statement (certification) from a professional civil engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
experienced in erosion control, to this effect is submitted to the
Township Engineer for review. This statement shall indicate
the site has been inspected and that the deviation from the
slope specified herein will not result in injury to persons,
damage to property or erosion.
(b) A concrete, segmental block or stone masonry wall,
constructed in accordance with Township requirements, is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(5) Fill. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1 = 33%),
except under one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding, or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys, or buildings.
(b) A written statement from a professional civil engineer, licensed
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in
erosion control, certifying the site has been inspected and that
the proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
result in injury to persons, damage to property or erosion, is
submitted to and approved by the Township.
(c) A concrete, segmental block, or stone masonry wall,
constructed in accordance with Township requirements, is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(6) Slopes and fences. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a
minimum of five feet from property or right-of-way lines of streets
or alleys in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property. Where walls or slopes
(steeper than two horizontal to one vertical) are approved under
the criteria in this chapter, and are four feet or more in height, a
protective fence (conforming to Middletown Township standards
and specifications), no less than four feet in height, shall be
required at the top of the wall (or bank).
(7) Cleanup. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances
whatsoever during construction.
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:357
(8) Design of erosion and sedimentation control facilities (particularly
stormwater/sediment basins) shall incorporate best management
practices as defined herein.
(9) Cut and fill operations shall be kept to a minimum. Wherever
feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and
supplemented. Cut and fills shall not endanger or otherwise
adversely impact adjoining property.
(10)No grading equipment shall be permitted to be loaded and/or
unloaded on a public street, and no grading equipment shall be
permitted to travel on or across a public street, unless licensed for
operation on public thoroughfares.
(11) Grading equipment shall not be permitted to cross surface waters
of the commonwealth. Temporary crossing shall only be permitted
where application is made, and approval is received, from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (where
applicable), the Delaware County Conservation District, and
Middletown Township.
(12) Design of energy dissipation for high volume and/or high velocity
discharge from storm sewer pipes and channels shall be in
accordance with Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 14,
"Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipaters for Culverts and
Channels," as published by Department of Transportation, FHA,
when deemed necessary by the Township, and as approved by the
Delaware County Conservation District.
(13) To control the dissemination of mud and dirt on to public roads and
driveways, tire cleaning areas constructed of AASHTO No. 1 stone
(underlain by geotextile structural fabric), at least 50 feet in length
shall be installed at each point of access to the site (and individual
lots) upon construction of internal streets in a binder condition.
When deemed necessary by the Township or as otherwise required
by the Delaware County Conservation District, washing stations
shall also be set up at every construction entrance in order to wash
mud and dirt from exiting vehicles. Appropriate measures must be
taken to control runoff from such locations. The applicant shall be
responsible for the placement of appropriate signage (conforming
to PennDOT requirements) identifying construction entrances and
washing stations. Construction entrances shall be maintained by
the applicant during construction, as determined by the Township.
(14) In the event any mud and/or debris is transported from the site
onto a public roadway, the debris shall be removed immediately
upon each occurrence and the roadway swept and/or washed as
deemed necessary by the Township.
(15) Adequate provision shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavation and the sloping surfaces of
fills.
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:358
H. Stormwater detention/retention basins.
(1) If permanent ponds (retention basin) are proposed, the applicant
shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed to protect the
public's health and safety. Should any stormwater management
facility require a dam safety permit under the PADEP Chapter 105
regulations, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning
dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger than a
100-year event.
(2) During construction, duly authorized representatives of
Middletown Township may enter at any reasonable time upon any
property within the Township to investigate whether construction
activity is in compliance with this chapter.
(3) When basins are provided, they shall be designed to utilize the
natural contours of the land whenever possible. When such design
is not practical, the construction of the basin shall utilize slopes as
flat as possible to blend the structure into the terrain. To minimize
the visual impact of detention basins, they shall be designed to
avoid the need for safety fencing. To meet this requirement,
detention basins shall be designed as follows:
(a) Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 24 inches for a twoyear
or ten-year storm event.
(b) Maximum depth of detained runoff shall be 36 inches for a
100-year storm event.
(c) The basin inflow and outflow structures shall not be located
directly across from each other and shall not be in close
proximity to one another. A length-to-width ratio in all
detention/retention basins and other such storage facilities of
at least 2:1 shall be provided to maximize the flow path
between the inflow point and the outlet structure. The distance
between these two structures must be at least 50% of the
maximum length of the basin as measured at the top of berm
elevation. Alternatively, a means for extending the time of
surface flow from basin inflow point to basin outlet structure,
designed to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, may be
utilized.
(4) Except with the one-year design storm, basins shall be designed so
that they drain and return to normal dry-weather condition within
72 hours from the time at which peak water elevation occurs in the
facility for the 100-year rainfall event, unless the Township
determines that downstream conditions may warrant other design
criteria for stormwater release.
(5) Landscaping and planting in and around the perimeter of basins
shall be provided. Proposed planting shall also be in accordance
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:359
with the provisions of this chapter, the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,71 and as recommended by the Township.
When a detention basin is not designed as a stormwater
management constructed wetland, it shall be planted with low
maintenance, wet-tolerant meadow grass or similar satisfactory to
the Township.
(6) If a stormwater management basin will serve as a temporary
sediment control device, the temporary sediment control measures
shall be shown, including perforated riser pipes or standboxes,
filter berms, cleanout stakes and other measures as may be
required by Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Chapter 102 regulations. Plans for such facilities shall require
Delaware County Conservation District approval prior to
implementation. Sedimentation basins shall be constructed prior to
any other earthmoving activities within their tributary drainage
areas. A note identifying the above criteria shall be on all plan
sheets required to be recorded as well as the stormwater
management facilities operation and maintenance agreement.
(7) Stormwater management basins shall be constructed before the
creation of any new impervious surfaces on the site. As-built
drawings of the basins(s) shall be submitted to the Township for
review immediately upon completion of installation. The basin shall
not be considered functional until it is proven by the applicant that
the basin meets the volume requirements and the outflow
characteristics of the original design of the basin(s). A notation
identifying these requirements must be added to the appropriate
plan sheets including those to be recorded.
(8) Runoff shall not be directed to any infiltration structure until all
tributary drainage areas are permanently stabilized. Where a
surface detention basin is to be utilized for infiltration and
sediment control (during construction), the bottom of the sediment
basin/trap may be constructed no less than three feet above the
proposed permanent infiltration basin bottom elevation, and must
remain that way until the sediment basin/trap is converted to
permanent condition (upon permanent stabilization of all tributary
surface area discharging runoff to the basin) as approved by the
Township and Delaware County Conservation District. Also refer to
§ 198-19I for additional requirements related to dual use of surface
infiltration basins, erosion and sedimentation controls, and
sediment basin/traps.
(9) Except where otherwise identified herein, all detention or retention
basins shall have slopes of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1 =
25%) or flatter on the basin's outer berm and five horizontal to one
vertical or less on the basin's inner berm. The top or toe of any
slope shall be located a minimum of five feet from any property
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:360
line. The maximum difference between the top of berm elevation
and the invert elevation of the outlet structure shall be seven feet.
(10) All portions of a detention basin bottom shall have a minimum slope
of 2%. For portions of basin bottoms with grades less than 2%, the
applicant shall provide a landscape design which minimizes
maintenance provisions and encourages infiltration and absorption
of runoff. These requirements may be altered when approved by
the Township Engineer.
(11) Basin berm construction requirements.
(a) Site preparation. Areas under the embankment and any
structural works shall be cleared, grubbed, and the topsoil
stripped to remove the trees, vegetation, roots or other
objectionable material. In order to facilitate cleanout and
restoration, the pool area will be cleared of all brush and
excess trees except where designed to retain such existing
vegetation as stormwater BMPs.
(b) Cutoff trench. A cutoff trench will be excavated along the
center line dam on earth fill embankments. The minimum
depth shall be two feet. The cutoff trench shall extend up both
abutments to the riser crest elevation. The minimum bottom
width shall be eight feet but wide enough to permit operation
of compaction equipment. The side slopes shall be no steeper
than 1:1. Compaction requirements shall be the same as those
for the embankment. The trench shall be kept free from
standing water during the backfilling operations.
(c) Embankment.
[1] The fill material shall be taken from the selected borrow
areas. It shall be free of roots, wood vegetation, oversized
stones, rocks or other objectionable material. Areas on
which fill is to be placed shall be scarified prior to
placement of fill.
[2] The fill material should contain sufficient moisture so that
it can be formed by hand into a ball without crumbling. If
water can be squeezed out of the ball, it is too wet for
proper compaction.
[3] Fill material will be placed in six- to eight-inch layers and
shall be continuous over the entire length of the fill. Fill
material must be compacted to a minimum of 95% of
modified proctor density as established by ASTM D-1557.
Compaction testing by a qualified soils engineer, soil
scientist or geologist must be completed as directed by the
Township Engineer to verify adequate compaction has
been achieved. Compaction tests shall be run on the
leading and trailing edge of the berm along with the top of
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:361
the berm. Verification of required compaction shall be
submitted to the Township prior to utilization of any basin
for stormwater management or erosion control.
(12) Emergency overflow facilities/spillways shall be provided within
basins in order to convey basin inflow in excess of design flows, out
of the basin, or in the event the outlet structure becomes blocked
and is unable to convey flow. Emergency spillways discharging over
embankments shall be constructed of reinforced concrete
checkerblock (or other spillway lining approved by the Township
Engineer) to protect the berm against erosion. The checkerblock
shall be backfilled with topsoil and seeded. Checkerblock shall
extend to the toe of the embankment on the outside of the berm and
shall extend to an elevation of three feet below the spillway crest on
the inside of the berm. Vegetated spillways may be utilized for
spillways constructed entirely on undisturbed ground (i.e., not
discharging over fill material). A dense cover of vegetation shall be
rapidly established in such spillways by sodding or seeding with a
geotextile anchor. The vegetated spillway must be stabilized before
runoff is directed to the basin. The minimum capacity of all
emergency spillways shall be equivalent to the peak flow rate of the
100-year, post-development design storm (entering to the basin).
(13) In all cases, the discharge end of the basin shall be provided with a
properly designed outflow control structure (concrete headwall,
concrete box with orifice, concrete box with internal weir wall
(containing orifice) or other approved flow control structure),
culvert pipe, and concrete endwall. Perforated riser pipes alone,
without provision for permanent outflow control structure (as
stated above), and culvert pipe are not permitted for permanent
basins. In no case shall any orifice or opening on an outflow
contracture be less than three inches in diameter (or the equivalent
thereof) or less than three inches in height (for rectangular
openings), unless a smaller opening is required as part of an
NPDES Permit utilizing the "Managed Release Concept" for
infiltration-challenged sites. In such cases, openings on the outflow
control structure must be screened in a manner, approved by the
Township Engineer, that will minimize the possibility of clogging
and minimize required recurring maintenance to remove debris.
(14) The minimum top of basin berm width (at the design elevation)
shall be 10 feet.
(15) The minimum freeboard through the emergency spillway shall be
one foot. Freeboard is defined as the difference between the design
flow elevation through the spillway and the elevation of the top of
the settled basin berm.
(16) Antiseep collars shall be installed around the pipe barrel and shall
be centered within the normal saturation zone of the berm. The
antiseep collars and their connections to the pipe barrel shall be
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:362
watertight. The antiseep collars shall be cast-in-place in the field
and extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the
principal pipe barrel. Precast collars shall be permitted if approved
by the Township Engineer. A minimum of two collars shall be
installed on each basin outlet pipe. Collars shall have a minimum
thickness of 12 inches and may not be installed within two feet of
pipe joints.
(17) A perforated sediment control structure, sized in accordance with
Delaware County Conservation District requirements, shall be
provided at each basin outlet structure (if more than one is to be
utilized) for sediment control. Sediment control structures shall not
be removed until the entire area tributary to the basin has been
permanently stabilized and until approved by the Township and
Delaware County Conservation District.
(18) Stormwater management facility outlet piping shall be Class III
reinforced O-ring concrete pipe. All joints shall be mortared.
Crushed stone bedding/backfill shall not be utilized through basin
berms.
(19) The top of the basin outflow control structure box (emergency
overflow grate) shall be at least six inches lower than the elevation
of the earthen emergency spillway. Six inches, minimum, is also
required between the 100-year water surface elevation and the
emergency overflow grate on the basin outflow control structure.
All outflow control structures shall be constructed of noncorrosive
materials (such as concrete, stainless steel, galvanized steel,
aluminum, heavy-gage PVC, or other coated metals).
(20) Energy dissipating devices (rock lining/riprap, or other approved
materials) shall be provided at all basin outlets and shall be sized in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation Publication,
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual, latest
revision.
(21) Stone gabion baskets, concrete blocks, stone, boulders, or concrete
or segmental block walls shall not be permitted for use in
construction of detention/retention basins within the 100-year
water surface elevation (as measured through the earthen
emergency spillway) or within 20 feet of any embankment or cut
slope that is appurtenant to the construction and integrity of a
detention or retention facility. A minimum of 30 feet shall separate
the foundation wall (or slab) of any building or structure and a
detention/retention basin (berm/embankment).
(22) An access easement and stabilized drive to stormwater detention/
retention facilities shall be provided for maintenance and
operation. This access easement shall be cleared and, when
possible, be at least 20 feet in width. Multiple accesses shall be
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:363
encouraged for major facilities. The applicant shall provide access
easements and drives of interlocked, reinforced pervious paving
systems (backfilled with topsoil and seeded) or other similar paver
acceptable to the Township Engineer, over a six-inch bed of
compacted PennDOT Type 3A coarse aggregate (or approved
equivalent). Accessways to basins shall be a minimum of 10 feet
wide and be no steeper in slope than 10 feet horizontal to one
feet vertical (10:1). In addition, depressed curb and reinforced
concrete apron (six-inch minimum thickness) shall be provided
where the accessway enters a street/driveway and the stabilized
driveway shall extend from the bottom of the interior basin berm
embankment to the point of access to the basin from a public
right-of-way or paved area within an access or utility easement.
Access easement shall be owned and maintained by the same entity
responsible for the ownership and maintenance of the stormwater
management facilities (within) and shall establish rights for access
by Middletown Township, or its designee, for emergency inspection
and/or maintenance at any reasonable time.
(23) If the basin is not designed to meet the requirements of
§ 198-19H(3), a split rail fence must be provided as follows:
(a) A level area (two-percent slope), eight feet in width, shall be
provided on both the inside and outside of the fence along the
entire length of the fence for proper access by maintenance
equipment. The total width of this generally level area shall be
at least 16 feet.
(b) Each basin fence installation shall include two points of access
with 10 feet wide self-closing, self-latching gates to allow for
maintenance equipment/vehicle access.
(c) Fences shall be split rail consisting of locust posts (two- or
three-rail), four feet high, minimum, with assorted hardwood
rails (eight feet to 10 feet long), and epoxy-coated wire mesh
(black or green in color) installed six inches above finished
grade. The mesh shall be installed on the outside of the fence.
(d) Split rail fences shall also be required around any detention or
retention basin, where directed by Middletown Township.
(24) Landscaping.
(a) The perimeter berms and embankments of retention/detention
basins, including wet ponds, and artificial wetland stormwater
management BMPs shall be designed to create a natural
appearance and reduce future maintenance requirements.
Landscaping shall include a mixture of native tall grasses and
perennial plants, ground cover, shrubs, and trees to eliminate
the necessity of periodic mowing. All proposed vegetation shall
be native to the State of Pennsylvania (Refer to
http://www.docs.dcnr.pa.gov/cs/groups/public/documents/
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:364
document/dcnr_20029 752.pdf for a guide book titled
"Common Trees of Pennsylvania" for a native tree list.),
consistent with the Pennsylvania BMP Manual (December
2006, as amended), shall conform to the planting requirements
of this chapter and all other applicable Township Codes,
including Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
whichever is most stringent.
(b) Artificial wetland basins shall be designed pursuant to
requirements of the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual.
Plant material and arrangement shall be subject to approval of
the Township.
(c) The perimeter of the retention/detention basin shall be
landscaped with a mixture of deciduous trees, evergreens, and
shrubs arranged in an informal manner. Retention basin (wet
ponds) and artificial wetland basin landscaping shall be
designed to create a "natural" appearance.
[1] Minimum plant material shall include the following per
100 linear feet of basin perimeter measured at the
100-year water surface elevation:
[a] Three evergreen trees (minimum height: six feet).
[b] Two deciduous trees (minimum caliper: 2 1/2 inches).
[c] Five shrubs (minimum height: three feet).
[2] Deciduous trees shall not be planted on the top or sides of
basin berms created by filling and compaction of earth.
Vegetation shall be suitable for wet conditions when
planted on the bottom of the basin or on the inner
embankment of basins (where they will be subject to
periodic inundation). All required deciduous trees and
other vegetation shall be planted informally along the
perimeter of the basin to create the appearance of a
natural condition. Suitability of a particular basin design
or location to required landscape plantings (e.g., due to
restriction on planting on fill berms) shall not relieve the
applicant from the planting requirements. Basin
landscaping design is subject to approval by the Township.
(d) Evergreen trees and deciduous trees shall be offset a minimum
horizontal distance of 10 feet from all subsurface pipes and
utilities. This minimum horizontal offset distance shall be
specified on the plans.
(e) Trees and shrubs shall be located so that at maturity they do
not interfere with the function, maintenance and inspection of
basin structures, including any required perimeter fencing.
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:365
(25) Special requirements for stormwater detention/retention BMPs
within defined exceptional value and high-quality watersheds as
defined in Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, Title 25,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Rules and
Regulations:
(a) Temperature-sensitive BMPs and stormwater conveyance
systems are to be used and designed with storage pool areas
and supply outflow channels and shaded with trees. At a
minimum, the southern half of pond shorelines shall be planted
with shade or canopy trees within 10 feet of the pond
shoreline. In conjunction with this requirement, the maximum
slope allowed on the berm area to be planted is 10 to 1. This
will lessen the destabilization of berm soils due to root growth.
A long-term maintenance schedule and management plan for
the thermal control BMPs must be identified on the stormwater
management site plan and recorded at the Delaware County
Recorder of Deeds for all development sites.
(b) As an alternative to mitigating the temperature of stormwater
runoff as described in § 198-19H(25)(a), alternative
temperature-sensitive BMPs may be utilized, if approved by the
Township Engineer, upon the applicant demonstrating such
BMPs will effectively reduce the temperature of detained
runoff before it is released from the development site. Such
alternative BMPs may include but are not limited to facilities
that cool runoff through underground storage and filtration
and retention ponds/basins where outflow from the facility is
drawn from a depth of six feet (or greater) below the
permanent pool surface.
(26) The applicant shall provide written assurance, satisfactory to the
Township, that the retention/detention basin will be properly
maintained. Such assurances shall be in the form of a covenant that
will run with the land and shall provide Township maintenance at
the cost of the landowner in case of default, and further provide for
assessment of costs and penalties in case of default.
(27) As an alternate to the above subsection [§ 198-19H(26)], the
Township may, at their own option, assume responsibility of the
basin and may accept dedication of the basin by the applicant. If
the retention/detention basin is dedicated or offered to the
Township for long-term maintenance, the following regulations
shall apply:
(a) The basin and appurtenances shall be on a separate lot/parcel
conforming to Township Zoning requirements.72 The recording
plan of subdivision must identify the detention/retention basin
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning.
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:366
parcel/lot as "not a building lot, not approved for construction
of a dwelling."
(b) The entire ponded area for the 100-year storm event, outside
slope of the berm embankment and all area within 10 feet of
the top of berm (where the basin is cut into existing grade),
shall be entirely within the lot.
(c) The dedicated lot/parcel shall not be part of the open space
and/or recreation land/facilities requirements of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance73 and Zoning
Ordinance.74
(d) The applicant shall provide for the special financial burden the
Township would take on by accepting basin maintenance. To
help mitigate this future financial burden, the applicant shall
contribute to the Township a cash payment in an amount to be
calculated by the Township Engineer, which amount shall
include all estimated cost to inspect, maintain and repair the
facilities during a fifteen-year period.
I. All developments which create impervious surface shall provide
capacity for and treatment of the water quality volume and recharge
volume, unless exempt under § 198-5. In potential stormwater BMPs,
the order of preference is as follows: 1) infiltration BMPs; 2) flow
attenuation methods (e.g., vegetated open swales and natural
depressions); 3) artificial wetlands, bioretention structures, and wet
ponds; 4) minimum first flush detention or dual-purpose detention
(where appropriate). Infiltration BMPs shall be utilized unless the
applicant can demonstrate use of infiltration techniques is not feasible
due to site conditions based upon site-specific soil testing. Vegetated
swales, wetlands or artificial wetlands and bioretention structures shall
be utilized wherever possible if infiltration BMPs are deemed
unfeasible. BMP techniques can and should be used in conjunction with
each other (e.g., vegetated swales with infiltration or retention
facilities).
(1) Infiltration best management practices (BMPs). Infiltration BMPs
shall be designed in accordance with the design criteria and
specifications of the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual (2006)
and shall conform to the following minimum requirements:
(a) A soils evaluation and infiltration/permeability testing of the
project site shall be conducted in accordance with Appendix
B75 of this chapter.
(b) A minimum soil depth of 18 inches shall be provided between
the bottom of the infiltration BMPs and the top of bedrock or
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning.
75.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:367
seasonally high water table. The minimum required separation
between the infiltration surface and these limiting zones shall
be increased by the Township should project-specific
conditions exist (such as soil conditions, anticipated increased
contaminants or high infiltration rates) which dictate greater
prevention of groundwater contamination.
(c) Infiltration BMPs must have an infiltration rate sufficient to
accept the design stormwater load and dewater completely as
determined by field infiltrometer tests. The minimum fieldtested
infiltration rate permitted for construction of infiltration
BMPs shall be 0.2 inch/hour (in/hr). A safety factor of 50% shall
be applied to field-tested rates to determine the infiltration
rate that must be utilized for design of infiltration BMPs (e.g.,
for soil which measured 0.4 in/hr, the BMP design rate shall be
0.2 in/hr to insure effective infiltration after construction).
(d) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive rooftop runoff shall
include appropriate measures such as leaf traps and cleanouts
to prevent clogging by debris or sediment. Surface inflows
shall be designed to prevent direct discharge (of sediment) into
the infiltration system. Filter inlets/collection structures must
conform to Middletown Township standards and specifications.
Underground stormwater BMPs may not be utilized for erosion
and sedimentation control.
(e) Adequate storage shall be provided to accommodate the
volume of runoff calculated as the difference between the predevelopment
runoff volume and post-development runoff
volume based on the 100-year design storm.
(f) The facility shall be designed to control the post-development
peak rate of runoff to the pre-development peak rate of runoff
for all design storms identified in § 198-13 of this chapter.
(g) An overflow or spillway shall be provided that safely permits
the passing of runoff greater than that occurring during the
100-year design storm event.
(h) Underground infiltration basins and BMPs shall have positive
overflow controls to prevent storage within one foot of the
finished surface over the basin.
(i) When infiltration methods such as seepage pits, beds, or
trenches are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed
septic tanks, infiltration areas, and wells must be shown. A
separation distance of no less than 50 feet shall be provided
between any septic system and any facility used for
stormwater management and infiltration.
(j) A minimum of 30 feet of undisturbed soil shall separate the
foundation wall (or slab) of any building or structure and an
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:368
infiltration BMP (or underground basin). A minimum of 20
feet shall be provided between an underground basin and a
property line or right-of-way.
(k) All infiltration facilities shall be designed to completely
infiltrate runoff volume within two days (48 hours) from the
peak of the design storm.
(l) Special attention shall be paid to proper installation of
infiltration-oriented stormwater management systems during
the construction and to careful avoidance of soil compaction
during site development. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs
shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction during
the construction phase, so as to maintain their maximum
infiltration capacity. Refer to § 198-19H(8) of this chapter for
other requirements related to dual use of surface infiltration
basins, erosion control facilities and sediment basins/traps.
(m) The Township may require the installation of a mitigative layer
or an impermeable liner in an infiltration BMP and/or other
stormwater structure that impounds runoff, where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A detailed
hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the Township.
(n) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff
until the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration
BMP has achieved final stabilization.
(o) Infiltration BMPs shall be designed based on field-tested
infiltration rates at the level of the proposed infiltration
surface(s) and based on a safety factor of 50%.
(p) Under no circumstances shall excavation, loading or
construction equipment be permitted in the bottom of
proposed infiltration basins or within three feet of the
proposed infiltration zone of a surface or underground basin
(proposed elevation where infiltration is to occur). Excavation
to the infiltration zone must be conducted from the perimeter
of the basin (infiltration zone) to prevent compaction of the
infiltration zone. If approved by the Township Engineer, low
ground pressure excavators and/or timber matting may be
utilized to access and excavate/grade within three feet of the
infiltration zone. A notation summarizing this requirement
must be added to all stormwater management plans.
(q) All surface or underground infiltration basins (infiltration
zones) must be protected from compaction. Four-foot-high
construction fences (or other similar structure approved by the
Township Engineer) must be installed around the perimeter of
infiltration basins during construction to prevent
encroachment by construction equipment. A notation
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:369
summarizing this requirement must be added to all stormwater
management plans.
(r) All surface (at-grade) infiltration basins shall be constructed
with amended soil (sufficient for growth of permanent
vegetation), just above the infiltration zone, in lieu of topsoil
(stripped from the construction area). The location of this soil
must be shown on the stormwater management plan. The
permeability of the amended soil on the surface of the basin,
over the infiltration zone, may be no less than the infiltration
rate utilized to design the basin. A specification for the
amended soil, including minimum required permeability rate,
must be shown on stormwater management plans for surface
infiltration basins.
(2) Noninfiltration facilities used as best management practices
(BMPs). All facilities shall be designed in accordance to the design
criteria and specifications in the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP
Manual.
(3) Artificial wetlands, wet ponds, and bioretention structures.
(a) Wet pond BMPs shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Wet ponds shall be constructed on hydric or wet soils and/
or soils which have an infiltration rate of less than 0.2 inch/
hour.
[2] A minimum drainage area of five acres shall be directed to
the pond unless a source of recharge is utilized such as a
natural spring or well.
[3] The length of the pond between the inflow and outlet
points shall be maximized. In addition, an irregular
shoreline shall be provided. By maximizing the flow length
through the pond and providing an irregular shoreline, the
greatest water quality benefit will be achieved by
minimizing "short circuiting" of runoff flowing through the
pond.
[4] A shallow forebay shall be provided adjacent to all inflow
areas. The forebay shall be planted as a marsh with
emergent wetland vegetation. The forebay serves to
enhance sediment trapping and pollutant removal, as well
as concentrating accumulated sediment in an area where
it can be readily removed.
[5] All wet ponds shall be designed with public safety as a
primary concern. An aquatic safety bench shall be
provided around the perimeter of the permanent pool. The
depth of the bench shall be a maximum of 15 inches and a
minimum of 12 inches for a width of at least 10 feet. A 3:1
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:370
slope shall lead from the edge of the safety bench toward
the deep-water portion of the pond. At least 15 feet of 3:1
slope shall be provided from the edge of the safety bench.
Slopes in the remainder of the pond below the permanent
pool elevation shall be a maximum of 2:1.
[6] The perimeter slope above the permanent pool shall have a
maximum slope of 5:1.
[7] Wet ponds shall have a deep-water zone of at least six feet
to encourage gravity settling of suspended fines and
prevent stagnation and possible eutrophication.
[8] Wet ponds shall be capable of being substantially drained
by gravity flow. Wet ponds shall be equipped with a
manually operated drain that can be secured against
unauthorized operation.
[9] A planting plan shall be developed for the wet pond,
showing all proposed aquatic, emergent, and upland
plantings required pursuant to this chapter and the Zoning
and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances76
(where specifically identified).
[10]Wet ponds shall be designed to discourage use by Canada
geese. Techniques employed shall include the following:
[a] Elimination of straight shorelines, islands, and
peninsulas;
[b] Placement of walking paths (where applicable) along
the shoreline;
[c] Placement of grassed areas (i.e., playing fields) at
least 450 feet from the water surface;
[d] Vegetative barriers;
[e] Rock barriers;
[f] Installation of tall trees within 10 feet of the water
surface;
[g] Use of ground covers not palatable to Canada geese.
[h] Other techniques as approved by the Township
Engineer.
[11] A minimum of 30 feet shall separate the foundation wall
(or slab) of any building or structure and a wet pond
(berm/embankment).
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning, and Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:371
(b) Artificial wetland BMPs shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Artificial wetlands shall be constructed on hydric or wet
soils and/or soils which have an infiltration rate of less
than 0.2 inch/hour.
[2] Runoff entering artificial wetlands shall be filtered through
a sediment removal device before entering the wetland.
[3] A planting plan shall be developed for the artificial wetland
showing all proposed aquatic, emergent, and upland
plantings required pursuant to this chapter and the Zoning
and Subdivision and Land Development Ordinances
(where specifically identified).77 The planting plan shall be
developed to provide a diversity of species resulting in a
dense stand of wetland vegetation.
[4] At least 75% of the surface area of the wetland shall be
developed as a shallow water emergent wetland, with a
water depth of less than 12 inches. The remainder shall be
constructed as open water with depths between two feet
and four feet.
[5] A minimum of 30 feet shall separate the foundation wall
(or slab) of any building or structure and an artificial
wetland (berm/embankment).
(4) Minimum first flush detention/dual purpose BMPs.
(a) Minimum first flush detention/dual purpose detention basin
BMPs shall be designed to meet the following requirements:
[1] Post-development runoff from a "water quality storm" (a
one-year, twenty-four-hour event) shall be released over a
minimum period of 24 hours from the point of peak water
surface elevation of impounded water.
[2] Two stage basins shall be utilized where first flush
detention will be employed for water quality and
conventional detention used for peak rate control of
storms exceeding the one-year, twenty-four-hour event.
[3] Two stage basins shall be constructed so that the lower
part of the basin is graded to detain stormwater from the
"water quality storm," and the remainder of the basin
graded as a flat overbank area to provide storage only for
the larger, less frequent storm events. The overbank area
is encouraged to be developed as an active or passive
recreational area.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning, and Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-19
C:372
[4] The area inundated by the "water quality storm" is
encouraged to be maintained as a wetland environment,
which will increase the water quality benefits of the first
flush/dual purpose detention basin, and will prevent the
need for mowing of a frequently saturated area.
J. Removal of existing impervious surfaces. Existing impervious surface
areas to be removed and converted to vegetative cover (to reduce the
overall increase of impervious surface area within a development site
for the purposes of reducing the size/scope of required stormwater
BMPs) shall be accomplished in accordance with Middletown Township
standards and specifications or as recommended by a qualified
technical professional, whichever is more stringent. Refer to § 198-12I
and § 198-13J of this chapter for additional requirements related to this
activity.
K. General design requirements.
(1) Prior to finish grading of a development site and final overlay of
streets, roads, and driveways, temporary measures, acceptable to
the Township, shall be taken to ensure that all runoff intended to be
intercepted and collected by an inlet or other facility, will be
collected. The stormwater management plan shall include such
details, notes, or specification, including bituminous "eyebrows" at
inlets, diversion berms, etc.
(2) Water originating from other than natural sources, such as airconditioning
units, sump pumps, underdrain (except those beneath
public roads and rights-of-way), foundation drains or other dryweather
flow, wherever practical and possible, shall be connected
first to an infiltration BMP and if that is not possible, then to a
storm sewer, street drainage structure, or other approved
stormwater conveyance facility that is designed as part of a
stormwater management BMP.
(3) All stormwater runoff and floodplain calculations and stormwater
management facilities design shall be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
Township for approval in sections, a complete storm sewer design
for the proposed subdivision and land development shall be
submitted. The proposed design must include the entire tract and
not a portion.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
Township shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the occupancy or continuation of an adverse
hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed.
§ 198-19 CHARTER § 198-19
C:373
§ 198-20. Erosion and sedimentation control requirements.
L. All stormwater control facility designs shall conform to the applicable
standards and specifications of the following governmental and
institutional agencies:
(1) American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM).
(2) Asphalt Institute (AI).
(3) Delaware County Conservation District (DCCD).
(4) Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).
(5) National Crushed Stone Association (NCSA).
(6) National Sand and Gravel Association (NSGA).
(7) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP).
(8) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
(9) U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service, Pennsylvania (USDA, NRCS, PA).
A. Whenever vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such activity
must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part 1, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, and in
accordance with the Delaware County Conservation District and the
standards and specifications of the Township. Various BMPs and their
design standards are identified in the PADEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual (March 2012), as amended and
updated.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of a grading and excavating
(aka soil erosion and sedimentation control) plan and permit for
construction activities.
C. In addition, under 25 PA Code Chapter 92, a PADEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities of one or more acres.
D. Evidence of all necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office and/or Delaware
County Conservation District must be submitted to the Township.
E. A copy of the erosion and sedimentation control permit plan and any
other permit, as required by PADEP or Delaware County Conservation
District regulations, shall be available at the project site at all times.
§ 198-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-20
C:374
F. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity. Thirty-three-inch
super filter fabric fence (or other means of protection approved by
the Township Engineer) must be installed around proposed
infiltration areas to prevent encroachment and compaction by
construction equipment.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization. If necessary, thirty-three-inch super
filter fabric fence (or other approved protection mechanism) must
be installed in the vicinity of infiltration area to prevent
contamination by runoff containing suspended sediment.
G. Peak discharge rates from the site during land disturbance shall comply
with the appropriate sections in this chapter related to allowable postdevelopment
stormwater runoff rates, with the following additions:
(1) For purposes of calculating required detention storage during land
disturbance, peak discharges shall be calculated based upon the
runoff coefficients for bare soils during the period of maximum
anticipated disturbance from clearing and grading, in combination
with the entire quantity of proposed impervious surface
construction, within the entire limit of disturbance, indicated on
the development plan. Runoff controls shall ensure that the peak
rate of "during construction" runoff does not exceed predevelopment
runoff rates for the one-year frequency through
100-year frequency design storm events using the actual predevelopment
ground cover condition. Detention storage during the
period of land disturbance and prior to establishment of permanent
cover may require additional detention facilities on a temporary
basis (e.g., sediment basin, sediment trap). Such measures shall be
located so as to preserve the natural soil infiltration capacities of
the planned infiltration areas, particularly as required in this
chapter. Calculations based on the above parameters must be
submitted to verify compliance with this requirement.
(2) Wherever soils, topography, cut and fill or grading requirements, or
other conditions suggest substantial erosion potential during land
disturbance, the Township may require that the entire volume of all
storms up to a two-year storm from the disturbed areas be retained
on site and that special sediment trapping facilities (such as check
dams, etc.) be installed.
H. Areas of the site to remain undisturbed shall be protected from
encroachment by construction equipment/vehicles and activities that
§ 198-20 CHARTER § 198-20
C:375
may cause compaction of the ground, to maintain the existing
infiltration/permeability characteristics of the soil. Four-foot-high
orange safety fences (or other similar protection mechanism approved
by the Township Engineer) must be installed around the entire limit of
disturbance/clearing prior to commencement of earthmoving activities
and shall be maintained and left in place until completion of all
construction activity.
§ 198-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-20
C:376
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Plan and Approval Requirements
§ 198-21. General requirements.
A. For any of the development activities regulated by this chapter as
defined pursuant to § 198-4E, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building, zoning, or
certificate of occupancy (or the equivalent thereof), or the
commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until
the property owner, applicant or their authorized agent (as verified by
the Township) has obtained approval of a stormwater management plan
[stormwater management site plan (SMSP) or simplified stormwater
management site plan (SSMSP), as applicable] or approval of a
stormwater management exemption by the Township.
B. Recordation of a final approved subdivision and/or land development
plan at the Delaware County Recorder of Deeds shall constitute
approval of the stormwater management site plan (SMSP) required for
such regulated activities. For all recorded subdivisions and/or land
developments, no construction activity, tree/vegetation clearing, or
ground disturbance may commence until a grading and excavating
permit (aka soil erosion and sedimentation control permit) is approved
by Middletown Township pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 186
of the Township Code. The SMSP shall include all items identified
pursuant to § 198-22.
C. For all regulated development activities that do not qualify for
exemption from the provisions of this chapter (pursuant to § 198-5B and
C of this chapter), and that are not a subdivision or land development,
approval of a stormwater management site plan (SMSP) shall be
required. Approval of the SMSP shall be accomplished at time of
approval, by Middletown Township, of a grading and excavating permit
application, submitted by the applicant (or approved agent/designee of
the owner), pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 186 of the
Township Code (aka Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control). No
construction activity, tree/vegetation clearing, or ground disturbance
associated with such regulated activities may commence until a grading
and excavating permit application is approved by the Township and a
permit is issued to the applicant, by the Township Director of Planning
and Development. The SMSP shall include all items identified pursuant
to § 198-22.
D. A simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP) shall be
required in conjunction with a permit for regulated development
activities qualifying for exemption of the provisions of this chapter
pursuant to § 198-5C. Approval of the SSMSP shall be accomplished at
time of approval, by Middletown Township, of a grading and excavating
permit application, submitted by the applicant (or approved agent/
designee of the owner), pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 186 of
the Township Code (Grading and Excavating, aka Soil Erosion and
§ 198-21 CHARTER § 198-21
C:377
§ 198-22. Stormwater management site plan (SMSP) contents and
requirements.
For all regulated activities that are not exempt from provisions of this
chapter, a stormwater management site plan (SMSP) is required and shall
consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and plans as described in this
chapter. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sedimentation control plan by title and date. The cover sheet
of the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer
to the associated maps by title and date. All SMSP documents, reports
and calculations shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is
clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the stormwater
management site plan shall be disapproved and returned to the applicant.
A SMSP and related documentation/reports shall be prepared by qualified
professional(s), as applicable, including but not limited to professional land
surveyors or engineers licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The following items shall be included with submission of any stormwater
management site plan (SMSP) for approval by the Township (Refer to
§ 198-22J for additional SMSP requirements related to subdivision and/or
land development applications.):
Sedimentation Control). No construction activity, tree/vegetation
clearing, or ground disturbance associated with such regulated
activities may commence until a grading and excavating permit
application is approved by the Township and a permit is issued to the
applicant, by the Township Director of Planning and Development. The
SSMSP shall include all items identified pursuant to § 198-23.
E. The SMSP or SSMSP approved by the Township shall be available to
view on a development site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
F. Approval of a stormwater management plan is not required for
regulated activities exempt pursuant to § 198-5B of this chapter, but
approval of a stormwater management exemption must be issued by the
Township pursuant to § 198-5B and F prior to commencement of
construction activities, tree/vegetation clearing, or ground disturbance.
A. Three copies of the completed Township grading and excavating (aka
soil erosion and sedimentation control) permit application form. (Refer
to § 198-21B.)
B. Grading and excavating (aka soil erosion and sedimentation control)
permit application fee and escrow, as established by separate resolution
of The Township Council.
C. Feasibility analysis.
(1) A feasibility analysis that evaluates the potential application of
infiltration, flow attenuation, bioretention, wetland, or wet pond
§ 198-21 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-22
C:378
BMPs must be submitted with the stormwater management site
plans required in Article IV.
(2) The feasibility analysis must allow the Township to review the
general soil characteristics of a site and the proposed development
for that site and determine if infiltration BMPs or wet pond or
artificial wetland BMPs could have been more thoroughly pursued
for use by the applicant. The information required in the analysis
shall be detailed enough to determine the potential applicability of
these BMPs for a proposed development, but general enough not to
force an applicant into incurring excessive cost associated with
conducting laborious field and/or laboratory soil testing for a site
which ultimately may not be suitable for infiltration or wet pond or
artificial wetland BMP implementation. Applicants are expected to
use these BMPs wherever possible and are required to provide
adequate justification if these BMPs are not to be implemented.
Applicants for those sites that are determined to be generally
suitable from these analysis (taking into consideration the areal
extent of suitable soils necessary to accommodate an infiltration or
wet pond or wetland BMP for the type and size of development
proposed) are required to conduct the detailed soil testing and
other feasibility testing required in other sections of this chapter
which contain the description and additional design criteria of
these BMPs.
(3) This analysis shall provide:
(a) A general assessment of the anticipated additional runoff
based on the design storm and post-development condition and
utilizing the calculation procedures required in § 198-18;
(b) Indication of drainage areas on the development site resulting
in impervious, pervious, and rooftop runoff;
(c) Indication of type of land use (residential, nonresidential)
generating the impervious surface runoff;
(d) A delineation of soils on the site from the NRCS, soil survey
and on-site soil study. The soil study shall be conducted by a
soil scientist and shall include sufficient probes/deep holes to
evaluate application of BMPs;
(e) Indication of soils generally suitable for infiltration and/or wet
pond/artificial wetland BMPs;
(f) Calculated acreage of suitable soils for infiltration BMPs and
wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs and percentage of suitable
soils based on total site acreage;
(g) Calculated acreage of suitable soils for infiltration BMPs and
wet pond or artificial wetland BMPs made unavailable due to
proposed development layout and justification that alternative
§ 198-22 CHARTER § 198-22
C:379
development layout which would reduce impact on suitable soil
availability is unfeasible;
(h) An analysis of potential infiltration or wet pond or artificial
wetland BMPs which could be implemented to manage the
projected post-development runoff with consideration of
suitable soil availability runoff point of and type of land use
(items in Subsection C(3)(b) and (c) above) and the general
design standards and maintenance issues included in this
chapter, including an indication of how most post-development
runoff can be managed by these BMPs (e.g., the entire postdevelopment
runoff or partial amount of runoff expressed as a
percentage); and
(i) The rationale for the decision to not proceed with
implementation of infiltration BMPs or wet pond or artificial
wetland BMPs, such as excessive cost of implementation,
insufficient soil suitability, and development constraints.
D. A detailed geologic evaluation of the project site pursuant to § 198-15D
and Appendix B78 of this chapter shall be performed to determine the
suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a
qualified geologist and/or soil scientist, and shall address, at a
minimum, soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole
formation, and subgrade stability.
E. Whenever stormwater management facilities will be located in an area
underlain by limestone or in proximity to known sinkholes or other
karst features, a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be
conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The
design of all stormwater BMPs over karst/limestone formations or in
proximity to known sinkholes shall include measures to prevent
groundwater contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation.
Installation of an impermeable liner shall be required in stormwater
management BMPs to be constructed over or in close proximity (less
than 150 feet) to limestone, other known sinkholes, or karst features.
The following note shall be attached to all stormwater management site
plans and signed and sealed by the applicant's professional engineer:
"I, ______________, certify that the proposed stormwater management
facilities (circle one) are/are not in close proximity to known sinkholes,
karst features, underlain by limestone or in proximity to geology
associated with the formation of voids and sinkholes."
F. General.
(1) General description of project.
78.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-22
C:380
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
G. Three copies of the stormwater management site plan for the parcel
shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets and
shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording
at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County. All existing
surface features required to be depicted on the plan must be obtained
from a field survey of the development site prepared by a qualified
professional licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The plan
must include the date of survey and the professional seal of the
individual(s) responsible for completing the survey and identification of
existing features. The contents of the plan shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities, or
other identifiable landmarks. Property boundaries of the
development site must be shown based on a field survey prepared
by a professional land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The plan must show property corners located and
include the date of survey and the professional seal of the land
surveyor responsible for completing the boundary survey. The
zoning district in which the property is located shall be shown
including bulk zoning data (required, existing and proposed).
(2) Watershed(s) within which the project is located (e.g., Chester
Creek, Ridley Creek, etc.).
(3) Existing contours at intervals no greater than two feet.
(4) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, surface waters, watercourses or
other bodies of water within the project area and all drainage
channels leading to or from such surface waters.
(5) Other physical features, including riparian corridors, floodplains,
sinkholes, streams, existing surface waters, wetlands, areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the
upstream area draining through the site.
(6) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines located on the site and/or within 50 feet of property
lines with minimum setback distances for all existing and proposed
water supply wells and on-lot sewage disposal systems.
(7) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries. This overlay shall
include a table on the map showing the recharge capabilities of
each soil represented on site in inches per hour and describe their
recharge or infiltration capabilities.
§ 198-22 CHARTER § 198-22
C:381
(8) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including a tabulation of impervious surface area which identifies
the type of surface and the quantity of existing impervious surface
area, existing impervious surface area to be removed and proposed
impervious surface area.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings. Where
pervious pavement is proposed for parking lots, recreational
facilities, nondedicated streets, or other areas, detailed pervious
pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan. All
pervious pavement areas of a development site must be
permanently posted with legible signs summarizing the
maintenance requirements of pervious paving as well as other
restrictions on use/maintenance of such areas (i.e., activities that
would adversely impact the ability of the surface to absorb water).
(10) Required and proposed structure setbacks to property boundaries
shall be shown.
(11) Final proposed contours at intervals no greater than two feet.
(12) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(13) The date of submission.
(14) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet. For tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale may be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(15) Location map identifying the site relative to streets and other
parcels in the vicinity of the site and depicting zoning district
boundaries.
(16) A North arrow.
(17) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(18) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(19) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project, or that may
impact the development proposal.
(20) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(21) All existing and proposed stormwater management facility and/or
drainage easements described by metes and bounds, including the
purpose and ownership and maintenance provisions for each
easement.
§ 198-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-22
C:382
(22) A twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way or paved driveway within an existing or
proposed easement that accesses a public right-of-way.
(23) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(24) A certification on the plan, signed by the landowner,
acknowledging the stormwater management system to be a
permanent fixture that may not be altered or removed without
written approval of a revised plan by the Township, which shall be
recorded with the record plan and which shall be applicable to all
future owners of the property.
(25) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities and
an erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(26) Riparian corridor area and floodplain shall be shown on the plan.
(27) Steep and very steep slopes, as defined by Middletown Township
Code Chapter 275, shall be shown on the plan.
(28) The following signature block for the design engineer:
"(Design engineer), on this date (date of signature), has reviewed
and hereby certifies that the stormwater management site plan
meets all design standards and criteria of the Middletown
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance, Township Code
Chapter 198."
(29) Design professional signature.
(a) The following signature block for the certified design
professional:
"(Design professional), on this date (date of signature), has
reviewed the project site, parcel(s) and surrounding areas
and hereby certifies that there are no wetlands, waters of
the United States, regulated surface waters or areas subject
to inundation by the 100-year frequency rainfall event, as
defined by this chapter 198 and other applicable Township
codes, within the parcel(s) being developed or within the
minimum required setbacks from such features if such
features are outside of the parcel(s) boundary."
(b) Alternatively, if any of these features do exist on the
development parcel(s) or in proximity to the parcel(s), the plan
shall show such features and must include a signed and dated
statement from a qualified professional indicating date of
§ 198-22 CHARTER § 198-22
C:383
identification of such features and certifying location and
extent of features identified on the plan.
(30) The stormwater management site plan shall include an operation
and maintenance plan for all existing and proposed stormwater
management/BMP facilities, addressing long-term ownership and
maintenance responsibilities for such facilities, including schedule
for operation and maintenance activities.
H. Required supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Three copies of stormwater runoff computations as specified in
this chapter, signed and sealed by a qualified technical
professional.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(2) An erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by PADEP and/or
Delaware County Conservation District.
(3) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on limestone, karst
geology or sinkholes as specified in this chapter.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volume, peak flow, and
discharge duration) on adjacent properties and on any existing
Township stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
(5) Highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District Office when
utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed.
(6) An operations and maintenance (O&M) plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater facilities, as well as schedules and
costs for O&M activities. The plan shall address long-term
ownership and responsibilities for O&M. Operation and
maintenance agreements for privately owned stormwater
management facilities/BMPs must be executed by the applicant/
owner pursuant to § 198-40 of this chapter.
I. Stormwater management BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
§ 198-22 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-22
C:384
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds,
or trenches are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed
septic tanks and seepage areas and wells must be shown. A
minimum separation distance of no less than 50 feet shall be
provided between any septic system and any facility used for
stormwater management. An analysis shall be submitted to verify
that stormwater infiltration shall not affect groundwater elevations
of the septic drain field site if this distance is approved by the
Township to be less than 50 feet. In no case shall this distance be
less than 20 feet.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown. If multiple
facilities are proposed in conjunction with each other, such as
infiltration best management practices with vegetation-based
management practices, a summary narrative shall be included
describing any sequence and how the facilities are meant to
function with each other to manage stormwater runoff.
(4) All stormwater management/BMP facility easements required by
this chapter must be shown on the stormwater management site
plan, including the bearing and distance of each segment of the
easement(s) boundary.
J. Additional requirements related to subdivisions and/or land
development applications.
(1) A grading and excavating (aka soil erosion and sedimentation
control) permit application form is not required at the time of
submission of the subdivision and land development application.
(Refer to Township Code, Chapter 210 for submission documents/
requirements for subdivisions and/or land developments.) A
grading and excavating permit application (and form) is required
upon approval and recordation of the subdivision and/or land
development plan, prior to commencement of construction activity,
tree/vegetation clearing, or ground disturbance, and shall be
submitted as described in § 198-22.
(2) A fee for review of an SMSP, separate from that required in
conjunction with a subdivision and/or land development
application, is not required until time of submission of the grading
and excavating permit application identified in § 198-22J(1). A
separate escrow is not required as long as the escrow posted with
the Township, in conjunction with the subdivision and/or land
development application, remains in good standing and in an
amount exceeding the minimum required by the Township.
(3) The SMSP and stormwater management calculations (report) shall
be included with the subdivision and/or land development plan and
application and shall include the same number of copies required
with the subdivision/land development application.
§ 198-22 CHARTER § 198-23
C:385
§ 198-23. Simplified stormwater management approach and
simplified stormwater management site plan (SSMSP) contents and
requirements.
For all regulated activities that qualify for the simplified stormwater
management approach (i.e., exempt from certain provisions of this chapter
pursuant to § 198-5C), a simplified stormwater management site plan
(SSMSP) is required for approval by the Township. SSMSPs and related
documentation shall be prepared by qualified professional(s) as applicable,
including but not limited to professional land surveyors or engineers
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The following items shall
be included with submission of any simplified stormwater management site
plan (SSMSP) for approval by the Township:
A. Three copies of the completed Township grading and excavating permit
application pursuant to Township Code, Chapter 186, Grading and
Excavating (aka Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control).
B. Grading and excavating (aka soil erosion and sedimentation control)
permit application fee and escrow, as established by separate resolution
of The Township Council.
C. Three copies of the simplified stormwater management site plan for the
parcel containing, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Property boundaries (within 100 feet of the proposed
improvements and/or limit of ground disturbance) and area of the
parcel, based on deed information. Property boundaries shall be
shown based on a field survey prepared by a professional land
surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Plan must
show property corners located and include date of survey and
professional seal of land surveyor responsible for completing the
boundary survey.
(2) Location map identifying the site relative to streets and other
parcels in the vicinity of the site and depicting zoning district
boundaries.
(3) North arrow.
(4) Within 100 feet of the proposed improvements and/or limit of
ground disturbance: location of significant natural and existing
man-made features, including but not limited to wetlands,
watercourses, surface waters, riparian corridors, woodlands, steep
slopes, very steep slopes, structures, parking areas, driveways,
utilities, floodplains, flood hazard boundaries, sinkholes, limestone/
karst features, wells, and on-lot septic systems within 100 feet of
proposed impervious surface areas and/or limit of proposed ground
disturbance, regardless of the location of the property boundary.
The plan must include the date of survey and the professional seal
of the individual responsible for completing the survey.
§ 198-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-23
C:386
(5) Location and dimensions of existing and proposed impervious
surface and other improvements, with setbacks drawn to relate the
location of same to property lines, streets, and existing features.
Impervious surface area tabulation must be provided identifying
existing area of impervious surface, existing impervious surface
area to be removed, and proposed impervious surface area. The
plan must clearly delineate the areas of existing impervious
surfaces that are to be removed. The tabulation must include all
existing and proposed impervious surface on the entire parcel. If
required by the Zoning Officer to verify compliance with the
maximum permitted impervious surface area cover percentage on
the parcel, all existing impervious surface areas must be shown on
the plan, regardless of whether they are within 100 feet of the
proposed improvements and/or limit of disturbance.
(6) Zoning district in which the property is located, including bulk
zoning data (required, existing and proposed).
(7) Plan scale, as applicable.
(8) Existing contours at intervals no greater than two feet.
(9) Final proposed contours at intervals no greater than two feet.
(10) Location and dimensions of proposed infiltration BMP(s), including
design calculation and BMP construction details. Projects meeting
the exemption criteria established by Tables 198-5.1 and 198-5.2
shall construct a stormwater management infiltration facility
(BMP) capable of capturing, storing and infiltrating the first two
inches of rainfall generated by the net increase in impervious
surface area (or the equivalent thereof). The physical surface area
of infiltration BMPs (the surface on which water is infiltrated) shall
be no less than 20% of the net increase of impervious surface area.
Infiltration BMPs must be constructed in accordance with
Middletown Township standards and specifications and provisions
of § 198-19 of this chapter, unless an alternative construction
specification is approved by the Township Engineer.
(11) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries. This overlay shall
include a table on the map showing the recharge capabilities of
each soil represented on site in inches per hour and describe their
recharge or infiltration capabilities.
(12)Watershed(s) within which the project is located (e.g., Chester
Creek, Ridley Creek, etc.).
(13) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet. For tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale may be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
§ 198-23 CHARTER § 198-23
C:387
(14) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(15) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover.
Proposed structures, driveways, parking areas, paved areas,
concrete surfaces, pavers, structures and buildings. Required and
proposed structure setbacks from the property boundaries shall be
shown.
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project or that may
impact the development proposal.
(17) An operation and maintenance plan for all existing and proposed
stormwater management/BMP facilities, addressing long-term
ownership and maintenance responsibilities for such facilities,
including schedule for operation and maintenance activities.
(18) An erosion and sedimentation control plan pursuant to Chapter 186
of the Middletown Township Code (Grading and Excavating, aka
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control), including all reviews and
approvals, as required by PADEP and/or Delaware County
Conservation District.
(19) Riparian corridor area and floodplain shall be shown on the plan.
(20) A certification on the plan, signed by the landowner,
acknowledging the stormwater management system to be a
permanent fixture that may not be altered or removed without
written approval of a revised plan by the Township, which shall be
recorded with the stormwater operation and maintenance
agreement, and which shall be applicable to all future owners of
the property.
(21) The following signature block for the certified design engineer:
"(Design engineer), on this date (date of signature), has reviewed
and hereby certifies that the simplified stormwater management
site plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Middletown
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance, Township Code
Chapter 198."
(22) Design professional signature.
(a) The following signature block for the certified design
professional:
§ 198-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-23
C:388
"(Design professional), on this date (date of signature), has
reviewed the project site, parcel(s) and surrounding areas
and hereby certify that there are no wetlands, waters of the
United States, regulated surface waters or areas subject to
inundation by the 100-year frequency rainfall event, as
defined by this chapter 198 and other applicable Township
codes, within the parcel(s) being developed or within the
minimum required setbacks from such features if such
features are outside of the parcel(s) boundary."
(b) Alternatively, if any of these features do exist on the property
or in proximity to the development site, the plan shall show
such features and must include a signed and dated statement
from a qualified professional indicating date of identification of
such features and certifying location and extent of features
identified on the plan.
(23) Locations of existing and proposed septic tanks and seepage areas
and wells must be shown. A minimum separation distance of no less
than 50 feet shall be provided between any septic system and any
facility used for stormwater management. An analysis shall be
required to verify that stormwater infiltration shall not affect
groundwater elevations of the septic drain field site, if this distance
is approved by the Township to be less than 50 feet. In no case shall
this distance be less than 20 feet.
(24) Steep and very steep slopes, as defined by Middletown Township
Code Chapter 275, shall be shown on the plan.
(25) Whenever stormwater management facilities will be located in an
area underlain by limestone or in proximity to known sinkholes or
other karst features, a geological evaluation of the proposed
location shall be conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole
formations. The design of all stormwater BMPs over karst/
limestone formations or in proximity to known sinkholes shall
include measures to prevent groundwater contamination and,
where necessary, sinkhole formation. Installation of an
impermeable liner shall be required in stormwater management
BMPs to be constructed over or in close proximity (less than 150
feet) to limestone other known sinkholes, or karst features. The
following note shall be attached to all simplified stormwater
management site plans and signed and sealed by the applicant's
professional engineer:
"I,____________, certify that the proposed stormwater management
facilities (circle one) are/are not in close proximity to known
sinkholes, karst features, underlain by limestone or in proximity to
geology associated with the formation of voids and sinkholes."
D. Required supplemental information.
§ 198-23 CHARTER § 198-23
C:389
§ 198-24. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission of a stormwater management plan (SMSP or SSMSP). For
any activities that require a PADEP permit regulated under Chapter 102
(Erosion and Sediment Control), Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PADEP's Rules
and Regulations, a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or any other
permit under applicable local, state, or federal regulations, those permit(s)
shall be part of the stormwater management plan.
(1) Operation and maintenance agreement for privately owned
stormwater management facilities/BMPs must be executed by the
applicant/owner and recorded at the Delaware County Recorder of
Deeds, pursuant to § 198-40 of this chapter, upon approval of the
SSMSP, but prior to issuance of grading and excavating permit by
the Township.
(2) Highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District Office when
utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed.
(3) Other information deemed necessary by the Township Engineer to
determine compliance and eligibility of the exemption criteria
contained in § 198-5B of this chapter.
E. The following requirements of this chapter are not applicable to
regulated activities eligible for the simplified stormwater management
approach:
(1) § 198-13, Stormwater management performance standards and
peak rate control.
(2) § 198-15, Volume control and infiltration BMPs.
(3) § 198-16A through C, Water quality requirements.
(4) § 198-17, Stream bank erosion requirements.
(5) § 198-18, Calculation methodology.
(6) § 198-20G, peak discharge rates during land disturbance.
(7) § 198-42, Stormwater maintenance fund.
A. For subdivision and/or land development applications, the SMSP shall
be submitted to the Township as part of any preliminary application (or
final, if preliminary is not required). The number of copies of the SMSP
and application fees and escrows shall be as stipulated by the
Township's subdivision and land development application
requirements. The SMSP will then be distributed by the Township for
review by their staff and/or consultants as part of the subdivision/land
development application.
§ 198-23 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-24
C:390
§ 198-25. Review of stormwater management site plan and
simplified stormwater management site plan.
B. For all regulated activities that are not a subdivision and/or land
development, a minimum of three copies of the plan [and required
grading and excavating (aka soil erosion and sedimentation control)
permit application form, fees and escrow] shall be submitted directly to
the Township. The Township shall then distribute the stormwater
management plan to its staff and/or consultants for review. Two copies
of the stormwater management plan (and related plan/submission
documentation) will be forwarded to the Township Engineer for review.
A. The Township Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for consistency with the requirements of this chapter, adopted
Watershed Act 167 stormwater management plans and other applicable
Township Code requirements. As a prerequisite to review of the plan by
the Township, a complete plan, required submission documentation/
reports/calculations, and applicable forms, fee and escrow, as specified
in this chapter, shall be required. Any stormwater management plan
submission determined to be incomplete by the Township shall not be
reviewed and will be returned to the applicant (except for those
submitted with subdivisions or land development applications; in such
cases, the Township Engineer will notify the applicant of deficiencies as
part of the subdivision and/or land development review).
B. For an SMSP submitted with a subdivision and/or land development,
the Township Engineer shall review the plan for compliance with
provisions of Township Code, Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development, where not superseded by this chapter.
C. For all activities regulated by this chapter, the Township Engineer shall
notify the Middletown Township Director of Planning and Development,
in writing, whether the stormwater management plan is consistent with
Township Code requirements and other relevant regulations, including
the requirements of this chapter. Should the stormwater management
plan submitted by the applicant be determined to be consistent with the
Township Code and other relevant regulations, the Township Engineer
will forward a review letter recommending approval of the plan (with
conditions, as applicable) to the Township and a copy of this
recommendation will also be forwarded to the applicant.
Recommendation of approval of a stormwater management plan by the
Township Engineer is not approval to commence construction. Refer to
§ 198-21 of this chapter for requirements that must be satisfied prior to
commencement of construction. Any disapproved stormwater
management plan may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted
consistent with this chapter.
D. The Township shall not approve any subdivision and/or land
development or regulated activities specified in § 198-4E(1) and (2) of
this chapter if the stormwater management plan has been found to be
inconsistent with adopted Watershed Act 167 stormwater management
§ 198-24 CHARTER § 198-25
C:391
§ 198-26. Modification of plans.
plan(s) and the requirements of this chapter. All required permits or
approvals from PADEP and/or PennDOT must be obtained prior to, or as
a condition of, final approval of a subdivision or land development.
E. For all regulated activities that are not a subdivision or land
development, all required permits and approvals from PADEP, PennDOT
or other regulatory agencies must be obtained prior to approval of the
stormwater management plan and issuance of a permit by the Township
to commence construction.
F. The Middletown Township Building Code Official shall not issue a
building permit for any regulated activity specified in § 198-4 of this
chapter if the stormwater management plan has been found to be
inconsistent with adopted Watershed Act 167 stormwater management
plan(s) and the requirements of this chapter, as determined by the
Township Engineer, or without considering the comments of the
Township Engineer. All required permits and approvals from PADEP,
PennDOT or other regulatory agencies must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
G. For regulated activities that are not a subdivision or land development,
the Township's approval of a stormwater management site plan or
simplified stormwater management site plan, submitted in conjunction
with a grading and excavating (aka soil erosion and sedimentation
control) permit application, shall be valid for the same time period as
the grading and excavating (aka soil erosion and sedimentation control)
permit issued in conjunction with the stormwater management plan.
Expiration and extension of a grading and excavating permit shall be in
accordance with Township Code, Chapter 186. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved plan have not been
constructed, or if an as-built survey plan of these facilities (pursuant to
§ 198-28 of this chapter) has not been approved prior to expiration of
the grading and excavating permit, the Township may consider the
stormwater management plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
related permits. Plans that are considered disapproved by the Township
shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 198-27 of this chapter.
H. The Township's approval of a stormwater management site plan
submitted in conjunction with an approved subdivision and/or land
development shall remain valid and protected from any change in
Township Codes and Ordinances for a period of time consistent with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A. A modification to a submitted stormwater management site plan or
simplified stormwater management site plan for a development site
that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other
conditions are not as stated on the plan as determined by the Township
§ 198-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-26
C:392
§ 198-27. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater management
site plans and simplified stormwater management site plans.
A disapproved stormwater management site plan or simplified stormwater
management site plan may be resubmitted, with revisions addressing the
Township Engineer's concerns, documented in writing, to the Township
Director of Planning and Development in accordance with § 198-24 of this
chapter and be subject to review as specified in § 198-25 of this chapter.
The applicable Township fees and escrow must accompany resubmission of
a disapproved Plan.
§ 198-28. As-built plans.
Engineer, shall require a resubmission of a modified stormwater
management plan consistent with § 198-27 of this chapter and be
subject to review as specified in § 198-25 of this chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved plan shall be
submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable Township
fees and escrow. A modification to a plan for which a formal action, in
writing, has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the
Township, accompanied by the applicable Township fees and escrow.
A. The applicant for any regulated activity requiring a stormwater
management plan shall be responsible for completing an as-built
survey, prepared and certified by a professional engineer or
professional land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, of all stormwater management facilities/improvements
included on the approved plan. The as-built survey and an explanation
of any discrepancies between constructed improvements and the
approved design plan shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
approval. In no case shall the Township approve the as-built survey until
the Township receives a copy of an approved NPDES permit notice of
termination (if applicable) from PADEP or the Delaware County
Conservation District.
B. Completed stormwater management facilities and BMPs, including but
not limited to storm sewer, drainage pipe, collection and junction
structures, detention/retention basins, underground basins, infiltration
facilities and surface conveyance facilities (e.g., swales, berms,
diversions, etc.) shall be surveyed by a professional land surveyor or
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to verify
compliance with the character of stormwater management facilities
and proposed post-construction drainage areas (tributary to
stormwater management BMPs) as depicted on the approved
stormwater management plan. As-constructed plans shall be submitted
to Middletown Township for review and approval, upon completion of
construction of all facilities and prior to dedication of any public
facilities and/or approval of certificate of total completion (and release
of financial security).
§ 198-26 CHARTER § 198-28
C:393
§ 198-29. Retention of plans at project site.
A copy of the stormwater management plan approved by the Township shall
be on file at the development site throughout the duration of the regulated
development activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the Township or
designee during development activities.
§ 198-30. Adherence to approved plan.
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any regulated activity
on any property, except as provided for in the approved stormwater
management plan and, if applicable, the grading and excavating (aka soil
erosion and sedimentation control) permit plan, and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
stormwater management facility or BMP required by the stormwater
management plan pursuant to this chapter or to allow the property to
remain in a condition which does not conform to the approved stormwater
management plan.
§ 198-31. Certification of completion.
At the completion of construction activity, and as a prerequisite for the
release of the performance guarantee required pursuant to § 198-37, the
applicant or their representatives shall:
C. Financial security required by the Township as part of a subdivision or
land development, or security required pursuant to § 198-37 of this
chapter, shall not be approved for release by the Township until the asbuilt
survey plan of all completed stormwater management BMPs, as
required by this chapter s been approved by the Township Engineer.
D. As-built survey plans of all stormwater management detention/
retention basins and/or underground basins must be submitted to the
Township for review immediately upon completion of construction, and
prior to collection and conveyance of stormwater runoff from
impervious surfaces, to those facilities. For subdivisions and/or land
developments, certificates of occupancy for any structure shall not be
approved by the Township until stormwater management facilities that
receive runoff from such structures are constructed and the as-built
survey (of those facilities) is reviewed and approved by the Township
Engineer.
A. Provide a set of survey as-built drawings pursuant to § 198-28 of this
chapter and/or, if applicable, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance79 requirements. The as-built submission shall include a
certification statement (certification of completion) signed by a
licensed, qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater
management/BMP facilities have been constructed in accordance with
the approved stormwater management plan and specifications. If
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 198-28 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-31
C:394
§ 198-32. Certificate of occupancy approval for structures.
A certificate of occupancy (CO) approval for any improvements constructed
in conjunction with a subdivision and/or land development or other
Township permit (requiring issuance of a CO) shall not be granted unless
the certification of completion, pursuant to § 198-31 of this chapter, has
been approved by the Township (in conjunction with regulated development
activities requiring a stormwater management plan and stormwater
improvements/BMPs).
stormwater management facilities/BMPs have been installed absent
required inspection by the Township Engineer pursuant to § 198-33 of
this chapter, the certification of completion shall also include material
data sheets, proof of purchase of required materials and photo
documentation verifying proper installation of all required facilities.
The Township shall not be obligated to approve any certification of
completion submitted for stormwater management facilities/BMPs that
have been constructed without reasonable and required notice to the
Township Engineer to schedule inspections.
B. Contact the Township Engineer to request inspection of the site for
completion of stormwater management facilities and compliance with
the approved stormwater management plan and provisions of this
chapter. This final inspection shall be conducted by the Township
Engineer after receipt of the certification of completion.
C. Certification of completion shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Engineer.
§ 198-31 CHARTER § 198-32
C:395

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 198-33. Schedule of inspections.
§ 198-34. Right-of-entry during construction.
A. The Township Engineer shall inspect all phases of the installation of the
permanent stormwater management facilities/BMPs required pursuant
to a stormwater management site plan and simplified stormwater
management site plan. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
notify the Township Engineer in advance of construction of stormwater
management facilities/BMPs so that required inspections can be
scheduled.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer determines that
proposed improvements, temporary or permanent erosion and
sedimentation control or stormwater management facilities are not
being installed in accordance with the approved plan, the Township
may revoke any existing permits until a revised plan is submitted and
approved, as specified in this chapter.
A. During construction, duly authorized representatives of the Township
may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Township
to inspect the implementation, condition, or operation and maintenance
of the stormwater management facilities/BMPs to investigate whether
construction activity is in compliance with this chapter.
B. Stormwater management facility/BMP owners and operators shall allow
persons working on behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this
chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the direct access to stormwater
management facilities/BMPs is a violation of this chapter.
§ 198-33 CHARTER § 198-34
C:397

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 198-35. Stormwater management plan fees and escrow.
The Township shall establish a fee schedule by resolution of the governing
body to defray plan review, construction, inspection and administrative
costs incurred by the Township from any outside agencies or entities
(required to review the stormwater management plan) and the Township
Engineer. The Township shall periodically update the fee schedule to ensure
that incurred costs are adequately reimbursed. The applicant shall pay all
such fees and escrows.
§ 198-36. Expenses covered by fees and escrow.
The fees established by resolution of Township Council for review and
administration of stormwater management plans and construction of
facilities/BMPs required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover the
following:
A. Administrative costs.
B. Review of the plan by the Township and the Township Engineer.
C. Site inspections by the Township staff, consultants and/or Township
Engineer.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities BMPs and stormwater
management improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and stormwater management improvements shown on the
stormwater management plan.
F. Review of as-built survey plan of completed stormwater management
facilities and BMPs.
G. Any additional work required to enforce any provisions regulated by
this chapter, correct violations, and ensure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 198-35 CHARTER § 198-36
C:399

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibility
§ 198-37. Performance guarantee.
§ 198-38. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. For all subdivision and land developments, the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the Township for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management facilities and BMPs
as required by the approved stormwater management plan and this
chapter equal to the full construction cost of the required controls plus
construction contingency and construction administration/inspection
costs, which amount shall be calculated by the Township Engineer.
B. For all regulated activities which are not a subdivision or land
development and for which the Township has approved a stormwater
management site plan or simplified stormwater management site plan
and issued a grading and excavating (aka soil erosion and
sedimentation control) permit and/or other building permit in
connection therewith, the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee
representing the Township's projected administration/inspections costs
related to such regulated activities in accordance with the Township's
fee schedule. (See § 198-35 of this chapter.) In the event that the
regulated activities and related stormwater management
improvements are not completed in accordance with the approved
stormwater management plan and permits issued, or are not completed
in accordance with all applicable requirements of this chapter prior to
expiration of the permit(s), as defined in § 198-25G of this chapter or
other applicable Township codes (under which a permit is issued), and
have not otherwise been previously extended by the Township in its
discretion upon written request by the applicant citing the reason(s)
necessitating the extension request, the financial guarantee provided
hereunder shall be forfeited by the applicant.
A. The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
contain a BMP operation and maintenance plan (BMP O&M) prepared
by the design engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall
outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary
to ensure proper operation of the BMPs and shall be subject to review
and approval of the Township. For subdivisions and/or land
developments, the Township Council upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer, shall make the final determination on the
continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the
stormwater management site plan.
B. The BMP O&M plan shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control
facilities, consistent with the following principles:
§ 198-37 CHARTER § 198-38
C:401
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, storm sewers, and other
stormwater management public improvements are to be dedicated
to the Township, stormwater control facilities may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the Township, if accepted by the
Township.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
storm sewers and other stormwater management improvements
are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and
maintenance of stormwater control facilities shall be the
responsibility of the owner or private management entity (e.g.,
homeowners' association) or individual lot owner.
C. The stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan shall include the following:
(1) Description of how each stormwater facility and BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity and contact information
associated with the person(s) responsible for O&M.
(2) Name of the project site, name and address of the owner of the
property, and name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
(3) A certification statement, signed by the property owner,
acknowledging that stormwater management facilities and BMPs
are permanent fixtures that cannot be altered or removed and that
any revision to the approved stormwater management facilities and
BMPs and stormwater management plan must be approved by
Middletown Township through the submission of a revised
stormwater management plan.
D. Facilities, areas, or structures used as BMPs shall be enumerated as
permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions
or easements that run with the land.
E. If the stormwater management facilities and BMPs are to be privately
owned, an operation and maintenance agreement that provides the
maintenance and cost sharing among the affected property owners,
consistent with the O&M plan, shall be recorded against every affected
property as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
F. The governing body shall have the right to require dedication of any or
all of the stormwater management controls. The right of the Township
to require dedication in the future shall be stated in the maintenance
agreement. (Refer to § 198-40.)
G. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provision of this chapter.
H. In the event a property owner or other entity responsible for
maintenance (e.g., homeowners' association) fails to honor their
maintenance responsibilities set forth in the O&M plan, in any manner,
§ 198-38 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-38
C:402
§ 198-39. Review of stormwater facilities and BMP operations and
maintenance (O&M) plan.
§ 198-40. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
§ 198-41. Stormwater management easements.
Middletown Township shall have the right of entry upon and within the
area of the easement (or area of BMP and access to stormwater BMPs
as defined by the recorded declaration of covenants and restrictions)
to undertake any required corrective or maintenance effort. The total
cost of such, including administrative, engineering, and legal costs
for enforcement, may be imposed upon the responsible party as
determined by the O&M agreement. Failure to remedy all associated
costs described above may be subject of the imposition of a lien by
the Township against the property(s) in question, in the same manner
as the Township might otherwise be empowered by law to assess or
impose a lien against a property for municipal improvements.
A. The Township shall review the stormwater facilities and BMP O&M plan
for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter and
any permits issued by PADEP.
B. The Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the
stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan is approved.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management plan, the
applicant shall sign and record an O&M agreement prepared and
approved by the Township Solicitor covering all stormwater control
facilities that are to be privately owned. The form and substance of the
agreement shall be consistent with the agreement in Appendix D of this
chapter.80 The signed O&M agreement shall be recorded against every
affected property as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The O&M agreement shall be subject to review and approval of the
Township.
C. The owner is responsible for the O&M of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the Township may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property as described in
§ 198-38.
A. Stormwater management easements shall be granted by the property
owner as necessary to provide for:
80.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 198-38 CHARTER § 198-41
C:403
§ 198-42. Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
(1) Access to the property by the Township for facility inspections and
emergency maintenance.
(2) Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the
100-year storm event and those structures and surface features
(e.g., embankments) containing the 100-year storm event.
B. Stormwater management/BMP facilities easements are required for all
areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by
Middletown Township Council.
C. All easements shall be recorded with the Delaware County Recorder of
Deeds prior to issuance of a building permit or recordation of a
subdivision or land development plan.
D. The purpose of any easement shall be specified in the O&M Agreement
signed by the property owner.
E. The record plan and development agreement for an approved
subdivision and/or land development shall define the ownership and
maintenance responsibilities as well as access rights for all drainagerelated
easements and stormwater management facilities/BMPs.
Specifically, the record plan shall contain a provision permitting access
to such easement(s) and facility, at any reasonable time, for inspection
and/or emergency repair/maintenance, by Middletown Township or its
designee, of all facilities deemed critical to public welfare.
F. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within the
area of an easement unless necessary for the purpose of the easement.
G. Easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines to
the maximum extent feasible.
H. Easements shall have a minimum width of 30 feet unless otherwise
approved by the Township.
I. Where required by the Township, the applicant shall provide a method
of physically delineating easements across private lots. Such method
shall include shrubbery, trees, permanent markers or other method
acceptable to the Township.
A. If stormwater management facilities/BMPs are accepted by the
Township for dedication, the applicant shall pay a specified amount to
the Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of
periodic inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount shall be
determined as follows:
(1) The amount shall include all estimated costs to inspect, maintain,
and repair the facilities during a fifteen-year period, as calculated
by the Township Engineer.
§ 198-41 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-42
C:404
§ 198-43. Post-construction maintenance inspections.
(2) The amount shall be converted to present worth of the annual
series values. The Township Engineer shall determine the present
worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the approval of
Township Council.
B. If a stormwater management facility/BMP is proposed that also serves
as a recreation facility (e.g., ball field, pond), the Township may, but is
not required to, reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund
deposit based upon the value of the land for public recreation purpose.
C. If at some future time a stormwater management facility (whether
publicly or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of
storm sewers or other stormwater management facility, the unused
portion of any maintenance deposit will be applied to the cost of
abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or
other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of
abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
D. For stormwater management facilities, storm sewer, culverts, or other
such improvements required by PennDOT (to be constructed within the
right-of-way of state highways or easement areas), for which Township
Council agrees to long-term maintenance, the applicant shall pay a fee
to the Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund. The fee shall cover the
estimated cost for maintenance and inspections for 15 years. The
Township Engineer will establish the estimated cost upon review of
information submitted by the applicant. The amount of the fee shall be
converted to present worth of the annual series values. The Township
Engineer shall determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be
subject to the approval of Township Council.
A. Stormwater management facilities and BMPs shall be inspected for
proper operation by the owner of facilities as indicated on the O&M
plan and agreement on the following basis:
(1) Twelve months after completion of the facility and acceptance of
completion of the facility by the Township;
(2) At least once every three years thereafter;
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year frequency
or greater storm; and/or
(4) As specified in the operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement.
B. The entity conducting the inspection shall submit a report to
Middletown Township summarizing observations of inspection and
necessary repairs, if any.
§ 198-42 CHARTER § 198-43
C:405

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 198-44. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows nonstormwater discharge, including, but not limited to, sewage,
processed wastewater, and wash water, to enter the surface waters of
the commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow or cause to allow stormwater discharges into the
Township's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges allowed under
a state or federal permit.
C. Discharges which may be allowed under the Township's NPDES permit
based on a finding by the Township that the discharge(s) do not
significantly contribute to pollution to surface waters of the
Commonwealth by the Township are:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including waterline and fire hydrant
flushing.
(3) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(4) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(5) Lawn watering.
(6) Irrigation drainage.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(9) Air-conditioning condensate.
(10)Water from individual residential car washing.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (pursuant to PADEP
requirements).
(12) Springs.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from crawl space pumps or sump pumps.
(15) Diverted stream flows.
§ 198-44 CHARTER § 198-44
C:407
§ 198-45. Prohibited connections.
§ 198-46. Roof drains, sump pumps, and foundation drains.
D. In the event that the Township subsequently determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 198-44C of this chapter degrade the quality of
surface waters of the commonwealth or waters of the United States by
the Township, then the Township will notify the responsible person to
cease the discharge.
E. Upon notice provided by the Township under § 198-44D, the discharger
will have a reasonable time to cease the discharge consistent with the
degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibility under
state or federal law.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
§ 198-44C above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the regulated small
MS4 or the surface waters of the commonwealth, and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor waste water
drains and sinks; and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the regulated small MS4 or surface waters of
the commonwealth which has not been documented in plans, maps,
or equivalent records, and approved by the Township.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection, drain or
conveyance was previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a
government agency, or otherwise permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
A. Roof drains, sump pumps or foundation drains (or similar subsurface or
surface drainage system) shall not be connected to streets or sanitary
sewers and shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable to satisfy the criteria for and
encourage disconnection of impervious surfaces. Roof drains may be
connected to storm sewers or roadside swales only when those facilities
ultimately discharge to stormwater management BMPs or water quality
facilities, and only when approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Roof drains, sump pumps or foundation drains shall not discharge
water within 10 feet of a public road right-of-way, sidewalk, walkway,
trail, or street and shall be constructed to discharge to a dry well/
seepage pit or aboveground entirely on the subject property. Sump
pump and roof drain discharge pipes shall not extend beyond the
§ 198-44 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-46
C:408
§ 198-47. Waste disposal prohibitions.
No person, owner or other entity shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep,
or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public
or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, drainage
swale, surface water of the commonwealth, stormwater runoff collection
system, riparian corridor area, floodplain (area subject to inundation by
the 100-year frequency storm event) or any component of the Township's
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), any refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and
accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution.
Waste deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of
collection is exempted from this prohibition.
§ 198-48. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
building envelope for the lot unless they are directly connected to an
infiltration facility, detention basin, storm sewer pipe or as otherwise
approved by the Township Engineer. In no case shall roof drains, sump
pumps or foundation drains discharge to the surface in a manner such
that water flows directly onto an adjoining property or across paved
walking surfaces, streets, driveways or parking areas.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater management BMP, unless part of an approved maintenance
program, and written approval of the Township has been obtained.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater management facility or BMP or within a drainage
easement, without the written approval of the Township.
§ 198-46 CHARTER § 198-48
C:409

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 198-49. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives
of Middletown Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property
within the Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures
and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 198-50. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any grading and
excavating (aka soil erosion and sedimentation control) permit or
stormwater management plan approval issued hereunder, the Township
shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall set
forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction
of these violations(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall
subject such person to the penalty provision of this chapter. All such
penalties shall be deemed cumulative. In addition, the Township may pursue
any and all other remedies available under state or federal law. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter. In the case where the violation
poses an immediate threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, no notice under this section shall be required.
§ 198-51. Enforcement.
Middletown Township Council is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the stormwater management site plan or simplified stormwater
management site plan shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the Township as directed by The
Township.
A. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Township or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 198-4 on any
property except as provided for in the approved stormwater
management site plan, simplified stormwater management site plan
and pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the plan pursuant to
this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a condition which
does not conform to the approved plan.
§ 198-49 CHARTER § 198-51
C:411
§ 198-52. Violations deemed public nuisances.
C. Suspension and revocation of approved stormwater management plan.
(1) Any approval under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the Township for:
(a) Noncompliance with, or failure to, implement any provision of
the approved stormwater management plan.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others, or as outlined in Article VIII of this
chapter.
(2) A suspended approval of a stormwater management plan shall be
reinstated by The Township when:
(a) The Township Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater management and
erosion and sedimentation control measure(s), or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(b) The violation of this chapter, law, rule or regulation has been
corrected.
(3) A stormwater management plan approval cannot be reinstated. The
applicant may apply for a new stormwater management plan
approval under the procedures outlined in this chapter.
(4) The decision to suspend or revoke a permit may be appealed to
Township Council within 30 days of the date of suspension or
revocation.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Township may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
§ 198-51 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-52
C:412
§ 198-53. Violations and penalties.
§ 198-54. Appeals.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Reimbursement to Middletown Township to cover administrative
and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater management facilities/BMPs to
correct a violation or prevent future violations; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of approved stormwater management
facilities/BMPs.
D. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent Middletown Township
from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment of not more than 10 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, Middletown Township, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. Appeals from the determination of the Township in the administration
of this chapter as it relates to stormwater management of a project
shall be made to the Middletown Township Council within 30 days of
that determination or decision.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Middletown Township
Council may appeal to the Delaware County Court of Common Pleas
within 30 days of the date of the decision.
§ 198-52 CHARTER § 198-54
C:413
Chapter 204
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Littering — See Ch. 148.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
Water — See Ch. 242.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 198-54 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 198-54
C:414
ARTICLE I
Construction Regulations
[Adopted 7-2-1946 by Ord. No. 7 (Ch. V, Art. 1, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 204-1. Construction requirements for roads, streets, lanes, alleys
and drainage facilities. [Amended 3-7-1949 by Ord. No. 16]
A. Plan required. No person, partnership, association or corporation shall
construct, open or dedicate any road, street, lane or alley, or any sewer
or drainage facilities in connection therewith, for public use or travel in
the Township of Middletown, without first submitting plans therefor to
the Township Supervisors for their approval, and no road, street, lane
or alley, nor sewer or drainage facilities in connection therewith shall
be opened, laid or constructed except in strict accordance with plans
approved by the Township Supervisors.
B. Plan and construction specifications. Such plans shall show the profiles
of such roads, streets, lanes or alleys, the course, structure and
capacity of the drainage facilities, the method of drainage of the
adjacent or contiguous territory and drainage profile of the streets and
plan showing drainage of the whole property; and the size of the lots
which shall conform with Chapter 275, Zoning. All roads and streets
shall be of a width of not less than 33 feet, the cartway shall be no less
than 18 feet, and all roads and streets connecting with existing streets
so as to form a continuation or extension thereof, shall be not less in
width than such existing roads and streets. All roads and streets, where
possible, shall connect with existing roads and streets, or proposed
roads and streets, so as to form as near as possible through road and
streets, and a harmonious and systematic development of the Township.
The names of the roads and streets shall not conflict with the names of
existing roads and streets, and all roads and streets shall be designated
by the names of existing roads and streets with which they connect as
extensions thereof.
C. Filing of plan and public hearing. All such plans shall be filed with the
Township Secretary at least 10 days prior to regular meeting of the
Township Supervisors, at which it is desired to seek approval thereof.
Before acting upon any such plans, the Township Supervisors may, in
their discretion, arrange for a public hearing, after giving such notice
as they may deem desirable in each case.
D. Modification of plan. The Township Supervisors reserve the right to
alter such plans, and to specify any changes or modifications of any
kind which they may deem necessary with respect thereto, and to make
their approval of such plans subject to any such alterations, changes or
modifications.
E. Required signatures and filing. Any and all plans, when so approved,
shall be signed by the Supervisors, and shall be filed in the office of the
§ 204-1 CHARTER § 204-1
C:415
Secretary of the Township, where the same shall be available to public
inspection.
F. Recording by applicant. The action of the Township Supervisors in
approving any such plans, and such plans, shall be recorded by the
person applying for such approval.
G. Road improvement. All roads and streets shown on the said plan shall
be improved in accordance with the plans and specifications prescribed
by the Township Supervisors.
H. Sewer, gas and water mains. All sewers, sewer laterals, and sewer
connections shall be laid on all improved streets before paving where
connection with the Township sewers is practicable, and shall be
required by the Township Supervisors, and all gas and water mains and
all service connections shall be laid before the paving of the streets
where water and gas is available, and all other mains, pipes and
conduits and the like shall be installed before paving of the cartway
where it is proposed to install any such service mains in the streets.
I. Requirements necessary for application of approval. All applications for
the approval of such plans shall be in writing on a blank form to be
furnished for that purpose, by the Township Supervisors, and signed by
the owners of the property, which must be filed with the Secretary of
the Township, setting forth in detail the character of the improvements
to be made on the property shown on said plan, in accordance with the
provisions of this article, and in such application the applicant shall
agree to open, lay out and improve the roads, streets, lanes or alleys,
and to construct all of the improvements, including sewers and
drainage facilities upon the property, shown on the plan, within the time
or times therein specified, and agree to enter into a contract in writing
prepared by the Township Solicitor, to install, erect and construct said
improvements. In addition, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of a
reputable title insurance company, satisfactory to Township
Supervisors, which as of the date of approval, shall set forth the name
or names of the owner or owners of all property covered by such plans
and shall show and shall contain a list of all mortgages, judgments,
liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds in and for Delaware County, Pennsylvania, which
shall affect the property covered by such plans. If said certificates of
title insurance company shall disclose that any such property shall be
subject to any mortgage, judgment, easement, lien, contract or
agreement, or other matters of record, then at the option of the
Township Supervisors, the holders or owners of such mortgages,
judgments, liens, easements, contracts or agreements shall be required
to join in and approve said application before the same shall be acted
upon by the Township Supervisors. The applicant shall furnish a bond in
such amount, under such conditions, and form, and with surety as shall
be approved by the Township Supervisor, to guarantee the performance
of the said contract and to secure the completion of said improvements
within the times therein specified. In lieu of a bond, the applicant may
§ 204-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 204-1
C:416
§ 204-2. Road specifications.
deposit cash to guarantee performance of said contract and to secure
completion of the improvements upon an escrow agreement to be
prepared by the Township Solicitor and approved by the Township
Supervisors. The escrow agent for the deposits of such cash shall be
designated and selected by the Township Supervisors.
J. Costs. All applicants shall bear all costs of inspection of such roads,
streets, lanes or alleys, and shall deposit with the Township Treasurer
such sum, as the Township Supervisors determine, to guarantee
payment of such costs; and applicant shall deposit a filing fee of $35
when application is filed, or such sum as the Supervisors shall by
resolution decide. In addition, all applicants shall bear all advertising
costs in connection with said application and all applicants shall bear all
fees of the Township Solicitor in connection with said application and in
connection with any ordinance prepared for the acceptance or taking
over of any road as a Township highway.81 The applicant shall deposit
an amount necessary to cover said costs, as determined by the
Township Supervisors, with the Township Treasurer and upon the final
conclusion of the consideration of said application and of the
consideration of an ordinance to ordain and take over said roads as
Township highways any part of said deposit not expended shall be
refunded to the applicant.
A. Preparation of subgrade. The subgrade shall be on undisturbed ground
below the topsoil and properly graded and rolled with a 10 ton threewheel
roller to a bearing strength of 10,000 pounds per square foot. If
fill is required, all topsoil and all organic material shall be removed. Fill
shall be installed in layers not more than six inches thick and
thoroughly compacted with a 10 ton three-wheel roller or installed in
layers not more than 12 inches thick and compacted with a ten-ton
sheep-foot roller or compactor of the same weight. Fill shall be entirely
mineral, shall not contain stumps, trees, brush, trash, or similar
materials or objects, and shall be properly compacted to the abovementioned
strength. The subgrade shall be finished with a contour
radially parallel to the finished road. Any old wells, cesspools, dump
holes and trenches shall be bridged over with reinforced concrete or
filled in to provide proper bearing strength at subgrade level. Such
bridging or fill shall be noted on the as-built plans. The subgrade shall
be inspected and approved by the Township Engineer before any stone
is applied.
B. Base course.
(1) The base course shall be applied in two layers.
(2) The first layer shall be four inches thick when compressed. This
layer shall be of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation No. 4
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 67316 et seq.
§ 204-1 CHARTER § 204-2
C:417
stone, spread uniformly on prepared subgrade. After ballast is
placed and spread, it shall be checked with approved templates and
straight edges and all irregularities corrected. The coarse material
shall be compacted by rolling with an approved three-wheel tenton
roller. The rolling shall be parallel with the center line of the
roadway uniformly lapping each preceding track and shall continue
until material does not creep or wave ahead of roller wheels.
After the materials has been rolled satisfactorily, fine material for
filling the voids shall be applied. The fine material shall be spread
from piles off the road or from dumping boards, and in no case
shall the fine material be dumped directly on the coarse material.
The fine material shall be stone meeting the size and grading
requirements for Pennsylvania Department of Transportation No. 1
screenings. Mechanical means of spreading fine material may be
approved by the Township Engineer, provided such means prove
satisfactory. The fine material shall be cast or spread in a series of
thin applications parallel with the roadway until no more material
can be forced into voids. Brooms shall be used to spread the fine
material over the surface to ensure even distribution and filling of
all voids. The rolling shall continue during the process of spreading
the fine material and shall begin at the sides and progress towards
the center of the road. Additional screenings shall be applied where
necessary to fill voids and rolling shall continue until the base is
thoroughly compacted and firmly set.
(3) The first layer shall be inspected and approved by the Township
Engineer before the second layer is started.
(4) The second four-inch layer shall be installed in the same manner
and with the same material as the first layer and the finished base
shall have the contour of the final road. An inspection by the
Township Engineer is required and approval of the work shall be
obtained before any topping is applied.
(5) With the approval or by the direction of the Township Engineer,
four inches to five inches bituminous concrete base course may be
substituted in place of the above-described stone base course. All
work shall be in accordance with the current Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards and specifications.
C. Surface.
(1) Binder course.
(a) The binder course shall be installed only from April 15 to
October 15. The base must be dry and hard and the air
temperature at least 50° F. and rising.
(b) The binding course shall be asphalt concrete mixture in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications as described in Bulletin No. 27, as amended, laid
with a paver approved by the Township Engineer and rolled
§ 204-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 204-2
C:418
§ 204-3. Concrete curb specifications.
§ 204-4. Curbless road specifications. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord.
No. 302; 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 388]
with a tandem roller not less than 10 tons. Rolling is to be done
in a direction parallel to the roadway properly compacting the
course to a thickness of two inches. The binder course shall be
rolled to the contour of the finished road and shall be straight
and even. The Township must be notified 24 hours prior to
installation of this course so that the Township Engineer can
make an inspection.
(2) Surface course.
(a) The same general provisions as set forth in Subsection C(1)(a)
and (b) above shall apply to the installation of the surface
course except that the material for the surface course shall be
asphalt concrete in accordance with Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation specifications as described in Bulletin No. 27
as amended, and shall be compacted to a thickness of 1 1/2
inches.
(b) All work shall be done in a workmanlike manner and special
care shall be exercised so that patching is not necessary.
Where a road meets an existing road or portion of a road, the
joint shall be straight and the old road shall be cut back so that
feathering is not necessary.
A. All concrete curbs shall be 18 inches deep, six inches wide at the top,
eight inches wide at the bottom and shall have a batter of one inch from
the top of the curbing to the surface of the road. Curbing shall be
constructed in ten-foot lengths and a suitable joint shall be used every
10 feet with an expansion joint every 40 feet. All curbing shall have a
minimum strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch.
B. All concrete work shall be cured with a moist cloth or waterproof
covering for sufficient time, depending on the temperature, to attain at
least 50% of maximum strength before removal of forms. Forms shall
remain in place in any event for a minimum of 72 hours.
C. All form work shall be inspected and approved by the Township
Engineer prior to the placing of any concrete or the work will not be
approved. At least 24 hours' notice must be received by the Township
prior to an inspection.
D. Any cracked, shifted or honeycombed sections will not be approved by
the Township Engineer and such sections shall be replaced before
approval is given.
A. Curbless roads shall be permitted, when it can be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer that with the use of swales,
§ 204-2 CHARTER § 204-4
C:419
holding ponds, and other drainage facilities which encourage maximum
absorption into the ground, the calculated road drainage runoff is
properly and adequately controlled. Curbless roads shall not be
permitted in any instance where the longitudinal slope of the roadway
exceeds 5%.
B. Curbless roads shall be constructed with a stone shoulder with a
minimum of two feet in width and 10 1/2 inches in depth. The shoulder
should be level in reference to the cross slope of the road to facilitate
interception of road drainage runoff. Shoulder material shall be
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation No. 3 stone.
C. The area adjacent to the two-foot stone shoulder shall have topsoil, six
inches deep, over a stone seepage bed of width and depth as required to
facilitate the calculated runoff.
§ 204-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 204-4
C:420
ARTICLE II
Highway Permits
[Adopted 3-7-1949 by Ord. No. 15; amended in its entirety
11-8-1982 by Ord. No. 326 (Ch. III, Art. 2, Sec. 201, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 204-5. Highway openings.
On and after the passage of this article it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to open, break or excavate any highway of the Township
by digging or otherwise to dig a tunnel under the surface of any highway
for the purpose of laying wire, pipe, sewers, drains or conduits of any
description or for making connections therewith or repairs thereto unless
and until a permit to do so shall have first been obtained as herein provided.
§ 204-6. Roads and driveways.
On and after the passage of this article it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to construct any public or private driveway or road
so as to open into any Township highway without first securing a permit
as herein provided. The design and construction of such driveway or road
shall be in accordance with the latest Township or PennDOT standards and
specifications.
§ 204-7. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on a form prepared by the Township
and shall be signed by a responsible applicant or by a fully authorized
officer or employee of the applicant. The application shall set forth the
purpose for which the highway is to be opened, excavated or occupied, the
location of the proposed work, the portion of the highway to be occupied
and such other information as may be required. The application shall
likewise set forth that the applicant agreed to do all of the work to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
§ 204-8. Fees.
Fees for permits required by this article shall be calculated using the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of Township Council of the Township of
Middletown.
§ 204-9. Approval and appeal.
Application shall be submitted to the Township Engineer who shall either
approve or disapprove the same. If he shall approve the same, then the
permit shall be granted by the Township upon payment of the required fee.
From the disapproval of the same, the applicant shall have the right of
appeal to the Township Council whose action thereon shall be final.
§ 204-5 CHARTER § 204-10
C:421
§ 204-10. Protective devices required.
It shall be the duty of the person to whom the permit has been granted to
protect all openings, materials and obstructions of any kind in the highway
by the use of danger signals and red lanterns which shall be kept lighted
from sunset to sunrise and by such fences, barricades or other protective
devices as may properly protect the public as approved by the Township
Engineer.
§ 204-11. Time limit on openings.
No opening, ditches or tunnels shall be kept open longer than 24 hours
except upon the written approval of the Township Engineer.
§ 204-12. Restoration requirements.
All openings or breaks shall be filled immediately with suitable materials
thoroughly compacted in all respects satisfactory to the Township Engineer
and the fill shall be compacted where required by the Engineer and any
sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be replaced with the same type of paving
as it was prior to the opening. All work shall be done to the satisfaction
and approval of the Township Engineer and shall be in accordance with all
applicable Township and PennDOT standards and specifications.
§ 204-13. Exceptions.
This article shall not require any telephone, electric light or telegraph
company to secure permits for erecting poles in the said highways.
§ 204-14. Costs of inspection.
All applicants shall bear all costs of inspections required hereunder. The
costs of inspections shall be charged at the rate established by Township
resolution, or actual costs incurred. The Township shall have the right to
seek outside consultants to provide independent inspections, plan review
and inspection reports.
§ 204-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall,
upon summary conviction before any Magisterial District Judge, be fined an
amount not exceeding $300 and costs of prosecution, and in default thereof,
may be imprisoned to the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
Each and every day in which any person, firm or corporation shall be in
violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 204-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 204-15
C:422
Chapter 210
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 186.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 198.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 242.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 204-15 CHARTER § 204-15
C:423

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 210-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of Middletown."
§ 210-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes, among others:
§ 210-3. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, Art. V, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 210-4. Application.
The following are subject to the regulations of this chapter:
A. To provide for the submittal and processing of plans, including
provisions for approval of sketch, preliminary and final subdivision and
land development plans.
B. To provide for the processing of final approval by stages of
development.
C. To provide specifications for all sketch, preliminary and final
subdivision and land development plans and standards for all public
improvements installed as a condition precedent to final approval of
plans.
D. To ensure that the layout or arrangement of the subdivision or land
development conforms to Chapter 275, Zoning.
E. To provide standards for roads to facilitate the movement of traffic and
fire protection.
F. To provide standards for public improvements such as roads, walkways,
curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, water sewage facilities and
other improvements and to ensure that such improvements are
installed as a condition precedent to final approval of plans.
G. To provide standards to ensure adequate easements for pedestrians,
drainage and utilities.
H. To promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Township.
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving: a group of two or more
§ 210-1 CHARTER § 210-4
C:425
§ 210-5. Sewer agreement. [Amended 11-20-1978 by Ord. No. 227;
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 296]
A separate sanitary sewer agreement shall be executed by the owner and
the Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority, providing for
the approval of the plans and specifications by the Sewer Authority where
sanitary sewers are to be installed and for an appropriate inspection during
the course of said construction. The owner shall also provide a separate
maintenance bond, approved by said Sewer Authority, for an amount that
will insure adequate maintenance of said sewer system. The abovementioned
sanitary sewer agreement shall also include an appropriate
method of conveying said sanitary sewer lines to the Middletown Township,
Delaware County, Sewer Authority and for the payment of all engineering
and legal fees incurred by said Sewer Authority in connection with said
application, sanitary sewer agreement and/or the construction of the
sanitary sewer lines.
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or
cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features; except that the addition of an
accessory building, not to exceed 400 square feet in area, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building is exempt only
from the aforementioned definition and plan review and requirements
process of this chapter and not the building permit process and other
applicable Township regulations.
B. A subdivision of land, including the division or redivision of a lot, tract
or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court
for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or
lot development. [Added 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
§ 210-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-5
C:426
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 210-6. Definitions. [Amended 4-10-1961 by Ord. No. 125;
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 296; 5-27-1982 by Ord. No. 311; 1-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 460; 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 613]
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms set forth in this article
shall have the meaning indicated. Words in the singular include the
plural, and words in the plural include the singular. The word "person"
includes a corporation, unincorporated association, partnership and
individual. The word "building" shall be construed as if followed by the
words "or part thereof." The word "watercourse" includes channel,
creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring and stream. The word "may" is
permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a road intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at road
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of road center lines.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Township of Middletown.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor road intersecting another road at one end and
terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted but not necessarily dedicated for
a limited use of land for public or private purposes.
HALF STREET — A road along the perimeter of a subdivision or land
development which does not comply with the road width requirements
contained in this chapter.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land
that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable subdivisions and
land developments, including but not limited to public improvements.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities described in
Subsections (1) and (2) below, but excluding any activities described in
Subsection (3) below:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
(1)
§ 210-6 CHARTER § 210-6
C:427
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or
other person having a proprietary interest in land shall be deemed to
be a "landowner" for the purpose of this chapter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as "minor
subdivisions."
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of four or fewer lots for
residential use which will not involve the installation of public
improvements.
NEW RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE — The total acreage in the
development, minus the area devoted to roads and parking compounds.
OPEN SPACE — That area in a subdivision or land development
intended for the use of enjoyment of its residents as a recreational area,
including dedicated and undedicated parcels of land.
PLAN — The plan of a subdivision or land development, whether a
sketch, preliminary or final.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
The addition of a single accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building if, and only if, all of the following criteria are met:
The use of the proposed accessory building will be other than
residential; and
(a)
The lot area of the lot on which the accessory building is to be
placed is 10 acres or larger; and
(b)
The proposed accessory building does not exceed 1,000 square
feet in gross floor area and the total cumulative gross floor
area of the proposed accessory building and all other
accessory buildings previously exempted from the definition
of land development pursuant to this section does not exceed
2,500 square feet; and
(c)
The height of the proposed accessory building does not exceed
35 feet.
(d)
(3)
§ 210-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-6
C:428
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Middletown
Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — "Public improvements" shall include but
not be limited to gutters, sidewalks and other pedestrian walkways,
bicycle paths, public driveways driveway aprons, bridges and culverts,
drainage facilities, stormwater detention and retention basins, roadway
underdrains, public sanitary sewers, public water distribution systems,
fire hydrants, streetlighting, street and traffic signs, traffic control
devices, shielding or protective fencing, guardrails, refuse collection
stations, public parking areas, monuments, grading and clearing,
landscaping and tree planting within public areas, dedicated
recreational facilities, park areas and community facilities.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS — Sewers owned and/or operated by the
Township or a municipal authority.
PUBLIC WATER AND PUBLIC WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS —
Water supplied through a system owned and/or operated by the
Township, a municipality or a municipal authority.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having
frontage on two generally parallel roads with vehicular access from
only one road.
ROAD — A strip of land, including the cartway and all unpaved areas
between the cartway and adjacent lots, intended primarily as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian travel which may also be used to provide
FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or land development
plan prepared for final review as required by this chapter to define
property rights, streets and other proposed improvements.
(1)
PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision or land development plan,
in lesser detail than a final plan, prepared for preliminary review
as required by this chapter.
(2)
RECORD — A copy of that portion of the final plan which contains
the layout of the lots in the development and the location of all open
space, existing and proposed public improvements and easements
therefor and the original endorsement of Township Council and
which is intended to be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds for
the County of Delaware.
(3)
SKETCH — A subdivision or land development plan prepared for
review prior to the more formal preliminary plan procedure.
(4)
§ 210-6 CHARTER § 210-6
C:429
space for sewers, public utilities and walkways. Roads shall be designed
according to the volume of average daily traffic. The word "road" shall
include a street.
ROAD LINE — The dividing line between the road and adjacent lots.
The road line is the same as the right-of-way line in situations where an
easement or a right-of-way has been provided for a road.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of a roadway visible to the driver
of a vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, conveyance or other transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
of any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for
the Township.
B. Words not defined above shall have the meaning given in the
Municipalities Planning Code,82 Chapter 275, Zoning, or other
Township codes and ordinances and, if not defined in the
aforementioned documents, the most recent edition of Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-6
C:430
ARTICLE III
Subdivision and Land Development Application
§ 210-7. General procedure.
Whenever any subdivision of land or land development is proposed, the
applicant shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision
or land development in accordance with the following procedure:
§ 210-8. Sketch plan application procedure. [Amended 1-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 460]
A. Types of plans required for subdivisions and land developments.
(1) Minor subdivision.
(a) Sketch plan not required.
(b) Preliminary plan recommended but not required.
(c) Final plan required.
(2) Major subdivision or land development.
(a) Sketch plan recommended but not required.
(b) Preliminary plan required.
(c) Final plan required.
B. Filing of application.
(1) An application is deemed formally filed when the required number
of copies of sketch, preliminary or final plans, together with the
required number of signed and completed applications, are
submitted to the Township together with the required fee.
(2) The presentation of a sketch, preliminary and final plan shall each
be considered a separate submission and the review period set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be
applicable to each submission.
(3) Prior to any action by Township Council, an applicant may revise a
sketch, preliminary or final plan. Upon the submission of a revised
plan, the applicant shall sign a statement withdrawing the plan
upon which the revised plan is based or grant an extension of time
of the review period set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, and upon failing either, the plan and the revised
plan shall be brought before Council for action.
A. Purpose. A sketch plan is intended to afford an applicant with the
opportunity to consult with the Township of Middletown and the
Delaware County Planning Commissions at an early stage, in an
informal manner and prior to the more formal preliminary plan
§ 210-7 CHARTER § 210-8
C:431
procedure. During the sketch plan procedure, an applicant may make
use of the services of both Planning Commissions to help analyze
the problems of the development and plan more adequately for its
sound coordination with the community. The sketch plan procedure also
affords both Planning Commissions the opportunity to give informal
guidance to the applicant at a stage when potential points of difference
can be more easily resolved. It can also simplify official action and save
unnecessary expense and delay.
B. Application procedure. Where the sketch plan procedure is used, an
application shall be submitted in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) The application shall be made on forms available from the
Township office and shall be designated as a sketch plan.
(2) All information requested in the application shall be supplied, and
the application shall be signed by the applicant.
(3) The applicant shall submit the required fee, 25 copies of the sketch
plan, 11 signed and completed applications and the Delaware
County Planning Department review form and such additional
plans, applications and copies thereof as are now or hereinafter
required by reviewing agencies, regulatory agencies or Township
Council to the Township Manager or his designee.
(4) The Township Manager shall check the submission, which shall
consist of the required number of completed and signed
applications and site plans, the Delaware County Planning
Department review form and the required fee. In the event that the
submission is incomplete in any of the foregoing respects, the
Township Manager shall so advise the applicant. The applicant may
either submit the application as tendered, in which case it shall be
processed even though not complete, or the applicant may
withdraw the application for the purpose of correcting the
deficiencies noted by the Township Manager. If the applicant
chooses to withdraw the application, he shall sign a statement
acknowledging that the application has been withdrawn.
C. Upon receipt of the submission by the Township Manager, a copy of the
application and sketch plan and the Delaware County Planning
Department review form shall be forwarded to the Delaware County
Planning Department for review and report.
D. Review and action by council. The Township Council shall review and
evaluate the applicant's submission and any reports submitted by the
Middletown Township Planning Commission, Delaware County
Planning Department and the Township Engineer.
(1) The Township Council shall not approve any application until the
Delaware County Planning Department's report is received or until
§ 210-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-8
C:432
§ 210-9. Preliminary plan application procedure. [Amended
1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded
to the county.
(2) After the Township Council's review and evaluation, the Township
Council shall render its decision and communicate it to the
applicant in the time, manner and form as provided in Section 508
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.83
E. Effect of approval of sketch plan.
(1) When a sketch plan is approved by the Township Council, the
approval shall be:
(a) Limited to only those items which are specifically and
accurately shown on the sketch plan.
(b) Conditioned on meeting all requirements for preliminary plans,
if a preliminary plan is required to be submitted or is
submitted, and final plans.
(c) Conditioned on meeting all applicable Township ordinances,
including but not limited to Chapter 275, Zoning.
(2) When a sketch plan is approved by the Township Council, if any
changes are required for preliminary or final approval, those
changes shall be incorporated into the plan next to be submitted for
approval.
A. Application procedure.
(1) The application shall be made on forms available in the Township
office and shall be designated as a preliminary plan.
(2) All information requested in the application shall be supplied, and
the application shall be signed by the applicant.
(3) The applicant shall submit the required fee, 25 copies of the
preliminary plan, 11 signed and completed applications, the
Delaware County Planning Department review form and such
additional plans, applications and copies thereof as are now or
hereinafter required by reviewing agencies, regulatory agencies or
Township Council to the Township Manager or his designee.
(4) The Township Manager shall check the submission, which shall
consist of the required number of completed and signed
applications and site plans, the completed Delaware County
Planning Department review form and the required fee. In the
event that the submission is incomplete in any of the foregoing
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 210-8 CHARTER § 210-9
C:433
§ 210-10. Final plan application procedure.
respects, the Township Manager shall so advise the applicant.
The applicant may either submit the application as tendered, in
which case it shall be processed even though not complete, or
the applicant may withdraw the application for the purpose of
correcting the deficiencies noted by the Township Manager. If the
applicant chooses to withdraw the application, he shall sign a
statement acknowledging that the application has been withdrawn.
(5) After submitting the preliminary plan, the applicant shall be
responsible for notifying the abutting property owners that a
preliminary plan proposed for the subject lot has been filed, no less
than 10 days prior to the first Planning Commission meeting for
which the plan has been scheduled for review. [Added 3-22-2010
by Ord. No. 711]
(6) Notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
by other proof of notification satisfactory to the Township. Proof of
such notification shall be presented to the Planning Commission at
the first meeting for which the plan has been scheduled for review.
[Added 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 711]
B. Upon receipt of the submission by the Township Manager, a copy of the
application and preliminary plan and the Delaware County Planning
Department review form shall be forwarded to the Delaware County
Planning Department for review and report.
C. Review and action by council. The Township Council shall review and
evaluate the applicant's submission and any reports submitted by the
Middletown Township Planning Commission, Delaware County
Planning Department and the Township Engineer.
(1) The Township Council shall not approve any application until the
Delaware County Planning Department's report is received or until
the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was
forwarded to the county.
(2) After the Township Council's review and evaluation, the Township
Council shall render its decision and communicate it to the
applicant in the time, manner and form as provided in Section 508
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.84
A. Application procedure. The application for final plans shall be the same
as the procedure for preliminary plans, unless otherwise provided.
(1) The word "final" shall be substituted for the word "preliminary"
whenever the latter appears.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 210-9 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-10
C:434
§ 210-11. Conditions on approval and performance standards.
[Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
Every final approval shall be subject to the following conditions and the
following performance standards:
B. Final approval. Where a preliminary plan has been duly approved, the
applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance with the
terms of the approved preliminary plan, the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and subject to the provision
of this chapter relating to final plan approval.
A. The applicant shall sign a development agreement on a form supplied
by the Township, which shall include but not be limited to the following
provisions where they are applicable, which provisions shall be the
performance standards governing implementation of the approved
subdivision or land development. The applicant shall agree:
(1) To construct or cause to be constructed, at the applicant's own cost
and expense and without any expense or cost whatsoever to the
Township, in strict conformity with the Township's ordinances and
resolutions, all public improvements contemplated by the final
plan, including but not limited to all of the following: roads, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks and other pedestrian walkways, bicycle paths,
public driveways, driveway aprons, bridges and culverts, drainage
facilities, stormwater detention and retention facilities, roadway
underdrains, public sanitary sewer systems, public water
distribution systems, fire hydrants, streetlighting, street and traffic
signs, traffic control devices shielding or protective fencing, guard
rails, refuse collection stations, public parking areas, monuments,
grading and clearing, landscaping, and tree planting within public
areas, and dedicated recreational facilities, park areas and
community facilities.
(2) To install all gas mains, water mains, sewage systems, drainage
systems, stormwater management systems and fire hydrants, as
well as all service connections to the lots within the development
which are to be installed under a road before paving such road.
(3) To install, at applicant's own cost and expense, all public
improvements in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications and the Township's ordinances
and resolutions. All public improvements shall be subject to final
inspection by the Township Engineer.
(4) To construct all public improvements according to the construction
details in the approved final plan. Any contemplated change or
rescission in the approved final plan shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and Township Council for approval.
§ 210-10 CHARTER § 210-11
C:435
(5) To comply with Township ordinances concerning stormwater
management and the Stormwater Management Act of 1978 as it
may be amended from time to time.
(6) To use construction materials which are in accordance with the
Township's ordinances and resolutions.
(7) To remove from public improvements, defective and unsuitable
materials or materials not in accordance with Township ordinances
and resolutions and replace such materials with approved
materials at applicant's own cost and expense.
(8) To acquire and construct, at applicant's own cost and expense, all
easements for drainage and utility purposes over, through, along
and across such portions of land as may be required to comply with
the site plans and specifications. Such easements shall include all
rights and privileges necessary to construct, maintain, restore,
operate, repair, replace, reconstruct and alter such easements and
the drainage and utility facilities constructed therein.
(9) To install all electric and telephone utilities underground in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the regulations and orders of the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission. Applicant further agrees to install public sanitary
sewers wherever practical in the cartway of a road.
(10) To set monuments along all road lines the perimeter of the tract
being developed and mark or stake the four major corners of each
lot appearing on the final plan in accordance with the provisions of
the Township's Subdivision Ordinance.
(11) To provide public water and the necessary easements for the
installation and maintenance of public water facilities in
accordance with § 210-32 of this chapter.
(12) To execute a separate sanitary sewer agreement with the
Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority in
accordance with Ordinance No. 62, approved January 31, 1961, as
amended by Ordinance No. 227, approved November 20, 1978.
(13) To abide by an inspection schedule set forth in the Development
Agreement. Any work covered before the inspection period has
expired without an inspection shall be uncovered at applicant's
own expense so that the Township Engineer can make the
inspection.
(14) To make the necessary arrangements, at applicant's own cost and
expense, for the erection of streetlights and the furnishing of
streetlighting until the Township has accepted the roads as part of
the road system of the Township.
§ 210-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-11
C:436
(15) To remove snow or have snow removed by the Township, once a
road or any portion thereof providing access to a building for which
a use and occupancy permit has been granted, has been paved with
a binder course. The development agreement shall specify whether
or not the applicant or the Township is responsible for snow
removal in the subdivision or land development up to the time of
dedication. Snow shall be removed promptly by the applicant in the
event the applicant elects to provide for snow removal. Upon
applicant's failure to promptly remove snow, and in no event any
later than eight hours after the snow has stopped falling, the
Township is authorized to do so upon notice to the applicant, and
the applicant agrees that the Township may be reimbursed for the
costs thereof from the funds held in escrow by the Township. In the
event the Township provides for snow removal upon the applicant's
failure to do so, the Township, in the absence of negligent or willful
acts or omissions on the part of its agents, servants, workmen or
employees, shall not be responsible for any damage or injury to
roads and other public improvements and the applicant shall
indemnify and hold the Township harmless for damage or injury
occurring to the Township's equipment and to persons and other
real and personal property. In the event the applicant elects to have
the Township provide for snow removal, the applicant shall:
(a) Provide the Township with an endorsement to its liability
insurance policy;
(b) Indemnify and hold harmless the Township, in the absence of
negligent or willful acts or omissions on the part of its agents,
servants, workmen or employees, for damage or injury to roads
and other public improvements, to the Township's equipment
and to persons and other real and personal property; and
(c) Reimburse the Township for the reasonable cost of snow
removal from the roads in the subdivision or land development.
(16) To, during the course of construction, maintain such barricades,
warning lights or flares as are necessary to give protection to the
traveling public, to carry adequate liability insurance in an amount
not less than $1,000,000, and to indemnify the Township for
negligent or willful acts or omissions in the event of loss to person
or property.
(17) To, during the course of construction, provide for adequate
disposal of construction debris and other waste material. Applicant
shall further agree not to bury or burn any waste material on the
subdivision or land development site unless the applicant has
complied with all regulations and standards of the Department of
Environmental Protection and all applicable Township ordinances
and resolutions.
§ 210-11 CHARTER § 210-11
C:437
(18) To clean all roads within the subdivision or land development until
such roads are dedicated to and accepted by the Township and to
keep all roads adjoining the subdivision or land development
during the period of construction free of mud and construction
debris.
(19) To hold the Township harmless against any suits or claims, which
any adjoining property owner may bring against the applicant, its
officers, directors, agents, servants, workmen, employees and
assigns, for any conditions occurring on adjacent property, caused
or alleged to be caused by conditions arising in the subdivision or
land development, such conditions, including but not limited to
injury or damage caused to person or property by drainage water,
mud, dirt or dust and which were caused by the negligent or willful
acts or omissions of the applicant, its directors, officers, agents,
servants, workmen, employees or assigns.
(20) To complete the work of all improvements in accordance with the
time schedule set forth in the development agreement.
(21) To comply fully with all Township ordinances and resolutions in
regard to the construction of buildings and the inspection of
buildings during the period of construction and when obtaining use
and occupancy permits. Applicant shall agree that upon notice of a
violation of the Subdivision Ordinance, the building, plumbing or
electrical ordinances and codes,85 or any other applicable Township
ordinances and resolutions, the Township has the right to revoke all
building permits which have been issued in the subdivision or land
development and to refuse to issue any additional building,
plumbing or electrical permits or certificates of occupancy until
such violations have been corrected.
(22) To reimburse the Township for any and all costs incurred by the
Township in connection with the review and approval of plans, the
preparation of the development and related agreements, site
inspections, the preparation of appropriate resolutions and
ordinances. Such costs shall include engineering fees, legal fees
and other costs incurred by the Township, including but not limited
to the cost of recording any instruments required under the
provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the Township, and all
costs, fees and deposits required under the Township's ordinances
or resolutions. The applicant shall further agree to deposit with the
Township appropriate security for the payment of all costs,
expenses, charges and fees.
(a) Reimbursement by the applicant to the Township shall be
based upon a schedule established by resolution. Such expense
shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary fees charged by the Township Engineer or
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes.
§ 210-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-11
C:438
consultant for work performed for similar service in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or
cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township
when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
[1] In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any
such expense in connection with the inspection of
improvements, the applicant shall, within 10 working days
of the date of billing, notify the Township that such
expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in
which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a
subdivision and/or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.
[2] If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township
and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of the
expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the
applicant and Township shall jointly, by mutual agreement,
appoint another professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review said
expenses and make a determination as to the amount
thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
[3] The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such
evidence and review such documentation as the
professional engineer in his or her sole opinion deems
necessary and render a decision within 50 days of the
billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay the
entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
[4] In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree
upon the professional engineer to be appointed within 20
days of the billing date, then, upon application of either
party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas
(or, if at the time there be no President Judge, then the
senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Township
Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been
retained by or performed service for the Township or the
applicant within the preceding five years.
[5] The fee of the appointed professional engineer for
determining the reasonable and necessary expenses shall
be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment required
in the decision is equal to or greater than the original bill.
If the amount of payment required in the decision is less
than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall
pay the fee of the professional engineer, but otherwise the
§ 210-11 CHARTER § 210-11
C:439
Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the fee of
the appointed professional engineer.
(23) When requested by the landowner or developer, in order to
facilitate financing, the Township Council shall furnish the
developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of
the final plan contingent upon the developer obtaining a
satisfactory financial security. The final plan (record plan) shall not
be signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement
is executed. The resolution or letter of contingent approval shall
expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security
agreement is not executed within 90 days, unless a written
extension is granted by the Township Council. Such extension shall
not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the landowner or developer. Where the approved
subdivision or land development plan requires installation of public
improvements, the applicant shall agree to furnish the Township
financial security in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, to secure completion of all such
improvements. Such security shall provide for and secure to the
public the completion of any public improvements which shall be
required within one year of the date fixed in the subdivision or land
development plan for completion of such improvements. The
amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by a landowner or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good
cause shown. If the landowner or developer and the Township are
unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
Township and landowner or developer. The estimate certified by
the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally
by the Township and the landowner or developer. If the applicant
requires more than one year from the date of the posting of the
financial security to complete the required public improvements,
the amount of financial security to complete the required public
improvements may be increased by an additional 10% for each oneyear
period beyond the first anniversary date from the posting of
the financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the
cost of completing the required public improvements as
reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year
period by using the foregoing bidding procedure. As the work of
installing the required public improvements proceeds, the
applicant may request the Township Council to release or authorize
§ 210-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-11
C:440
the release of, from time to time, such portions of the financial
security necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors
performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing,
addressed to the Township Council, and Township Council shall
have 45 days from the receipt of such request within which to
allow the Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Township
Council that such portion of the work upon the improvements
has been completed in accordance with the approved final plan.
Upon such certification, the Township Manager shall authorize
such interim releases by the bonding company or lending
institution of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer
fairly representing the value of the improvements completed or, if
the Township Council fails to act within said forty-five-day period,
the Township Council shall be deemed to have approved the release
of funds as requested. The Township Council shall, prior to the final
release at the time of completion and certification by its engineer,
require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements.
(24) To offer to dedicate roads and other public improvements
designated for dedication on the approved final plan. Any public
improvements which are not to be dedicated to the Township shall
be noted on the preliminary and/or final plan. The Township shall
accept the offer of dedication provided:
(a) The public improvements are completed to the satisfaction of
the Township;
(b) Financial security is posted in accordance with Subsection
A(27) hereof;
(c) As-built drawings are provided in accordance with § 210-13
hereof;
(d) Deeds of dedication or grants of easement, as the case may be,
are provided for all public improvements. In the case of roads
and open space, the offer dedicate shall be a fee simple title,
insurable by a reputable title insurance company of
Pennsylvania, and in all other instances, a perpetual easement.
All documents pertaining to the dedication of roads and other
public improvements shall be in a form approved by the
Township Solicitor.
(e) A certificate of a reputable title insurance company,
satisfactory to Township Council is provided which as of the
date of approval, shall set forth the name or names of the
owner or owners of all property covered by such plans and
shall show and shall contain a list of all mortgages, judgments,
liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record in
Delaware County, Pennsylvania which shall affect the property
covered by such plans. If said certificate of title insurance
§ 210-11 CHARTER § 210-11
C:441
company shall disclose any such property to be subject to any
mortgage, judgment, easement, lien, contract or agreement
or other matters of record, then at the option of Township
Council, the holder or owner of such mortgage; judgment, lien,
easement, contract or agreement shall be required to join in
and approve said offer of dedication before said offer shall be
acted upon by Township Council, or to agree to release the
area to be dedicated to the Township from the lien of said
mortgage, judgment or other similar encumbrance. It is to be
expressly understood that the Township does not accept any
responsibility for the maintenance of any roads or other public
improvements offered for dedication until such time as the
Township shall officially and legally accept such roads or other
public improvements.
(25) To install all street signs, street name signs and traffic control
devices in the subdivision or land development. At the option of the
Township, the Township may require the applicant to enter into
appropriate arrangements with the Township whereby the
Township will erect street signs, street name signs and traffic
control devices with the understanding that the costs and expenses
for erecting such signs and devices shall be borne by the applicant
and that all moneys advanced by the Township for erecting such
signs and devices shall be reimbursed to the Township out of the
developer's escrow fund.
(26) To have approved and accepted by the Middletown Township,
Delaware County, Sewer Authority all sewer lines and
appurtenances located under roads and within easements for
public improvements proposed for dedication to the Township
before such public improvements are offered to the Township for
dedication.
(27) To post financial security to secure the structural integrity of the
dedicated public improvements, as well as the functioning of said
improvements, in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the approved final plans for a term of 18 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication. Such financial security shall
be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code and shall be equal to 15% of the actual cost of installation of
such public improvements.
(28) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for final plan approval, the
Township shall not condition the issuance of building, grading or
other permits relating to the erection or placement of
improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as
depicted upon the final plan upon actual completion of the
improvements depicted upon the approved final plan. Moreover, if
said financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for
any building or buildings to be erected shall not be withheld
§ 210-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-11
C:442
§ 210-12. Appeal procedure.
Where a subdivision or land development plan requires the applicant to
seek relief from the Zoning Hearing Board of Middletown Township, the
applicant shall first file an application with the Township seeking approval
of the subdivision or land development plan and then seek appropriate relief
from the Zoning Hearing Board of Middletown Township. In the alternative,
the applicant may proceed simultaneously before the Township Council and
the Zoning Hearing Board of Middletown Township. In either case, the
Township's approval of the subdivision or land development plan, whether
sketch, preliminary or final, shall be conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining the necessary zoning relief from the Zoning Hearing Board of
Middletown Township. This section shall not apply to applications filed with
the Zoning Hearing Board of Middletown Township pursuant to § 275-206
of Chapter 275, Zoning.
§ 210-13. As-built plan.
After final plan approval and upon completion of all required improvements
and before the Township accepts dedication of such improvements, the
developer shall submit, in duplicate, an as-built plan accurately showing
the location, dimension and elevation of all improvements, including but not
limited to underground utility lines, underground drains, storm drainage
lines, sanitary sewer lines and permanent subdivision monuments. The asbuilt
plan shall note all deviation from the previously approved final plan
and drawings.
§ 210-14. Release from improvement bond. [Amended 1-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 460]
following: the improvement of the streets providing access to and
from existing public roads to such building or buildings, as
required by this chapter and the developer's agreement, as well
as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the
approved final plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot
or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the developer has completed all of the required improvements,
the developer shall so notify Township Council, in writing, by certified
or registered mail, and shall send a copy of the letter to the Township
Engineer. The Township Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all
of the required improvements. The Township Engineer shall,
thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Township Council and shall
promptly mail a copy of the report to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days
after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization
from Township Council. The Township Engineer's report shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said improvements,
§ 210-11 CHARTER § 210-14
C:443
§ 210-15. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any required improvements have not been installed as
provided in this chapter or in accordance with the approved final plan,
the Township Council may enforce any corporate bond or other security
by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the proceeds of such bond
or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making
repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security,
the Township Council may, at its option, install part of such improvements
in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute
appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to
complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether
resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought
against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of
the improvements covered by such security and not for only other municipal
purpose.
§ 210-16. Effect of ordinance change upon approved plans.
[Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
From the time an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary or
final, is duly filed as provided in this chapter and while such application is
pending approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of the Zoning or
Subdivision Ordinance or other governing ordinance or plan shall affect the
decision on such application adversely to the applicant, and the applicant
either in whole or in part, and if said improvements or any portion
thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township
Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such
nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Township Council shall notify the landowner or developer, within
15 days of receipt of the Township Engineer's report, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the action of the Township Council with
relation thereto.
C. If Township Council or the Township Engineer fails to comply with the
limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved, and the developer shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Township Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Township Council or the Township
Engineer.
§ 210-14 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-16
C:444
shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application
was duly filed. In addition, when a preliminary application has been duly
approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final approval in accordance
with the terms of the approved preliminary application as hereinafter
provided. However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any
subsequent application shall be subject to the intervening change in
governing regulations. When an application for approval of a plan, whether
preliminary or final, has been approved or approved subject to conditions
acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent change or amendment in the
Zoning or Subdivision Ordinance or other governing ordinance or plan shall
be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to
complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the
terms of such approval within five years from such approval. Where final
approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the five-year period shall be
counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt
as to the terms of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in
the light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
§ 210-17. Recording of final plan. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No.
460]
§ 210-18. Amendments to approved final plans. [Amended
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 296]
Proposed amendments to approved final plans shall be acted on in the same
manner as the original approved plan.
A. Within 90 days after approval of a final plan by the Township Council, a
record plan shall be filed for recording by the developer with the
Delaware County Recorder of Deeds. The record plan shall also bear
the signature of the County Planning Department indicating review of
the plan and shall be filed with the County Recorder of Deeds before
proceeding with the sale of lots or construction of buildings. The
developer shall notify the Township Council, in writing, of the date of
such recording and the plan book and page wherein such subdivision or
land development plan is located.
§ 210-16 CHARTER § 210-18
C:445

ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 210-19. Sketch plan requirements.
The following shall be provided with every sketch plan application:
§ 210-20. Preliminary plan requirements. [Amended 1-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 460]
The following shall be provided with every preliminary plan application:
A. An aerial photograph of the subdivision or land development at a scale
of not less than one inch to 400 feet. The tract containing the proposed
subdivision or land development shall be outlined so as to be clearly
identifiable on the aerial photograph.
B. A sketch plan, containing at least the following information, legibly
drawn to a scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch:
(1) Name and address of record owner and equitable owner, if any;
(2) Name and address of applicant if different than the record owner
and equitable owner, if any;
(3) A statement of the total acreage of the tract to be developed;
(4) The nature of all contemplated uses;
(5) The zoning district or districts in which the tract to be developed is
located.
(6) North arrow, scale of plan and date of drawing;
(7) Location key for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided or
developed;
(8) Location of all proposed public improvements, including but not
limited to roads;
(9) Proposed lot layout and, except for applications involving a
subdivision or land development containing single-family detached
dwellings, the location of proposed buildings;
(10) Location of existing public rights-of-way and easements;
C. USGS topographical map and soil types based on USDA Soil Survey of
Chester and Delaware Counties, Pennsylvania.
A. An aerial photograph of the subdivision or land development at a scale
of not less than one inch to 400 feet. The tract containing the proposed
subdivision or land development shall be outlined so as to be clearly
identifiable on the aerial photograph.
§ 210-19 CHARTER § 210-20
C:447
B. A preliminary plan, containing at least the following information, legibly
drawn to a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch:
(1) Name and address of record owner and equitable owner, if any;
(2) Name and address of applicant if different than the record owner
and equitable owner, if any;
(3) Name and seal of the registered engineer and/or surveyor
responsible for the plan;
(4) A statement of the total acreage of the tract to be developed and
tract boundaries with bearings, courses and distances;
(5) The nature of all contemplated uses;
(6) The zoning district or districts in which the tract to be developed is
located;
(7) North arrow, scale of plan and date of drawings and all revisions
thereto;
(8) Location key for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided or
developed;
(9) Soil types based on the USDA Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware
Counties, Pennsylvania;
(10) Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet. All
elevations shall be based on USGS datum. The location of the USGS
benchmark shall be noted;
(11) Location of all proposed lot lines with bearings, courses and
distances and, except for applications involving a subdivision or
land development containing single-family detached dwellings, the
location of all proposed buildings;
(12) Location of all proposed public improvements and easements
therefor, including but not limited to roads, utilities, walkways and
bicycle paths (whether public or private and whether to be
dedicated or not) with bearings, courses and distances. All public
improvements to be dedicated to the Township shall be noted on
the plan;
(13) Location of proposed open space and land to be dedicated to a
public use or purpose;
(14) Location of existing rights-of-way and easements;
(15) Location of all existing watercourses, wetlands, ponds, lakes,
floodways and drainage swales;
(16) Location of existing man-made improvements and existing public
improvements, including but not limited to roads;
§ 210-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-20
C:448
§ 210-21. Final plan requirements. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord.
No. 296; 8-26-1985 by Ord. No. 376; 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
The final plan shall incorporate all modifications and revisions to the
preliminary plan as specified by the Township Council and shall be in
compliance with all applicable Township ordinances. The following shall be
provided with every final plan application:
(17) An identification of all owners of adjacent land.
C. Preliminary profiles along the center line of each proposed road shown
on the preliminary plan.
D. A plan for stormwater management, which may be based on
preliminary engineering studies.
E. A plan showing cuts and/or fills in excess of six feet, which may be
based on preliminary engineering studies.
F. Staged development. Where a subdivision or land development is to be
developed in stages, a plan drawn to an appropriate scale showing the
successive phases of development and a time schedule within which
applications for final approval of all parts of the development are
intended to be filed.
G. Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such plans
shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367, known as the
Professional Engineers Registration Law (P.L. 913, No. 367), (63 P.S.
§ 151), as amended.
H. If the proposed lot(s) abut on a street under the jurisdiction of the state,
a note shall be added to the preliminary plan to indicate that a highway
occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street can access a
state highway.
A. When a preliminary plan application containing all required
information has been filed with and has been approved by the Township
with or without conditions, the applicant shall be required to provide
final plans, containing at least the following information, legibly drawn
to a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch:
(1) The data, information and material required in § 210-20B(1)
through (8), inclusive, and § 210-20B(11) through (17), inclusive,
set forth in § 210-20 hereof, which shall be incorporated in the final
plans and/or application as appropriate;
(2) The boundary lines of the tract being developed, with accurate
bearings, courses and distances verified by field survey;
(3) The location and elevation of all monuments along the perimeter of
the tract being developed, certified by a registered surveyor or
registered engineer;
§ 210-20 CHARTER § 210-21
C:449
(4) The area of each lot in the proposed subdivision or land
development and all required front, side and rear yard lines;
(5) The location of all existing roads intersecting the boundaries of the
tract, including roads of record (recorded but not constructed),
with names, rights-of-way widths and cartway widths;
(6) With respect to all existing and proposed roads in the tract:
(a) The cartway and road widths.
(b) Complete curve data for all road center lines and road lines.
(c) Road center lines, curblines and road lines.
(d) If the subdivision or land development proposes a new
intersection with a state legislative route, the permit
number(s) issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. No plan which will require access onto a road
under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation shall be finally approved unless the plan
contains a notice that a highway occupancy permit is required
and has received preliminary approval from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation pursuant to Section 420 of Act
428, known as the "State Highway Law" (P.L. 1242, No. 428),
(36 P.S. § 670-420), as amended, before access to a state road
is permitted. The Department of Transportation shall, within
60 days of the date of receipt of an application for a highway
occupancy permit:
[1] Approve the permit, which shall be valid thereafter unless,
prior to commencement of construction thereunder, the
geographic, physical or other conditions under which the
permit is approved change, requiring modification or
denial of the permit, in which event, the Department shall
give notice thereof in accordance with regulations;
[2] Deny the permit;
[3] Return the application for additional information or
correction to conform to Department regulations; or
[4] Determine that no permit is required, in which case, the
department shall notify the Township and the applicant, in
writing. If the Department shall fail to take any action
within the sixty-day period, the permit will be deemed to
be issued. The plan shall be marked to indicate that access
to the state road shall be only as authorized by a highway
occupancy permit. The Department shall not be liable in
damages for any injury to persons or property arising out
of the issuance or denial of a permit or for failure to
regulate any access. Furthermore, the Township shall not
§ 210-21 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-21
C:450
be held liable for damages to persons or property arising
out of the issuance or denial of a permit by the
Department.
(e) The location of all road monuments.
(7) Names of roads within the subdivision or land development shall be
shown and approved. The names of roads shall not conflict with the
names of existing roads within the Township unless the road is a
continuation of an existing named road.
(8) With respect to subdivisions and land developments not involving
single-family detached dwellings, such details to show compliance
with applicable zoning, including but not limited to the following
where required by applicable ordinances:
(a) The location and height of all buildings and structures,
including all freestanding signs, and distances between
buildings and between buildings and streets and/or property
lines;
(b) Square footage of floor space;
(c) Land coverage percentages; and
(d) The location and square footage of all parking areas and
parking facilities and number of parking spaces in each.
(9) Road profiles for all roads, whether existing or proposed. Such
profiles shall show at least the following:
(a) Existing grades along the proposed road center line;
(b) Proposed finished center line grade of each road, with percent
of tangents and elevations at fifty-foot intervals, at grade
intersection and at either end of curb radii.
(c) Vertical curve data, including length and elevation as required
by the Township Engineer.
(d) Existing and proposed sanitary sewer mains and access holes,
storm sewer mains, inlets, access holes culverts and headwalls,
and any other underground utility crossings.
(10) Road cross-sections for each proposed road shown on the plan;
(11) An erosion and sediment control plan in compliance with applicable
County and Township ordinances and regulations and applicable
state laws, statutes, codes and regulations;
(12) A plan showing the location, size and invert elevations of existing
and proposed sanitary sewer mains and access holes, storm sewer
mains, access holes, inlets and culverts, water distribution system
and fire hydrants.
§ 210-21 CHARTER § 210-21
C:451
(13) For subdivisions and land developments not involving the
development of single-family detached dwellings:
(a) Architectural renderings of typical structures; and
(b) A landscaping plan.
(14) Plan for stormwater management in compliance with all applicable
county and Township ordinances and regulations and all applicable
state laws, statutes, codes and regulations.
(15) Grading plan showing proposed contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two feet. All elevations shall be based on USGS datum.
The location of the USGS benchmark shall be noted.
(16) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgements of deeds and signed by the applicant that
he is the record or equitable owner of the tract to be developed,
that the subdivision or land development on the final plan is the act
and deed of the applicant and that he desires the same to be
recorded.
(17) A ledger setting forth the zoning classification of classifications and
dimensional area provision thereof or applicable thereto.
(18) Applicant shall submit site investigation and percolation test report
for on-lot disposal of sewage approved by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer for Middletown Township reflecting approval for on site
disposal of sewage for each lot in the subdivision application.
(a) The subdivision plan shall show the location of all deep holes
and percolation tests.
(b) All existing on-site sewage systems shall be shown on the
subdivision plan.
(c) In the event that any lot in the subdivision is not approved for
conventional on-lot disposal of sewage, the subdivision plan
shall reflect the lots which have not qualified.
(19) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such plans
shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367, known as the
"Professional Engineers Registration Law" (P.L. 913, No. 367), (63
P.S. § 151), as amended.
B. When a preliminary plan application has not been filed with the
Township, in addition to the items set forth in Subsection A above, the
applicant shall also provide with the final plan application:
(1) Soil types based on the United States Department of Agriculture's
Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties, Pennsylvania;
(2) An aerial photograph of the subdivision or land development at a
scale of not less than one inch to 400 feet. The tract containing the
§ 210-21 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-21
C:452
proposed subdivision or land development shall be outlined so as to
be clearly identifiable on the aerial photograph.
C. Documents showing ownership and proposed maintenance of
undedicated land, common recreation areas or facilities and open
space.
§ 210-21 CHARTER § 210-21
C:453

ARTICLE V
Standards
§ 210-22. Application.
All subdivision and land development plans approved by Township Council
shall comply with the following standards. The standards outlined herein
shall be considered minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
§ 210-23. General standards.
§ 210-24. Lots.
§ 210-25. Lot access.
A. All subdivisions and land developments shall be developed in
conformance with Township ordinances and resolutions.
B. The design of subdivisions and land developments shall preserve,
insofar as possible, the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing
topsoil and trees.
C. The design of subdivisions and land developments shall take into
consideration natural and man-made features of adjacent land.
D. Land subject to hazards of life, health or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease or other causes, shall not be developed for
building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless
the plan shall show adequate safeguards against them, which shall be
approved by appropriate governmental regulatory agencies.
E. All portions of a tract being developed shall be taken upon in lots,
roads, public lands or other proposed uses so that there are no
remnants of land after development.
F. Lot lines shall, where possible, follow Township boundary lines rather
than cross them.
A. All lots within the tract of land being developed shall conform to
Chapter 275, Zoning.
B. All lots shall abut on a public road or have access to a public road.
C. Reverse frontage lots shall be required to provide separation of
residential development from major roads or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography or other natural features of the tract being
developed. All residential reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard
with a minimum of 75 feet and within such rear yard and immediately
adjacent to the road line of the major road, shall have a landscape
screen consisting of hedges, walls, trees or earth berms arranged so as
to create a continuous visual barrier.
§ 210-22 CHARTER § 210-25
C:455
A. No residential lot shall have direct access to an urban extension road or
an urban minor arterial road. Where a residential lot has access to a
state road or highway, authorization shall be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
B. Driveways.
(1) Driveways to single-family residences shall intersect roads at
angles of no less than 60°. All other driveways shall intersect roads
at right angles, where practicable and in no case less than 75°.
Where a single-family residence is situated at the intersection of
two roads, the driveway shall intersect the road with the lower
volume of average daily traffic.
(2) The width of driveways shall be in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) Driveways for multifamily residential and all nonresidential
subdivisions and land developments shall be no less than 20
feet in width, and shall be clearly defined.
(b) Driveways for single-family residential subdivisions shall not
exceed 20 feet in width at the road line.
(3) To provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, the curbs of
driveway entrances for multifamily residential developments and
all nonresidential subdivisions and land developments shall be
rounded at a minimum radius of 20 feet, and driveway entrances
for single-family residential subdivisions shall be rounded at a
minimum radius of 10 feet.
(4) The grade of all driveways shall not exceed 2% within 25 feet of the
driveway's intersection with a road. Driveway grades beyond the
25 feet shall not exceed the following:
(a) Fourteen percent in single-family subdivisions;
(b) Ten percent in multifamily subdivisions;
(c) Eight percent in nonresidential subdivisions.
(5) The center line of a driveway at the point of access to a road shall
not be located closer to another road intersection than the
following distances:
(a) For single-family residential subdivisions:
[1] One hundred feet if the intersecting road is an urban
minor arterial road.
[2] Fifty feet if the intersecting road is an urban collector or
local primary road.
§ 210-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-25
C:456
§ 210-26. Roads. [Amended 4-10-1961 by Ord. No. 125; 5-27-1982
by Ord. No. 311; 9-25-1989 by Ord. No. 454; 3-26-1990 by Ord. No.
463]
(b) For multifamily residential developments and nonresidential
subdivisions and land developments:
[1] Two hundred feet if the intersecting road is an urban
extension or urban minor arterial road.
[2] One hundred feet if the intersecting road is an urban
collector or local primary road.
A. General standards.
(1) An easement for all roads shall be conveyed to the Township.
Where a subdivision or land development abuts an existing road
which the Township does not own in fee simple, if the applicant
owns the underlying fee in the road or a portion thereof, the
applicant may offer to dedicate such easement to the Township in
the same manner as new roads in a subdivision or land
development are offered for dedication.
(2) Proposed roads shall be coordinated with existing Township roads
and county and state roads and highway plans. Roads shall be
designed to provide adequate vehicular access to all lots with
regard to topographic conditions, projected volumes of traffic and
further subdivision possibilities in the area.
(3) If a portion of a tract of land is not subdivided or developed,
suitable access and road openings for future subdivision or land
development shall be provided.
(4) In the R-4B Residence District, the main access road or roads in the
development shall be public roads, shall comply with all Township
specifications and shall be offered to the Township by deed of
dedication. Access roads to units in the development from the main
access road, driveways and parking areas in R-4B Residence
Districts shall remain private.
(5) Proposed roads which are in alignment with existing and named
roads shall bear the names of the existing roads. In no case shall
the name of proposed road duplicate or be similar to an existing
road name. All road names shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Council. Road name signs, approved by the Township
Council, shall be provided at all intersections.
(6) Where a subdivision abuts a railroad right-of-way, roads crossing
the railroad shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located to
facilitate grade separation.
§ 210-25 CHARTER § 210-26
C:457
(7) Roads shall be designed according to the volume of average daily
traffic and defined as follows:
(a) Major roads.
[1] Urban extension. Primarily designated for the movement
of heavy and mixed traffic volumes; not interrelated to
adjacent land use; access is almost always limited.
[2] Urban minor arterial. Principally designated for the
movement of heavy and mixed traffic volumes; residential
land us is not encouraged along these roadways; access to
abutting land uses should be controlled, but not limited.
[3] Urban collector. Principally designated for the collection
and/or distribution of moderate to heavy traffic volumes to
the intersecting street system; residential land use is not
encouraged along these roadways.
(b) Minor roads.
[1] Local primary. Principally designated for the collection
and/or distribution of moderate traffic volumes; all types of
adjoining land use can be considered.
[2] Local secondary. Primarily designated for serving adjacent
land use and adjoining development. All types of land use
can be served, but industrial and commercial development
are not encouraged along these roadways.
[3] Local: other.
[a] Local loop. Exclusively designated to serve adjacent
land use; predominant land use is residential.
[b] Local cul-de-sac. Exclusively designated to serve
adjacent land use; predominant land use is residential.
(8) Township Council shall, in the interest of highway safety and the
safety of the area residents and in order to promote orderly
community development, require the owner/developer of any large
commercial complex, such as shopping centers, industrial parks or
plants, housing projects, apartment complexes, major educational
or recreational facilities and other significant traffic generators, to
have prepared a traffic study by a competent traffic engineer
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to meet with
a representative of the Township Engineer's office and the
Pennsylvania Department or Highways to achieve a high level of
design from the standpoint of traffic.
B. General design standards.
§ 210-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-26
C:458
(1) Roads shall be finished graded to their full width, and improved to
the grades and dimensions shown on the plans, profiles and crosssections
submitted by the developer and approved by Township
Council.
(2) All roads shall be constructed in accordance with Township road
specifications.
(3) Roads shall be designed to conform with the natural features of the
land to reduce excessive cuts and fills.
(4) Road cuts shall be provided with side slopes no steeper than onefoot
vertical to each 1 1/2 foot horizontal, and the same shall apply
to fill slopes. Such slopes shall be suitably planted with perennial
grasses or other vegetation to prevent erosion.
(5) All unpaved portions of roads shall be planted with perennial grass
seed at the same time and with the same varieties as the front
lawns of improved lots.
(6) Hedges, fences and walls or other obstructions shall not be planted
or placed in the area between the paved cartway and the road line.
(7) Whenever standards for required road improvements are not
specified herein, the applicable standards of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO), contained in A Policy of Urban Highways and Arterial
Streets (1973 edition), as it may be amended from time to time,
shall govern and all work shall be performed in the manner
prescribed therein.
C. Road grades.
(1) The minimum grades on all roads shall be 1%.
(2) The maximum grades on all roads, all vertical curves and the grade
of all roads at the approach to an intersection shall be in
conformance with AASHTO standards.
(3) No cul-de-sac or turnaround area shall have a grade which exceeds
5%.
D. Road alignment.
(1) The minimum radius at the center line of all roads and the superelevation
for horizontal curves for all roads and the super-elevation
for horizontal curves for all roads shall be in conformance with
AASHTO standards.
(2) Proper sight distance with respect to both horizontal and vertical
alignment shall also be in conformance with AASHTO standards.
E. Intersections.
§ 210-26 CHARTER § 210-26
C:459
(1) No more than two roads shall intersect at the same point.
(2) Right-angle intersections shall be used whenever possible. The
minimum angle of intersection of the road center lines shall not be
less than 75°.
(3) Road curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of 20 feet for minor roads and 30 feet for
intersections which include a major road or a local primary
secondary road.
(4) Radius corners shall be provided on the road lines substantially
concentric with the curb radius.
(5) There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections clear
sight triangles based upon the posted speed of vehicles on the
through road and in conformance with AASHTO standards for
corner sight distance. Sight distances shall be indicated on the
plans. The Township shall be provided with easements for all clear
sight triangles. Plantings no higher than one and 1 1/2 feet shall be
permitted in the area of the clear sight triangle. No hedge, fence,
wall or other obstruction that would obscure the vision of a
motorist shall be permitted in the area of the clear sight triangle
and the grant of easement to the Township shall so provide. The
grant of easement shall further provide that the Township has the
right, but not the responsibility, to enter upon such easements to
remove obstructions or plantings that obscure the vision of
motorists.
(6) Intersections involving urban extension or urban minor arterial
roads with urban collector local primary roads shall be located not
less than 1,000 feet apart, measured from center line to center line.
Intersections involving minor roads with major or local primary
roads shall be located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from
center line to center line.
(7) Two roads intersecting from opposite sides shall intersect at their
center line or their center lines shall be offset at least 200 feet.
(8) Intersections shall be graded to permit proper drainage in
conformance with AASHTO standards.
F. Road widths.
(1) The widths of roads and the widths of cartways where there is
parking on both sides of the road, parking on one side of the road
and no parking on the road shall be as follows:
§ 210-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-26
C:460
Cartway Widths
Road
Type
Range
of
Average
Daily
Traffic
Road
Widths
(feet)
With
Parking
Both
Sides
(feet)
Parking
on 1
Side
(feet)
Without
Parking
(feet)
Design
Speed
(mph)
Urban
Extension 25,000
to
40,000
150 92 to
116
80 to
104
68 to 92 60
Minor
arterial
10,000
to
25,000
100 68 to 78 58 to 68 48 to 58 50
Collector 5,000 to
10,000
80 40 32 24 40
Local
Primary 1,500 to
5,000
70 38 to 40 30 to 32 22 to 24 30
Secondary500 to
1,500
60 36 to 40 28 to 32 20 to 24 30
Loop 500 50 32 26 to 28 20 to 24 25
Cul-desac
300 50 32 26 to 28 20 to 24 25
(2) Provisions for additional cartway widths may be required by the
Township Council in specific cases for:
(a) Public safety and convenience;
(b) Access to off-street parking in commercial and industrial areas
and in areas of high-density residential development.
(3) Where a subdivision or land development contains an existing road
with inadequate road or cartway widths, additional road and
cartway widths in conformance with the above standards shall be
required.
(4) Where a subdivision fronts on an existing road having a right-ofway
of less than the minimum width required in this chapter, a road
line shall be established. The distance of the road line from the
center line of the existing road shall be 1/2 of the width of the
required minimum road width, if possible, and the subdivider may
dedicate sufficient land to accomplish this standard.
(5) Cartways shall be measured from the face of one curb measured
perpendicularly across the road to the face of the other curb. If the
§ 210-26 CHARTER § 210-26
C:461
road has no curbs, the road shall be measured from the edge
of the flexible pavement structure on the other side of the road.
Any flexible stone base beyond the edge of the flexible pavement
structure shall not be considered when measuring the width of a
road with no curbs. Where dished gutters are used, the width of
such gutters shall not be used to calculate the width of the cartway.
G. Culs-de-sac and turnarounds.
(1) Dead-end roads are prohibited, except where designated as
temporary turnarounds because of authorized stage development
or when designed as culs-de-sac.
(2) All temporary turnarounds and culs-de-sac shall not exceed 500
feet in length and shall furnish access to not more than 10 dwelling
units in the case of residential development or 400,000 square feet
of building area in the case of commercial or industrial
development.
(3) All culs-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a paved
turnaround. The minimum radius to the pavement edge or curbline
shall be 40 feet, and the minimum radius to the road line shall be
60 feet.
(4) Temporary turnarounds.
(a) A temporary turnaround permitted at the end of a road
because of authorized staged development shall have a
minimum turning radius of 40 feet for the cartway and shall be
constructed of temporary all-weather material. Curbs and
gutters need not be constructed around the temporary
turnaround.
(b) The turnaround shall be completely within the subdivision or
land development and the use of such turnaround shall be
guaranteed to the public until such time as the road is
extended;
(c) A road ending in a temporary turnaround which has not been
extended within three years from the date of final subdivision
approval, shall be constructed to full specifications of a
permanent cul-de-sac, including installation of curbs and
gutters. Township Council may approve the continuance of a
temporary turnaround beyond the three-year period if it finds
that staged development is continuing and it is likely that the
road will be extended. The financial security furnished the
Township shall include the estimated costs of completing the
temporary turnaround to full specifications.
(d) When a road is extended and the temporary turnaround is no
longer necessary, all evidence of the turnaround shall be
eliminated.
§ 210-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-26
C:462
§ 210-27. Monuments and markers.
(5) When a subdivision or land development contemplates the
extension of an existing cul-de-sac, the cul-de-sac may be extended
provided:
(a) The developer, when extending the cul-de-sac, eliminates all
evidence of the turnaround, including its curbs, gutters and the
paved portions thereof which are beyond the cartway of the
proposed road;
(b) The developer extends the driveways of all lots abutting the
turnaround to the cartway of the proposed road, grades the
paved portion of the turnaround which has been eliminated
and plants such area with the same variety of perennial grass
seed as exists on the front lawns of the lots abutting the
turnaround; and
(c) The developer constructs curbs, gutters, driveway aprons and
inlets where necessary for proper drainage, where the cul-desac
has been eliminated.
A. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, shall be a minimum of six
inches square and at least 30 inches in length and shall contain a
copper or brass dowel scored with an "x" to mark the reference point.
B. Monuments shall be placed so that the marked point shall coincide
exactly with the intersection of lines to be marked and shall be set so
that the top of the monument is level with the finished grade of the
surrounding ground.
C. Monuments shall be set for all roads on the road lines at the following
locations:
(1) At least one monument at each intersection.
(2) At changes in direction of road lines, excluding curb area at
intersections.
(3) An intermediate monument wherever topographical or other
conditions make it impossible to sight between two otherwise
required monuments.
(4) At each other places along the road line as the Township Engineer
deems necessary to readily define the road.
D. Monuments shall also be set along the perimeter of the tract being
developed, sufficient to establish the boundaries of such tract.
E. Where public sanitary sewers are installed and capped, a monument
shall be set at the end of each capped lateral.
§ 210-26 CHARTER § 210-27
C:463
§ 210-28. Curbs, dished gutters, curbless road and sidewalks.
§ 210-29. Streetlights.
Streetlights shall be provided at the intersection of roads with roads and
driveways leading from land developments, at the intersection of roads with
urban extension and urban minor arterial roads, and at such intersections
as Township Council shall deem necessary in the interest of public safety.
Streetlights shall be of such intensity as approved by Township Council.
§ 210-30. Street name signs, street signs and traffic control devices.
F. The four major corners of each lot appearing on the subdivision plan
shall be marked with iron pins, not less than 2 1/2 feet in length,
embedded or driven to a depth of not less than two feet. Nothing shall
prevent the use of granite or some other suitable or appropriate
marker.
A. Curbs, dished gutters and curbless roads.
(1) Curbs or dished gutters shall be provided on all new roads in
subdivisions. Curbless roads shall be permitted in subdivisions if
the applicant complies with Township specifications pertaining to
curbless roads.
(2) Curbs shall be provided on all new roads and parking compounds in
land developments.
(3) Curbs and dished gutters shall be constructed in accordance with
Township specifications.
B. Pedestrian walkways.
(1) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided along both sides of new
roads and along parking compounds in all land developments,
except subdivisions involving single-family dwellings.
(2) Pedestrian walkways shall be required in any subdivision where it
is desirable to continue sidewalks that are existing in adjacent
developments, or to provide access to community facilities such as
schools, shopping areas or recreation areas, or to ensure the safety
of pedestrians in unusual conditions involving vehicular traffic.
(3) All pedestrian walkways shall conform to specifications for Class A
concrete, as specified by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, with a minimum compressive strength of 3,500
pounds per square inch after 28 days.
(4) Pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of four feet wide.
(5) Pedestrian walkways shall have a minimum thickness of four inches
where used solely for pedestrian traffic and a minimum thickness of
six inches at all driveways.
§ 210-27 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-30
C:464
§ 210-31. Sanitary sewers.
§ 210-32. Water supply. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
A. Street signs, identifying the names of intersecting roads, shall be
erected at the intersection of all roads.
B. Street signs and traffic control devices shall be erected in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, as amended, and all
applicable PennDOT standards.
A. Public sanitary sewers shall be required in all subdivisions or land
developments where public sanitary sewer facilities are available to the
site, either in the road or in easements accessible to the site. If public
sanitary sewers are not available to the site, but will become available
within a reasonable time, as defined below, such sewers, together with
all necessary laterals extending from the main sewer line to a point
inside the lot, five feet from the road line, shall be installed and capped.
In such event, the owner shall also install on-site sewage disposal
facilities in approved locations. All sanitary sewers as mentioned herein
shall be installed in accordance with the latest specifications of the
Middletown Township, Delaware County, Sewer Authority and shall be
tested and pass such tests as may be required by said Sewer Authority.
"Reasonable time," for purposes of this subsection, shall mean the
following: where the Sewer Authority has designed a plan for the
installation of public sanitary sewers for a part or parts of Middletown
Township, public sanitary sewers in such part or parts of Middletown
Township shall be deemed to be available within a reasonable time.
Where a plan for the installation of public sanitary sewers has not been
designed by the Sewer Authority for a part or parts of Middletown
Township, if it is determined by the Sewer Authority that public sanitary
sewers will be designed and installed within a period of 10 years in such
part of parts of Middletown Township, then public sanitary sewers shall
be deemed to be available within a reasonable time.
B. Where connection to a public sanitary sewer is not required, a separate
on-site sewage disposal facility shall be provided for each lot in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection and applicable Township ordinances and
resolutions.
A. Public water shall be required in subdivisions and land developments in
accordance with the following:
(1) Single-family residential developments:
(a) Public water shall be required in all single-family residential
developments containing lots less than 40,000 square feet
unless the developer can demonstrate that public water is not
required by virtue of the provisions set forth in Subsection
A(1)(c) below. Notwithstanding the provisions in Subsection
§ 210-30 CHARTER § 210-32
C:465
A(1)(c) below, public water shall be required where public
water is made available to the site by the Township, at the
Township's sole discretion and expense.
(b) Public water shall also be required in all single-family
residential developments containing lots of 40,000 square feet
or more where:
[1] Public water is available to the site; or
[2] The development contains from five to nine dwelling units
and the distance from the development to the nearest
accessible public water line is 1/10 of a mile; or
[3] The development contains 10 to 19 dwelling units and the
distance from the development to the nearest accessible
public water line 1/5 of a mile; or
[4] The development contains from 20 to 29 dwelling units
and the distance from the development to the nearest
accessible public water line is 2/5 of a mile; or
[5] The development contains from 30 to 39 dwelling units
and the distance from the development to the nearest
accessible public water line is 3/5 of a mile; or
[6] The development contains from 40 to 74 dwelling units
and the distance from the development to the nearest
public water line is 4/5 of a mile; or
[7] The development contains 75 or more dwelling units and
the distance from the development to the nearest
accessible public water line in one mile; or
[8] The nearest accessible public water line is farther than the
distances set forth in Subsection A(1)(b)[2] through [7]
hereof and the Township, at its sole discretion, constructs
or has constructed at Township expense the public water
line to the points referenced in Subsection A(1)(b)[2]
through [7] above.
(c) Public water shall not be required in any single-family
residential development where it can be demonstrated by the
developer that an on-site water system can supply an adequate
and safe supply of water to the residential development in
conformance with all regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection, that the cost of installing the on-site
water system will be less expensive than providing public
water such that there will be an appreciable cost saving to
future purchasers of lots in the residential development and
that the public safety in terms of fire protection will not be
§ 210-32 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-32
C:466
§ 210-33. Stormwater management systems.
adversely affected by the installation of an on-site water
system.
(2) Public water shall be required in all other subdivisions and land
developments. Wherever a public or community water system is
provided, applicants shall present evidence to the Township
Council that the subdivision or land development is to be supplied
by a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative association
of lot owners or by a municipal authority or utility. A copy of a
certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable
evidence.
B. The design and installation of the public water distribution system shall
be subject to the approval of the appropriate operating authority of the
water system.
C. Where public water is not required, each lot in a subdivision shall be
provided with an individual water supply system in accordance with all
applicable standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. Common wells supplying water to more than one lot shall be
prohibited.
D. Fire hydrants shall be provided as an integral part of any public system.
Hydrants shall be located in such a manner as to provide complete
accessibility and to minimize the possibility of damage from vehicles of
injury to pedestrians. Fire hydrants shall be installed under the
direction of the Township Fire Marshal, who shall fix the location of
such hydrants. In fixing the locations of fire hydrants, the Township Fire
Marshal shall be guided by the standards established by the
Pennsylvania Insurance Service Organization.
A. Purpose. A stormwater management system shall be provided in order
to:
(1) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(2) Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the lines of roads;
(3) Intercept stormwater runoff along roads at intervals related to the
extent and grade of the area drained;
(4) Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal and
structures;
(5) Remove surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, lead
water from springs and avoid the use cross-gutters at road
intersections and elsewhere.
§ 210-32 CHARTER § 210-33
C:467
(6) Ensure that the peak discharge from the development site is no
greater than the peak discharge prior to development.
B. A site drainage plan for the proposed subdivision or land development
tract which illustrates the following information shall be prepared for
review.
(1) Mapping of the watershed area in which proposed subdivision or
land development is located;
(2) Calculations of runoff for all points of runoff concentrations;
(3) Complete drainage systems for the subdivision or land
development including storage facilities where required. All
existing drainage features which are to be incorporated in the
design shall be also so identified;
(4) Identification of all soil classifications in the watershed area;
(5) Letter of approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation when drainage structures are to be located on state
highway rights-of-way;
(6) If the subdivision or land development is to be developed in stages,
a general drainage plan for the entire subdivision or land
development shall be presented with the first stage, and
appropriate development stages for the drainage system shall be
indicated.
C. Runoff computations.
(1) All storm sewer design shall be based on the rational formula Q =
CiA, where:
Q = Rate of flow in cubic feet per second
C = Runoff coefficient
i = Intensity of rainfall in inches per hour
A = Watershed area in acres
(2) In setting the value of the runoff coefficient "C", consideration shall
be given to the physical features of the drainage basin and the best
available data on the future density of development of the drainage
basin. The value chosen should conform to the percentage of runoff
versus total rainfall as determined by the soil cover complex
method.
(3) The intensity of the storm shall be based on a one-hundred-year
frequency storm with the inlet time of concentration equal to the
storm duration for any given point. The inlet time of concentration
may be determined by any standard engineering method.
§ 210-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-33
C:468
(4) The Rainfall-Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curve for Philadelphia
presented in Technical Paper No. 25, prepared by U.S. Department
of Commerce Weather Bureau, shall be used.
D. Pipeline design. All storm sewer pipelines shall be reinforced concrete
pipe and shall be designed by either of the following two methods, both
of which shall be based on the Manning equation, shall utilize the "n"
factor of 0.015, and require a minimum allowable pipe size of 15 inches:
(1) Pipeline submerged.
(a) This method is based on the assumption that when the storm
sewer system is under maximum load, the hydraulic gradient
will be at or above the crown of the pipe and that flow in the
lines will be controlled by head differentials between
structures or other locations where the system is open to the
ground surface, such as inlets or outlets, manholes and stream
inlets and outlets. The head of water above the crown of any
pipe can range from zero feet to a point which will not cause
surface flooding.
(b) The slope of the hydraulic gradient in any section of storm
sewer between openings to the surface shall be calculated on
the assumption that the pipe is flowing full at a constant
velocity and at the required capacity.
(c) The elevation of the hydraulic gradient at any point in the pipe
shall be no lower than the crown of the pipe and no higher than
the surface of the ground.
(d) The elevation of the hydraulic gradient at any point where the
system opens to the surface, such as an inlet or manhole, shall
be three feet below the surface of the ground.
(e) At all structures such as manholes, inlets and culverts where
the pipe size does not change, the elevation of the hydraulic
gradient shall be dropped 0.2 foot to allow for losses therein.
Where the inlet and outlet pipe sizes are not the same, the
elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be dropped by an
amount based on the following formula:
H = 0.2 foot + 0.8 (D1 – D2)
D1 = Diameter of inlet pipe
D2 = Diameter of outlet pipe
If D1 is larger than D2
head loss
= 0.2 foot
(f) The minimum slope of any pipe shall be such that a minimum
velocity of 2.5 fps shall be maintained when the pipe is flowing
1/4 full.
§ 210-33 CHARTER § 210-33
C:469
(2) Pipeline flowing full.
(a) This method is based on the assumption that the hydraulic
gradient will match the inside top of the pipe when the system
is under maximum hydraulic load.
(b) For this method, head losses through manholes, inlets and
culverts shall be ignored.
(c) The minimum slope of any pipe shall be such that a minimum
velocity of 2.5 fps shall be maintained when the pipe is flowing
1/4 full.
(d) When the pipe sizes change, the inside tops of the pipes shall
be matched.
E. Profile requirements. Continuous profiles for each reach of pipe shall be
plotted along with the hydraulic information pertinent to each reach
within the system. This information shall include the pipe size and type,
the "n" factor, slope of the pipe, the design capacity, and the velocity at
the design capacity.
F. Endwalls. Standard PennDOT endwalls shall be installed on all influent
and effluent pipes.
G. Inlets.
(1) Inlets conforming to PennDOT Standards shall be utilized in all
applications. The type to be used shall depend on the particular
application.
(2) Sufficient inlets shall be located and constructed so as to collect all
of the flow in the contributory drainage area. In roadways the inlets
shall be spaced to allow a maximum gutter flow 4.0 cfs. Calculation
of inlet capacities shall be in accordance with PennDOT guidelines.
(3) The gutter of all inlets shall be set not less than two inches, nor
more than four inches, below the gutter grade. The surface of the
paving adjacent to the inlets shall be constructed to blend into the
lowered gutter grade at the inlet in such a manner that sudden
dropoff or dip at the inlet will not be created.
(4) Where surface water is collected from two directions at one road
corner, inlets shall be placed at, or near, the tangent points of both
ends of the radius. The use of an inlet in the radius shall not be
allowed.
H. Manholes. Manholes shall be located at intervals of approximately 400
feet where pipe sizes of 24 inches or less are used, and 600 feet apart
for larger sizes. Inlets should be substituted for manholes where they
will serve a useful purpose. Manholes or inlets shall be placed at all
changes of direction.
§ 210-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-33
C:470
I. Open channel design. Open channel design shall be based on the
following hydraulic considerations:
(1) Manning's equations
(a) n values.
n = 0.015 — best concrete lined ditch
n = 0.025 — best unlined ditch
n = 0.03 to 0.15 — fair to poor natural streams and
watercourses.
(b) Allowable velocities.
Excavation Material Allowable Velocity
Fine sand and firm loam 2.50 to 3.5 fps
Stiff clay and hardpan 3.75 to 6.0 fps
Concrete-lined ditch 15 fps
(2) Ample freeboard shall be provided on all channels.
(3) The channel shall be designed to conform, wherever possible, to
the adjacent ground conditions. This means that it should not be
projecting excessively above the surrounding ground or placed
excessively below the surrounding ground.
(4) Continuous profiles for each reach of open channel shall be plotted
along with the adjacent average ground and the hydraulic
information pertinent to each reach within the system. This
information shall include the type of channel lining, the "n" factor,
the width of the channel bottom, the side slopes, the water depth,
the design capacity and the velocity at the design capacity.
(5) Open channels shall have a maximum side slope of three to one and
shall have adequate slope protection.
(6) No open watercourses shall be permitted within the road lines of
any road.
J. Bridges and culverts. Single opening culverts are desirable. The design
of culverts shall be such as to minimize the probability of debris
accumulation. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current
PennDOT standards to support expected loads and carry expected
flows. They shall be constructed for the full width of the road.
K. Permit requirements. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Bureau of Water Quality Management, Division of Dams and
Encroachments requires a permit for construction or changes in a
watercourse which drains an area of more than 1/2 square mile. No
open watercourses shall be permitted within the road lines of any road.
§ 210-33 CHARTER § 210-33
C:471
L. Location of sewers. Wherever practicable, storm sewers shall be
located behind the curb and within the road lines of the road. They shall
be protected by a cover of at least 18 inches.
M. Change in direction. In lieu of manholes or inlets, special concrete pipe
sections with a minimum radii of 10 times the inside pipe diameter (10 x
ID) may be used where changes are made in direction.
N. Stormwater roof drains. Stormwater roof drains and pipes immediately
adjacent to a sidewalk shall not discharge water over a sidewalk but
shall extend under the sidewalk to the gutter. Where accessible, the
roof drain shall be connected with the storm drainage system of the
Township.
O. Detention facilities.
(1) Storage requirements.
(a) Whenever an increase in runoff will occur as the result of
development, the developer will be required to provide
permanent stormwater management facilities to attain zero
increase during peak runoffs. The storage requirements of all
stormwater management facilities shall be computed in
accordance with the soil cover complex method and must be
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and, when
required, to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or the United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service.
(b) In addition to the permanent storage facilities, the developer
shall provide adequate erosion and sedimentation control
measures in accordance with the Pennsylvania Clean Stream
Act, as amended, and applicable Township ordinances.
(c) All storage computations shall be based on a one-hundred-year
frequency, twenty-four-hour duration storm. The storage
required may be based on "after" construction flows rather
than "during" provided that the development is property
staged or other measures are taken to retard the higher
"during" construction flows. An additional storage allowance of
0.06 acre-inches must be provided to compensate for sediment
accumulation.
(2) Discharge piping.
(a) Discharge piping shall be reinforced concrete pipe and shall be
sized to maximize use and efficiency of the storage provided.
Specifically, the most critical duration one-hundred-year storm
should fill the storage facility to the spillway level without
utilizing the spillway. In no case shall the spillway be utilized in
the design routing of one-hundred-year storms.
§ 210-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-33
C:472
(b) The sizing of the discharge piping will therefore require
detailed analysis rather than a random sizing correlating to a
"before" construction standard frequency storm, such as a tenyear
storm. The design engineer's submittal to the Township
must include calculations on the methodology of sizing the
piping. The capacity of all discharge piping shall be based on
"inlet control" or where conditions warrant "outlet control."
PennDOT charts may be utilized for this purpose.
(c) Once the discharge piping is sized, a storage versus elevation
versus discharge curve should be prepared and included with
the submittal, along with a routing of the most critical onehundred-
year storm. Both ends of the discharge piping shall be
provided with headwalls.
(d) Erosion protection shall be provided in the form of rip-rap or
other means in accordance with acceptable engineering
standards.
(e) Anti-seep collars shall be provided for all discharge pipes. The
collars shall be a minimum of six inches thick and shall extend
a minimum of two feet in all directions from the outside walls
of the pipe.
(f) A concrete-lined emergency spillway shall be provided for all
storage facilities. Although the storage facility is designed so
that the spillway will not be used in a one-hundred-year storm,
the possibility exists whereby the outlet pipe could be totally
blocked during a storm. For this reason, it is required that the
spillway be sized to accommodate the peak flow rate into the
pond when the pond would be completely full during a onehundred-
year storm assuming a totally blocked discharge pipe.
[1] The spillway capacity should be calculated by the
following formula:
Q = 3.087 x D3 x L
Where:
Q = Capacity in cubic feet per second
D = Depth of spillway in feet
L = Length of spillway in feet
[2] The minimum depth of spillway shall be two feet.
(3) Storage area.
(a) Side slopes in storage areas shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical. Every effort should be made to
"blend" the storage area into the natural topography of its
surroundings.
§ 210-33 CHARTER § 210-33
C:473
(b) The bed of the storage area shall slope towards the discharge
pipe from all directions at a minimum slope of 1%.
(c) Prior to grading in the storage area, the topsoil shall be
stripped and stockpiled. Upon the completion of grading, the
topsoil shall be redistributed over the storage area (minimum
six-inch thick) and should then be seeded.
(d) All fill material to be utilized in embankment areas shall be
selected from the impervious materials available at the site and
shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% of the materials'
maximum dry density as determined by a standard protector
test. Where necessary, embankment fill materials shall be
keyed into virgin soil. Where embankment berms are used, a
minimum ten-foot-wide flat area shall be provided at the top of
the berm.
(e) A fence four feet in height with a self-closing gate surrounding
the retention basin shall be required in the interest of public
safety.
(f) All storage areas must be located outside of the one-hundredyear
floodplain as indicated on the Township floodplain
mapping.
(g) Underground storage beds will be given consideration in lieu
of conventional storage facilities. Specifications for such
storage beds shall be submitted to the Township shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer for review. The design for
such storage beds shall be such that the stormwater
management requirements of this chapter are satisfied.
P. Spring heads. All spring heads uncovered during construction shall be
treated as if the water flowing therefrom were stormwater except
where it can be demonstrated that the water flowing from such source
can be satisfactorily induced back into the ground as if the spring had
never been uncovered. In the event there is piping of other facilities to
conduct spring water from whatever source to the nearest dedicated
portion of the stormwater management system, or other facilities pass
in favor of the property owners served thereby, giving said property
owners the right to construct, maintain, operate, repair, replace,
reconstruct and alter such piping and facilities. Such easement shall
name the Township as a third-party beneficiary with the right, but not
the obligation, to enter upon the easement to repair, alter or replace
such piping or other facilities in the event the property owners
benefited thereby fail to do so. The Township shall have the further
right to impose the cost of repairing, altering or replacing such piping
or other facilities upon the property owner or owners responsible
therefor, but who failed to do so.
§ 210-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-34
C:474
§ 210-34. Erosion and sediment control.
Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a
minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the Delaware County
Soil and Water Conservation District, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and applicable Township ordinances.
§ 210-35. Underground utilities.
§ 210-36. Utility and drainage easements.
A. All electric and telephone utility lines shall be installed underground in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
regulations and orders of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
In the event underground installation of utilities is not practical or not
required by law, regulation or order, installation of electric, telephone
and cable television utilities shall be, when possible, along the rear
portion of the lots.
B. Trenches through utility easements shall be occupied, whenever
practical, jointly by electric, gas, water, sewer, telephone and cable
television lines.
C. A plan for providing utility service to the proposed subdivision or land
development shall be prepared by the developer in cooperation with
appropriate utility companies and governmental agencies.
A. When easements are required for utilities and/or drainage, the
following minimum widths shall be required for such easements:
(1) When the easement is contiguous to a road, a minimum easement
width of 10 feet shall be required;
(2) In all other cases, a minimum width of 20 feet shall be required.
When the easement is along a rear or side lot line, the easement
shall be to the fullest extent possible centered on such lot line;
(3) Township Council may require easements with widths of greater
than 20 feet when greater widths are necessary for utility
installation or servicing.
B. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way, channel, or stream, a drainage easement may be
required which conforms substantially with the line of such
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream and of such width as will
be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage. Such
easement shall give the Township the right but not the responsibility to
enter upon the easement for the purpose of widening, deepening,
relocating, improving, or protecting such drainage facilities or for the
purpose of installing a stormwater sewer. Such easement shall also
comply with floodplain requirements contained in applicable Township
ordinances.
§ 210-34 CHARTER § 210-36
C:475
§ 210-37. Gas, petroleum and petroleum product pipelines.
§ 210-38. Topography and grading.
C. Nothing permanent shall be constructed, placed, planted or set within
the area of a drainage or utility easement. Such areas shall be kept as
lawn.
D. Metes and bounds shall be provided and iron pins shall be installed so
that the location of all utility and drainage easements may be accurately
determined.
A. The minimum distance from a natural gas line to a dwelling unit shall be
75 feet or as may be required by the applicable transmission or
distributing company, or as may be required by the applicable
regulations issued by the Department of Transportation under the
Natural Gas Pipe Line Safety Act of 1968, as amended, whichever is
greater.
B. When any petroleum or petroleum products transmission line traverses
a subdivision or land development, the developer shall confer with the
applicable transmission or distribution company to determine the
minimum distance which shall be required between each proposed
dwelling unit and the petroleum or petroleum products transmission
lines. In no case shall there be a distance of less than 75 feet between a
dwelling unit and a petroleum or petroleum products transmission line.
C. No petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas transmission line
shall be constructed in a subdivision or land development on less than a
fifty-foot easement. Such lines shall be installed in the center of the
easement and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws
and regulations.
A. The natural terrain of the proposed subdivision or land development
shall be retained wherever possible. Cuts and/or fills should be kept to
the minimum necessary to achieve acceptable road grades, parking
areas, or building sites where no feasible alternative exists or where
they will be used to enhance the site, such as berms or swales which
add visual interest or perform a function such as drainage or screening.
B. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than two
horizontal to one vertical except under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of two
horizontal to one vertical and passing through any portion of the
cut face will be entirely inside of the property lines of the property
in which the excavation was made; or
(2) A concrete or stone masonry wall is provided which adequately
supports the face of the excavation.
§ 210-36 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-38
C:476
§ 210-39. Natural features preservation and tree planting.
C. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope
than two horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in damage to property, driveway or buildings; or
(2) A concrete or stone masonry wall is provided which adequately
supports the face of the excavation.
D. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of two feet from
property lines or road lines in order to permit the normal rounding of
the edge without encroaching on the abutting property.
A. General standards. The design and development of all subdivisions and
land developments shall preserve, whenever possible, natural features
such as the natural terrain of the site, woodland areas, large trees,
natural watercourses and bodies of water, wetlands, rock outcroppings
and scenic views.
B. Floodplain protection. Any areas located in a designated floodplain
shall be subject to all the requirements pertaining thereto in applicable
Township ordinances.
C. Tree preservation and planting.
(1) Trees, with a caliper of 10 inches or more, shall not be removed
unless they are located within the proposed cartway, or the area of
a proposed sidewalk, within 15 feet of the foundation area of a new
building, within a utility easement, within a proposed parking area,
or within an area where regrading is necessary to achieve
acceptable site development. Where possible, existing open areas
should be utilized for such facilities to minimize necessary
disturbance of existing wooded areas. Areas in which trees are
retained shall remain undisturbed and at the original grade level
whenever possible.
(2) Trees, with a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches, shall be planted
along road lines where suitable trees do not exist. Such trees shall
be planted not less than 50 feet apart, or an equivalent number
shall be planted in an informal arrangement acceptable to the
Township.
(3) Trees shall not be planted within three feet of road lines or
pedestrian walkways. Trees may be planted between the curb of
the road and pedestrian walkways if there is a minimum distance of
six feet between the curb and walkway.
(4) Trees shall not be planted within 30 feet of the intersection of road
lines and within 15 feet of a driveway entrance.
§ 210-38 CHARTER § 210-39
C:477
§ 210-40. Open space. [Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 615
Open space shall be in accordance with § 210-41, Recreational facilities and
open space.
§ 210-41. Recreational facilities and open space. [Amended
8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 615
(5) Road trees and other required plants shall be of nursery stock
grown under climatic conditions comparable to those of
Middletown Township. They shall be of symmetrical growth, free of
insects, pests and disease, suitable for road use and durable under
the maintenance contemplated.
(6) For all subdivisions or land developments not involving singlefamily
detached dwellings, a landscape plan prepared by a
registered landscape architect shall be submitted. The plan shall
show the plant cover which exists, and on the same or separate
sheet, that which will exist when the landscaping is completed,
including trees, shrubs, and ground cover. A landscape plan shall
be prepared and submitted prior to approval of a building permit.
In the case of staged development or developments of individual
parcels by separate owners, the landscape plan may be submitted
in stages coinciding with the application for final plan approval for
each stage.
D. Topsoil protection. Topsoil shall not be removed from the development
site or used as fill. Topsoil shall be removed from the areas of
construction and stored separately. The topsoil shall be stabilized to
minimize erosion during storage. Upon completion of construction, the
topsoil shall be uniformly redistributed on the site.
A. All subdivision and/or land development applications shall provide for
active and passive recreation areas as provided herein.
B. The Township Council may require the public dedication of land
suitable for the use intended; and, upon agreement with the applicant
or developer, the construction of recreational facilities, the payment of
fees in lieu thereof, the private reservation of land, or a combination, for
park or recreation purposes as a condition precedent to final plan
approval, in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Each application for subdivision and/or land development shall set
aside and clearly identify land to be used for park and recreation
purposes, in an amount which shall be equal to 2,178 square feet
(0.05 acres) for each lot proposed to be improved for a residential
dwelling unit, and 1,089 square feet (0.025 acres) for each acre of
land proposed for use other than for a residential dwelling unit
(nonresidential use).
§ 210-39 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-41
C:478
(2) Land dedicated to the Township under this section shall be by fee
simple deed of special warranty. At the time of dedication, title to
said land shall be good and marketable, free and clear of all liens
and encumbrances. The applicant or developer shall supply a title
report evidencing the foregoing to the Township, prior to final
approval of the subdivision and/or land development plan. The deed
of dedication shall be delivered to the Township at the time of final
subdivision and/or land development approval and recorded at the
time of recording of the final plan. All costs associated with said
dedication shall be borne by the applicant or developer.
(3) In the event that the Township does not accept the proposed land
for dedication, the applicant or developer shall provide for other
means of ownership of the proposed land by an entity approved by
the Township. In such an event, the Township may still require
limited rights of entry onto the proposed land for maintenance and
similar purposes, should the owner(s) of said land fail to do so, and
such failure shall, in the opinion of the Township, pose a threat to
the health, safety and welfare of the Township or its residents.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any subdivision and/or
land development plan application:
(1) Approved and developed pursuant to the planned residential
development provisions of Article XI of Chapter 275, Zoning.
(2) Approved and developed pursuant to the cluster subdivision option
provisions of Chapter 275, Zoning, in § 275-22 (R-1 District) and
§ 275-27 (R-2 District).
(3) Approved and developed pursuant to the open space requirements
for townhouses and/or apartments in the R-4 or R-5 Districts.
(4) That is pending, whether preliminary or final, at the time of
enactment of this chapter.
D. If the land proposed to be dedicated to the Township is not suitable for
the use intended because of its size, shape, location, or features
pursuant to Subsection F of this section, or if park or recreational lands
are already available and accessible to the proposed development, or
the Township and the applicant or developer agree otherwise, the
applicant or developer:
(1) May provide sufficient and suitable land for dedication within the
Township, but which is not part of the proposed development; or
(2) Make payment of a fee in lieu of the public dedication of land as set
forth in this section.
E. The amount of said fee in lieu of dedication shall be determined from
time to time by resolution of the Township Council, in accordance with
the Recreation and Open Space Plan, dated November 15, 2000,
§ 210-41 CHARTER § 210-41
C:479
adopted March 26, 2001, as may be amended or updated from time to
time. Said fee shall be payable to the Township prior to recording of the
final plan, and as condition precedent to the issuance of any building
permit.
(1) A combination of dedicated land and fee-in-lieu payment thereof
shall be made as set forth in this section by any applicant or
developer to the Township if it is determined that suitable park or
recreational land is not available for dedication in a particular
subdivision and/or land development, or if the Township and the
applicant or developer shall agree otherwise; in such cases, the feein-
lieu shall be applied to the number of lots or units for which no
land is dedicated. Any such fee shall be payable to the Township
prior to recording of the final plan and shall be included in the
developer's agreement between the applicant or developer and the
Township as a condition precedent to the issuance of any building
permits.
(2) The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be
paid in lieu of thereof shall bear a reasonable relationship to the
use of the park and recreational facilities by future inhabitants of
the subdivision and/or land development. The land dedicated or
fees paid or the combination thereof shall be used by the Township
only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities
reasonably accessible to the subdivision and/or land development.
F. Any fee collected under this section shall be used by the Township for
acquisition and improvement of park or recreational sites and land in
accordance with the Middletown Township Recreation and Open Space
Plan, dated November 15, 2000, adopted March 26, 2001, as may be
amended or updated from time to time, and shall, upon payment to the
Township, be deposited in an interest-bearing account, which account
shall identify the specific park or recreation facilities for which the fee
was received. Interest earned on such account shall become funds of
the account.
G. The determination of the suitability of land which is acceptable for
dedication, or use for park or recreational purposes, shall include its
overall size, shape, location and natural features and shall also be based
on the following additional criteria;
(1) The dedicated land must be easily accessible to all inhabitants of
the development by virtue of at least one side of each parcel of
dedicated land abutting an existing or proposed public street for a
minimum distance of 50 feet.
(2) The park or recreational land shall be located so that it serves all
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or land development.
(3) The shape of the land shall be suitable to accommodate those park
or recreational activities appropriate to the location and needs of
the inhabitants of the development.
§ 210-41 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-41
C:480
(4) Any parcel of park or recreation land to be dedicated to the
Township shall be comprised of at least one acre in size and no less
than 50 feet in width.
(5) The parcels to be dedicated, comprising the intended park or
recreational land shall be contiguous.
(6) Soils and drainage shall be suitable for the intended park or
recreational uses, and shall conform to all Township ordinances.
(7) Such land, taken in the aggregate, shall have an average slope of
less than 8%, and shall have no more than 20% of the land
contained within the boundaries of a floodplain, or steep slope area
greater than 15%, or a combination of floodplain and steep slope.
(8) Vehicular parking shall be in accordance with Article XXXI of the
Middletown Township Zoning Ordinance, and shall be designed,
constructed and maintained such that any site can be adequately
served and accessed.
(9) Provisions shall be made for trails, footpaths, and other pedestrian
circulation systems and accessways.
(10) Such land shall be consistent with the findings and
recommendations set forth in the Middletown Township Recreation
and Open Space Plan, dated November 15, 2000, adopted March
26, 2001, as may be amended or updated from time to time.
H. In the event any applicant or developer of land identified in the
Middletown Township Recreation and Open Space Plan, dated
November 15, 2000, adopted March 26, 2001, as may be amended or
updated from time to time, proposes to dedicate land and/or construct
recreational facilities, as provided in this section, the applicant or
developer shall submit a recreational study prepared by a certified
planner or recreational planner to verify:
(1) Compliance with the provisions of Subsection G(1) to (10).
(2) The proposed recreational facilities and/or improvements are not
duplicative of those park and/or recreational facilities already
available to the inhabitants of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development.
(3) The proposed recreational facilities and/or improvements will be
properly owned, managed and maintained by a responsible entity
such as a homeowners' association, the governing documents for
which shall be acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
(4) The proposed park and/or recreational area shall be subject to a
declaration of covenants, easements, and restrictions which shall
be acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
§ 210-41 CHARTER § 210-41
C:481
§ 210-42. Inspections. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 296]
(5) The proposed park or recreational area shall be suitably
landscaped as depicted on a landscape plan which shall be
submitted as part of the applicant or developer's subdivision and/or
land development plan and which shall be reviewed by the
Township as part of the applicant or developer's final plan.
I. If the recreation study and related documents are not approved by the
Township, then the Township Council shall require the payment of a fee
in lieu of the dedication of land and/or the construction of recreational
facilities, as set forth in this section.
A. The Township shall have the right to inspect erosion and sediment
control facilities and all roads, curbs, stormwater management facilities
and other public improvements during the course of construction in all
subdivisions and land developments.
B. The Township shall also have the right to make a final inspection of all
public improvements prior to acceptance of such improvements by the
Township.
C. In the event that any work on a public improvement is not constructed
in accordance with Township ordinances, resolutions or specifications
and the approved final plan or is not performed in a good and
workmanlike manner, the Township Engineer shall have the right to
require the developer, at his own expense, to correct all faulty
construction. The Township shall also have the right to refuse to accept
any public improvement offered for dedication which is not constructed
in accordance with Township ordinances, resolutions or specifications
and the approved final plan or is not performed in a good and
workmanlike manner.
D. When work in public improvements is covered prior to the Township
having an opportunity to inspect, the developer shall uncover the work
at his own expense so that the Township Engineer can make the
inspection.
§ 210-41 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-42
C:482
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 210-43. Modifications. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
§ 210-44. Reconsideration.
Any applicant aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
Township Council may request to appear before the Township Council,
present additional relevant information and request reconsideration of the
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare.
B. One or more provisions of this chapter may be modified by the
Township Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission,
if the literal enforcement of the provisions will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
(1) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the preliminary or final plan
application for subdivision and/or land development. The request
shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions
of this chapter involved and the minimum modification necessary.
(2) The Township shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
(3) The Township Council may authorize a waiver of these regulations.
In granting any modification, the Township Council shall prescribe
any conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public
interest. In making its findings, the Township Council shall take
into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing
use of land in the vicinity, the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions and/or fire and police protection
and other utilities and services in the vicinity. No modification shall
be granted unless the Township Council finds that:
(a) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of
this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use
of the land.
(b) The modification is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant.
(c) The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in
which said property is situated.
§ 210-43 CHARTER § 210-44
C:483
Township Council's original findings, decision or reconsideration. The
applicant's request shall be in writing and made within 30 days of
notification of the Township Council's decision. The applicant's request for
reconsideration shall not extend the time for appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 210-45. Records.
§ 210-46. Fees.
Application fees for major and minor subdivisions and land developments
shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as established by the Township
Council.
§ 210-47. Requirements of construction codes and Zoning
Ordinance.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to permit any waiver of
any of the requirements of the Middletown Township Building, Electrical,
Plumbing, Fire and Zoning Codes, as each may have been amended or will
from time to time be amended.86
§ 210-48. Amendments.
Township Council may, from time to time, revise, modify, and amend this
chapter by appropriate action taken at a scheduled public meeting, all in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Planning Code.
§ 210-49. Remedies. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 460]
A. The Township shall keep a record of its findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision and land development
plans filed with it for review.
B. All such records shall be public records.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transformer
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(2) The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
86.Editor's Note: See Chs. 89, Construction Codes, and 275, Zoning.
§ 210-44 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-49
C:484
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of any ordinance provisions. This authority to
deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
B. Jurisdiction. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under Subsection C.
C. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of
a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge,
§ 210-49 CHARTER § 210-49
C:485
§ 210-50. Appeals.
The decision of Township Council with respect to the approval or
disapproval of plans may be appealed directly to court as provided for in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 210-51. Saved from amendment.
Chapter VII, Subdivision Regulations, Article 1, Section 105.D.2.d.(4), which
is Ordinance No. 62, approved January 31, 1961, as amended by Ordinance
No. 227, approved November 20, 1978, is not amended by anything stated
herein and said section shall remain in full force and effect.87
and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
87.Editor's Note: This section refers to original ordinance numbering.
§ 210-49 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-51
C:486
ARTICLE VII
Street Number Regulations
§ 210-52. Street number regulations. [Added 4-10-1961 by Ord. No.
63; amended 6-9-1969 by Ord. No. 125; 4-10-1961 by Ord. No. 125]
A. Definition. The word "building," as used in this chapter, shall mean any
structure used or intended to be used as a dwelling or place of business
or industry, or any other use requiring a location identity, but shall not
include any accessory building located upon a lot where there is also a
main building.
B. Street number plan. The map known as "Middletown Township Street
Number Plan" bearing the same date as this chapter is hereby
incorporated into this chapter. Said map shall be maintained current, by
the addition of new buildings as constructed, by the Township Manager.
C. Notification and compliance. It shall be the duty of the Township to
notify present owners of properties of the new number which has been
assigned to said properties, and to notify the owners of all newly
improved properties which will require a number, and it shall be the
duty of such owner so notified within 30 days to comply with the further
provisions of this chapter.
(1) Notwithstanding Section C, any subdivision of land made after the
date of this chapter shall have the engineer responsible for the
subdivision plan provide house numbers on said subdivision plan in
accordance with the rules and regulations adopted April 10, 1961,
which will be consistent with the present plan and reflect the
proper coordination with future development of adjoining land.
D. Depiction of numbers. Numbers, as assigned to each building in the
Township according to the provisions of this chapter, shall be affixed to
or painted upon or carved upon such building or upon a permanent
standard, base or support between such building and street. Each
number shall be at least three inches high, shall be of such color and
material as to be visible from the street and shall be constantly
maintained in complete and legible form. The property owner shall
reaffix or renew all numbers that shall not continue to conform to the
requirements of this section; provided, in the case of buildings occupied
by other than by the owner thereof, the occupant, rather than the
owner, shall be responsible for maintaining numbers upon such
buildings as hereby required.
E. Application for a building number. Whenever a building shall hereafter
be erected in the Township, the owner thereof shall forthwith apply to
the Township Manager for the official number thereof. The number
shall be assigned by the Township Manager in conformity with the
requirement set forth in this chapter for numbers for existing buildings
and shall, within 30 days after being assigned to such building, be
affixed by the owner thereof in the manner required by this chapter in
§ 210-52 CHARTER § 210-52
C:487
the case of existing buildings, and shall thereafter be maintained as
hereby required for the numbers of existing buildings.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10 and costs of
prosecution; provided, each week's continuance of a violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 210-52 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-52
C:488
ARTICLE VIII
Special Provisions Applying to Subdivisions in Designated
Floodplain Districts
§ 210-53. Purposes. [Amended 10-25-1993 by Ord. No. 528]
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
flooding conditions, the following provisions supplement the provisions of
Article I of this chapter and shall apply to all proposed subdivisions and
land developments occurring in any of the floodplain districts designated in
Chapter 275, Zoning, and as delineated in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
dated September 30, 1993, and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) prepared
for the Township of Middletown by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), including any further amendments or supplements
thereto.88 Said study and map are available at the Township offices during
normal business hours. Specific purposes of these provisions are as follows:
§ 210-54. Plan requirements.
In addition to the maps and information required in § 210-5 of this chapter,
the following maps and information, prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor, shall be submitted as indicated for preliminary and final plans.
A. To regulate the subdivision and/or development of land within any
designated floodplain district in order to promote the general health,
welfare and safety of the community.
B. To require that each subdivision lot in flood-prone areas be provided
with a safe building site with adequate access, and that public facilities
which serve such uses be designed and installed to preclude flood at the
time of initial construction.
C. To protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood by prohibiting the improper subdivision and/or
development of unprotected lands within the designated floodplain
districts.
A. Preliminary plans.
(1) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to any designated floodplain district,
including information on, but not limited to, the one-hundred-year
flood elevations, boundaries of the floodplain districts, proposed
lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities and areas
subject to special deed restrictions.
(2) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely within any designated floodplain districts, or where the
subdivision and/or land development borders on a floodplain
district, the preliminary plan map shall include detailed
88.Editor's Note: See also § 89-8.
§ 210-53 CHARTER § 210-54
C:489
§ 210-55. Design standards and improvements in designated
floodplain districts.
information giving the location and elevation of proposed roads,
public utilities, and contours at intervals of two feet if the slope is
less than 15% or five feet if the slope exceeds 15%, and identify
accurately the boundaries of the floodplain districts.
B. Final plans.
(1) A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed
buildings, structures, roads, and public utilities to be constructed
within any designated floodplain district. All such maps shall show
contours at intervals of two feet if the slope is less than 15% and
five feet if the slope exceeds 15%, and identify accurately the
boundaries of the flood-prone areas.
(2) All required permits and related documentation from the
Department of Environmental Protection, and any other
commonwealth agency, or local municipality where any alteration
or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed. In addition,
documentation shall be submitted indicating that all affected
adjacent municipalities, the Department of Community and
Economic Development, and the Federal Insurance Administrator
have been notified of the proposed alteration or relocation.
A. General.
(1) Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land
located in any designated floodplain district may be platted for
development with the provision that the developer construct all
buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance
with this and any other laws and ordinances regulating such
development.
(2) Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodation shall not be permitted in any floodway area. Sites
for these uses may be permitted outside the floodway area if the
sites or dwelling units are elevated up to the regulatory flood
elevation. If fill is used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area
shall extend out laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed structures.
(3) Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential
uses shall also not be permitted in any floodway area. Sites for
structures or buildings outside the floodway shall be protected as
provided for in Subsection A(2) above. However, the Township
Council may allow the subdivision and/or development of area or
sites for commercial and industrial uses at an elevation below the
regulatory flood elevation if the developer otherwise protects the
§ 210-54 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-55
C:490
area to that height or assures that the buildings or structures will
be floodproofed at least up to that height.
(4) If the Township Council determines that only a part of a proposed
plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part
and shall require that development proceed consistent with this
determination.
(5) When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and
the Township Council determines that additional controls are
required to insure safe development, it may require the developer
to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed
restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every
recorded plat.
B. Excavation and grading. Where any excavation or grading is proposed
or where any existing trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will be
removed, the developer shall consult the County Conservation District
representative concerning plans for erosion and sediment control and
to also obtain a report on the soil characteristics of the site so that a
determination can be made as to the type and degree of development
the site may accommodate. Before undertaking any excavation or
grading, the developer shall obtain a grading and excavation permit as
required by the Township.
C. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or
property. The system shall insure drainage at all points along streets,
and provide positive drainage away from buildings and on-site waste
disposal sites. The Township Council may require a primarily
underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary
surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage
plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The
facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff
onto adjacent properties.
D. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed streets shall not be more
than the one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. Profiles and
elevations of streets shall be submitted to determine compliance with
this requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge
flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
E. Sewer facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in any designated
floodplain district, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed up
to the regulatory flood elevation.
(1) Sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems which
will not function due to high ground water, flooding, or unsuitable
soil characteristics are prohibited. In such areas, the developer
shall note on the face of the plat and in any deed of conveyance that
soil absorption fields are prohibited.
§ 210-55 CHARTER § 210-55
C:491
§ 210-56. Definitions.
For purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used
for human habitation.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts
specifically designated in Chapter 275, Zoning, as being inundated
primarily by the one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas identified
as the Floodway District (FW), the Flood-Fringe District (FF), and the
General Floodplain District (FA).
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations and the
subdivision of land.
(2) If a sanitary sewer system is located on or near the proposed
subdivision and/or land development, the developer shall connect
to this system where practical, in accordance with the
requirements of Article V of this chapter.
F. Water facilities. All water systems located in any designated floodplain
districts, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed up to the
regulatory flood elevation. If there is an existing public water supply
system on or near the subdivision, the developer shall connect to this
system where practical, in accordance with the requirements of Article
V of this chapter.
G. Other public utilities and facilities. All other public and/or private
utilities and facilities, including gas and electric, shall be elevated or
floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
H. Permit requirements. In addition to meeting the permit requirements
for subdivisions (this chapter), Chapter 275, Zoning, and Chapter 89,
Construction Codes, Article II, Building Standards, development
permits are required for any man-made changes to improved or
unimproved real estate within the one-hundred-year floodplain, where
permits for such changes are not required by any of the above
regulations. Such changes shall include, but are not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavations, or drilling operations. Application for development permits
shall be made on such forms and in accordance with such procedures as
may be prescribed by the Township.
§ 210-55 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-56
C:492
DWELLING — A building designed and constructed for residential purposes
in which people live. This includes a mobile home which is a transportable,
single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place
of assembly contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be joined
into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor
and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so
that it may be used without a permanent foundation. "Mobile home" shall
include trailers used for human habitation which meet the above definition.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year
magnitude.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years; i.e., that has a one 1% chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any year.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, mobile homes, and other similar items.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other division of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access, shall be exempted.
§ 210-57. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article supplements Article I hereof and supersedes any ordinances
pertaining to subdivision and land development currently in effect in flood
areas which are less restrictive than this chapter. Any other applicable
ordinances shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive.
§ 210-58. Municipal liability. [Amended 4-10-1961 by Ord. No. 125;
2-12-1979 by Ord. No. 12]
The grant of a permit or approval of a plan for any proposed subdivision
and/or land development to be located within any designated floodplain
district shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by the municipality or by any official or employee thereof of the
practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability upon
Middletown Township, its official or employees.
§ 210-56 CHARTER § 210-58
C:493

ARTICLE IX
Steep Slope Conservation Districts
[Added 6-27-1994 by Ord. No. 541]
§ 210-59. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to expand upon the community development
objectives associated with environmental protection and the preservation
of natural resources expressed in Article I of Chapter 275, Zoning, and
to complement the provisions in Article XXXV thereof relating to open
space. Further, the provisions of this article are designed to encourage
the sensitive treatment of hillsides and their related soil and vegetation
resources in an effort to minimize adverse environmental impacts. The
following objectives serve to complement these specific purposes and the
overall purposes of this article:
§ 210-60. General provisions.
A. To conserve and protect steep and very steep slopes from inappropriate
development such as excessive grading, land form alteration and
extensive vegetation removal.
B. To avoid potential hazards to property and the disruption of ecological
balance which may be caused by increased runoff, flooding, soil erosion
and sedimentation, blasting and ripping of rock and landslide and soil
failure.
C. To encourage the use of steep and very steep slopes for open space and
other uses which are compatible with the preservation of natural
resources and protection of areas of environmental concern.
A. Compliance. No area within the Steep Slope Conservation District shall
hereafter be used without full compliance with the terms of this article
and other applicable regulations.
B. Preservation of other restrictions. It is not intended by this article to
repeal, abrogate or impair any regulations set forth in any other articles
herein, any regulations of Chapter 275, Zoning, except as therein
provided, and or any easements, restrictive covenants or deed
restrictions, except that, where this article imposes greater
restrictions, its provisions shall prevail. Further, nothing contained in
this article shall diminish in any way the provisions of the Clean
Streams Law89 and/or Chapter 102 of the Department of Environmental
Protection Rules and Regulations, or any other applicable state, federal,
county or Township regulations, codes, ordinances and the like.
C. Boundary definition and mapping.
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 210-59 CHARTER § 210-60
C:495
(1) The Steep Slope Conservation District is comprised of areas of
steep and very steep slopes, as shown on the Steep Slope
Conservation District Map90 which is attached to and made part of
this chapter. The map constitutes only a general representation of
steep and very steep slopes, based on the analysis of the contours
displayed on the most recent United States Geological Survey
(USGS) Quadrangles for Media, Pennsylvania, and Marcus Hook,
Pennsylvania. As such, refined mapping will be required to more
accurately define the district, as specified in Subsection C(5) below.
(2) Areas of steep slope are characterized by a change in elevation
from 15% to 25% over the distance and contour interval specified
in Subsection C(5) below.
(3) Areas of very steep slope are characterized by a change in
elevation greater than or equal to 25% over the distance and
contour interval specified in Subsection C(5) below.
(4) The Steep Slope Conservation District Map shall be considered as
an overlay to the Middletown Township Zoning Map subject to the
following:
(a) The District shall have no effect on the permitted use in the
underlying zoning district, except where said uses, intended to
be located within the boundaries of the District, are in conflict
with the permitted uses set forth in this section.
(b) In those areas of the Township where the district applies, the
limitations of the Steep Slope Conservation District as set forth
herein shall be in addition to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s).
(c) Should the district boundaries be revised as a result of the
judicial decision, the zoning requirements applicable to the
area in question shall revert to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s) without consideration of this
section.
(5) Interpretation of district boundaries.
(a) The applicant shall use an actual field topographic survey as
the source of contour information and the basis for depicting
steep and very steep slopes as described below.
(b) The Steep Slope Conservation District Map (based on the tenfoot
contour interval from USGS) shall be used as a general
guide for determining the boundaries of the district. In any
application for subdivision and/or land development, the
applicant shall, using the contour interval as required in this
90.Editor's Note: A copy of said map is on file in the office of the Township Secretary and may
be examined there during regular office hours.
§ 210-60 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-60
C:496
§ 210-61. Use regulations. [Amended 8-22-1994 by Ord. No. 543]
chapter, delineate slopes from 15% to 25% and greater than or
equal to 25%.
(c) Mapping of steep and very steep slope shall be performed
using a tick-strip or other suitable measuring device.
(d) Whenever five-foot contour intervals are required by this
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for minor
subdivisions, the applicant shall delineate all steep and very
steep slopes on this basis. However, the use regulations of this
article will be invoked only when there is a cumulative steep or
very steep slope over a ten-foot or more vertical change in
grade. Thus, the representative sample of steep and/or very
steep slope for minor subdivisions will be 10 or more feet of
vertical grade change.
(e) Whenever two-foot contour intervals are required by this
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for major
subdivisions and/or land developments, or as required for an
environmental impact assessment under Article 31 of Chapter
IX, Zoning, the applicant shall delineate all steep and very
steep slopes on this basis. However, the use regulations of this
article will be invoked only when there is a cumulative steep or
very steep slope over a six-foot or more vertical change in
grade. Thus, the representative sample of steep and/or very
steep slope for major subdivisions and/or land developments
will be six or more feet of vertical grade change.
(f) The mapping by the applicant will be reviewed by the Township
Engineer. The applicant will be required to follow all
regulations of this article for those areas which reflect steep
slope and very steep slope conditions as determined through
the Township Engineer's review.
A. Areas of very steep slope (greater than 25%).
(1) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Agricultural uses that do not require cultivation or structures.
(b) Conservation and recreation uses not requiring structures.
(c) Front, rear or side yards of any lot or tract.
(d) Structures existing prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(2) Uses permitted if a modification is granted pursuant to § 210-43
hereof.
(a) Conservation and recreation uses requiring structures.
§ 210-60 CHARTER § 210-61
C:497
(b) Agricultural structures and cultivation.
(c) Utility lines for public utilities such as, but not limited to,
water, sewer, gas, telephone, electrical and cable television.
(d) Accessory structures to any uses permitted in Subsection A(1)
and/or (2)(a), (b) and/or (c) above.
(e) Roads and driveways only when no viable alternative
alignment or location is feasible, provided that such roads and
driveways are aligned predominantly parallel to the contours.
(f) Uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
(3) Prohibited uses and activities.
(a) Cut and fill, other than in association with any uses related to
Subsection A(1) and/or (2) above.
(b) Soil, rock and mineral extraction and/or removal, other than in
association with any uses related to Subsection A(1) and/or (2)
above.
(c) Removal of topsoil, other than in association with any uses
related to Subsection A(1) and/or (2) above.
(d) Stormwater management facilities other than in association
with any of the uses related to Subsection A(1) and/or (2)
above.
B. Areas of steep slope (15% to 25%).
(1) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Any principal use permitted in Subsection A(1).
(2) Use permitted by modification granted pursuant to § 210-43 hereof.
(a) Any uses identified in Subsection A(2) and the following:
[1] Stormwater management facilities.
[2] Sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations.
[3] Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to
the foregoing.
(3) Prohibited uses and activities.
(a) Cut and fill other than in association with any uses related to
Subsection B(1) and/or (2) above.
(b) Soil, rock or mineral extraction and/or removal other than in
association with any uses related to Subsection B(1) and/or (2)
above.
§ 210-61 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-62
C:498
§ 210-62. Application procedure.
§ 210-63. Supplemental information to accompany request for
modification under § 210-43.
A. All applicants for any use of land within the Steep Slope Conservation
District shall include the submission of the following materials and
information:
(1) Plans drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet sealed by
a registered professional engineer, depicting the following:
(a) The location, dimensions and elevation of the property.
(b) Existing and proposed uses and development.
(c) Existing and proposed contours at five-foot intervals for minor
subdivisions or two-foot intervals for major subdivisions or
land developments.
(d) The location and boundaries of steep slopes and very steep
slopes as described in § 210-60C.
(e) Typical cross-sections and elevations of the property and
proposed structures at intervals prescribed by the Township
Engineer.
(f) Existing land cover characteristics of that portion of the
property within the Steep Slope Conservation District
indicating wooded areas, open areas and their ground cover
type and any areas with impervious surfaces. The
modifications proposed to the existing land cover shall also be
indicated.
(g) Photographs showing existing uses, vegetation and topography
of areas within the Steep Slope Conservation District.
(h) A report describing the slope, soil and vegetation
characteristics of that portion of the property within the
subject district. Such report shall also describe the proposed
type and methods of proposed building construction, the type
of foundation system(s) to be employed and proposals for
landscaping, sewage disposal and water supply. Further, the
report shall describe all sediment and erosion control
measures to be used as required by Middletown Township, the
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Delaware
County Conservation District and any and all additional
engineering and conservation techniques designed to alleviate
environmental impacts which may be created by proposed
development activities.
A. In addition to information described in § 210-43, the Township Council
shall require a written report addressing the following which, together
§ 210-62 CHARTER § 210-63
C:499
with the foregoing required information and information required by
the said § 210-43, shall be considered by Township Council in rendering
its decision on the requested modification.
(1) The degree of modification, proposed within the district, to the
topographic, soil and vegetation resources and the techniques
proposed to mitigate potential adverse environmental impacts.
(2) The effect the development of the subject district would have on
adjacent properties.
(3) The relationship of the proposed uses to the objectives described in
§ 210-59.
B. In addition, the applicant shall have the burden of providing evidence
that:
(1) The Steep Slope Conservation District is being proposed for
development since no other alternative location is feasible or
practical.
(2) Earthmoving activities and vegetation removal will be conducted
only to the extent necessary to accommodate proposed uses and
structures and in a manner that will not cause excessive surface
water runoff, erosion, sedimentation and unstable soil conditions.
(3) Mitigation techniques will be utilized, including but not limited to
retaining walls, tree wells, the establishment of ground cover and/
or low-spreading shrubs, the use of erosion control fabric and the
like. Such techniques shall be evidenced through the submission of
plans and construction details which depict, delineate and
otherwise describe the land developmental proposal.
(4) Proposed buildings and structures will be of sound engineering
design and footings will be designed in response to the site's slope,
soil and bedrock characteristics. Such design shall be evidenced
through the submission of plans and construction details which
depict, delineate and otherwise describe the land development
proposal.
§ 210-63 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 210-63
C:500
Chapter 215
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 167.
§ 210-63 CHARTER § 210-63
C:501

ARTICLE I
Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 3-3-1975 by Ord. No. 182 (Ch. II, Art. 1, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 215-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mercantile Tax
Ordinance."
§ 215-2. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have
the meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The Township Secretary of the Township of
Middletown, or his designated representative.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit
transactions, and trade-in transactions as provided by law.
LICENSE YEAR —
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation (except such as are wholly exempt from
taxation under the Act of Assembly No. 511, as amended).
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer
in or vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale
dealer or vendor, or a wholesale and retail dealer or vendor as
hereinafter defined.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business
that is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar
days.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Middletown.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER or WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
VENDOR — Any person who sells to dealers in or vendors of goods,
wares and merchandise and to other persons.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who
sells to dealers in, or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to
no other persons.
As to 1975, the period beginning April 2, 1975, and ending
December 31, 1975;
(1)
As to 1976, and each calendar year thereafter, the twelve-month
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
(2)
B. The terms "person," "wholesale dealer" or "wholesale vendor" and
"wholesale and retail dealer" or "wholesale and retail vendor" shall not
§ 215-1 CHARTER § 215-2
C:503
§ 215-3. License.
include nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the Government of the
United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any person
vending or disposing of articles of his own manufacture for shipment or
delivery away from the place of the manufacture thereof, or any farmer
vending or disposing of his own produce, or other transaction exempted
by law.
A. For the license year beginning April 2, 1975, every person desiring to
continue to engage in, or hereafter to begin to engage in, the business
of wholesale, or retail, or wholesale and retail, vendor or dealer in
goods, wares and merchandise and any person conducting a restaurant
or other place where food, drink or refreshment are sold in the
Township shall, on or before the first day of July 1975, or prior to
commencing business in said license year, apply for and procure a
mercantile license for his place of business, or if more than one, for
each of his places of business in the Township, from the Collector who
shall issue same upon payment of a fee of $10 for a wholesale or retail
license or for a wholesale and retail license for his place of business, or
if more than one, for each of his places of business in the Township for
such license year.
B. For the license year beginning January 1, 1976, and each license year
thereafter, every person desiring to continue to engage in, or hereafter
to begin to engage in, the business of wholesale, or retail, or wholesale
and retail, vendor or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise and any
person conducting a restaurant or other place where food, drink or
refreshment are sold in the Township, shall on or before the first day of
January, 1976, and each license year thereafter, or prior to commencing
business in any such license year, apply for and procure a mercantile
license for his place of business, or if more than one, for each of his
places of business in the Township, from the Collector who shall issue
the same upon payment of a fee of $10 for a wholesale or retail license
or for a wholesale and retail license for his place of business, or if more
than one, for each of his places of business in the Township for such
license year.
C. Each application for a license shall be signed by the applicant, if a
natural person, and in the case of an association or partnership, by a
member or partner thereof, and in the case of a corporation, by an
officer thereof. Such licenses shall not be assignable and shall be
conspicuously posted at the place of business or each of the places of
business of every such person at all times.
D. In the case of loss, defacement or destruction of any license, the person
to whom the license was issued shall apply to the Collector for a new
license for which a fee of $1 shall be charged.
§ 215-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-4
C:504
§ 215-4. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-15-1980 by Ord. No. 265;
2-17-1987 by Ord. No. 401]
A tax to provide revenue for general Township purposes is hereby levied,
assessed and imposed upon every person engaging in any of the following
occupations or businesses in the Township at the rate hereinafter set forth,
and such persons shall pay a mercantile tax for each license year, at such
rate, subject to the exemptions hereinafter set forth:
§ 215-5. Computation of tax estimated.
The following subsections refer to the computation of the estimated gross
volume of business:
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of every
kind, at the rate of 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the gross volume of
business transacted by him during the license year.
B. Retail vendors or dealers of goods, wares and merchandise of every
kind, and all persons engaged in conducting restaurants or other places
where food, drink or refreshments are sold, at the rate of 2 1/4 mills on
each dollar of the gross volume of business transacted by him during
the license year.
C. Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise of every kind at the rate of 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the
gross volume of wholesale business transacted by him, and 2 1/4 mills
on each dollar of the gross volume of retail business transacted by him
during the license year.
D. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the dollar volume of
annual business covering the resale of goods, wares or merchandise
taken by a dealer at a trade-in, or as part payment for other goods,
wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price
exceeds the trade-in allowance.
E. The first $25,000 of gross volume of business shall be exempt from and
not subject to the rates of taxation specified above and herein.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business at least nine full months prior to April 2,
1975, shall compute the gross volume of business upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during the nine months
preceding April 2, 1975.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business less than nine full months prior to April 2,
1975, shall compute the gross volume of business by multiplying by
nine the monthly average of the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during the months he was engaged in business prior
to April 2, 1975.
§ 215-4 CHARTER § 215-5
C:505
§ 215-6. Taxpayer returns. [Amended 2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 338]
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
commences his business subsequent to April 2, 1975, shall compute the
gross volume of business for the license year upon the gross volume of
business transacted by him during the first month of his engaging in
business, multiplied by the number of months remaining in the license
year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature,
shall compute the gross volume of business upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during the license year.
A. General. Every return, as hereinafter required by this subsection, shall
be made upon a form furnished by the Collector. Every person making
such return shall furnish all information requested therein and shall
furnish such additional information, including copies of tax returns,
forms and schedules, filed for state and federal taxes, as may be
required by the tax collector to determine or verify the tax due under
this article. Every person making such return shall certify the
correctness thereof under the penalties of perjury.
B. First return.
(1) For the license year 1975, every person subject to the tax imposed
by this article who has commenced business prior to the beginning
of said license year, shall on or before the first day of July 1975, file
with the Collector a return setting forth his name, his business and
business address, and such other information as may be necessary
to compute the actual gross volume of business transacted by him
during the license year and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
(2) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
commences business subsequent to the beginning of the license
year shall within 60 days from the date of commencing such
business file a return with the Collector setting forth his name, his
business and business address and such information as may be
necessary to compute the actual gross volume of business
transacted by him during the license year and the amount of tax
estimated to be due.
(3) Every person subject to payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature, shall within seven days from the day he completes such
business file a return with the Collector setting forth his name, his
business and business address, and such information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during such period and the amount of the tax
due.
§ 215-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-6
C:506
§ 215-7. Payment of tax.
§ 215-8. Duties of Collector. [Amended 2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 338]
C. Final tax return.
(1) On or before April 15 of each year, every person subject to the tax
hereby imposed shall make a final return to the Collector showing
the actual volume of business transacted by the taxpayer during
the preceding license year. Such final return shall state the amount
of the gross volume of business as set forth in the first tax return,
the amount of tax paid at the time of fling the first tax return, and
the amount of tax due upon the final computation. [Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 679]
(2) Any person ceasing to do business during the license year shall,
within 14 days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a final
return showing the actual gross volume of business conducted
during that portion of the license year in which said person was
actually in business, and pay the tax due as computed thereon.
A. At the time of filing the first tax return, the person making the same
shall pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due.
B. At the time of the filing of the final tax return, if the full amount of the
tax due by the taxpayer for the license year has not been paid, the
taxpayer shall pay the remaining balance of the tax which will be the
difference between the amount of the tax paid at the time of making the
first return on the estimated computation, and the amount of the tax
finally shown to be due.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the fees, taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount of the tax received by him and the
date of payment.
B. If the Collector is not satisfied with the return and payment of tax made
by any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer under the provisions of this
article, he is hereby authorized and empowered to make a
determination of the tax due by such person, based upon the facts
contained in the return, or upon any information within his possession,
or that shall come into his possession and for this purpose, the
Collector, or his authorized agent are authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any such person to verify the accuracy of any
return or payment made under the provisions thereof or to ascertain
whether the taxes imposed by this article have been paid. The Collector
is hereby authorized and directed to make and keep such records,
prepare such forms and take such other measures as may be necessary
or convenient to carry this article into effect, and may, in his discretion,
require reasonable deposits to be made by licensees who engage in a
business temporary, seasonable or itinerant by its nature. The tax
§ 215-6 CHARTER § 215-8
C:507
§ 215-9. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Collector or any other Township employee
or official from the administration of this tax shall be confidential, except in
accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, and
divulgence of any information so gained is hereby declared to be a violation
of this article.
§ 215-10. Recovering unpaid taxes.
All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Township Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now by law
recoverable.
§ 215-11. Interest and penalty.
All taxes due under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per
month or fractional part of a month, from the day they are due and payable
until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any return or
payment as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount of the tax
shall be added by the Collector and collected.
collector is hereby authorized to require any person making a return
under this article to provide, with the return, copies of such tax returns,
forms and schedules, filed for federal and state taxes, as the tax
collector shall, in his discretion, require to determine or verify the tax
due under this article.
C. If any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make
any return and payment of tax required by this article, or if, as a result
of an investigation by the Collector, a return is found to be incorrect,
the Collector shall estimate the tax due by such person, and determine
the amount due by him for taxes, penalties and interest thereon.
D. The burden is hereby imposed upon any person, firm or corporation
claiming an exemption from the payment of the tax hereby imposed to
convince the Collector of his legal right to such exemption.
E. If the final return of the taxpayer shows an overpayment of the tax by
reason of the fact that the gross volume of business as stated in the
estimated computation was less than the actual volume of business for
the year or by reason of the fact that the taxpayer did not continue to
engage in business throughout the year, the Collector shall refund to
the taxpayer, without interest, the amount of such overpayment, which
shall be the difference between the amount of tax paid upon the filing of
the first return and the amount of the tax finally shown to be due.
§ 215-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-12
C:508
§ 215-12. Receipts to be paid into treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the Treasury of the Township of
Middletown for the use and benefit of the Township of Middletown.
§ 215-13. Construction.
The provisions of this article are severable and if any of its provisions or
exemptions shall be held to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, or invalid
or unconstitutional as to any part of the period designated herein as the
license year, the decisions of any Court shall not affect or impair any of
the remaining provisions of this article, or affect or impair its application
upon any other part of the said license year, and the requirements as to
the license shall operate as of the effective date of this article and the
computation of tax and payment thereof shall be applied and adjusted
accordingly.
§ 215-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of
the terms of provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof before
a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $300 and costs and prosecution, for each offense, to be
collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible, and in default of
payment of said fine and costs, shall be imprisoned in the Delaware County
Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. The fine imposed by this section
shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this
article.
§ 215-15. Effect on other provisions.
It is the intent of the Township Council that any ordinance now in effect
which imposes a special license fee or tax on specific types or kinds of
business not covered by the provisions of this article shall be and remain in
full force and effect.
§ 215-16. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately after its passage and
advertisement subject to the time limitations of the "Local Tax Enabling
Act."
§ 215-12 CHARTER § 215-16
C:509

ARTICLE II
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 12-15-1980 by Ord. No. 266 (Ch. II, Art. 2, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 215-17. Title.
This article shall be known as "The Middletown Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance."
§ 215-18. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — All business, trades, occupation, professions and activities
carried on or exercised for gain or profit, including without limitation those
enterprises engaged in by hotel operators, motel operators, parking lot
and garage operators, warehouse operators, lessors of real and/or tangible
personal property, social workers, consultants, teachers, nurses, health
services, therapists, physicians and surgeons, osteopaths, podiatrists,
chiropractors, veterinarians, optometrists, pharmacists, lawyers, dentists,
engineers, architects, chemists, certified public accountants, public
accountants, funeral directors, promoters, factors, commission merchants,
agents brokers, manufacturer's representatives, advertising and public
relations agencies, real estate brokers, insurance brokers and agents, cable
television operators, operators of places of amusement providing either
passive or active recreation, vending machine operators, barbershop
operators, and beauty shop operators, cleaning, pressing and dyeing
establishment operators, laundry operators, shoe repair shop operators,
tailors, upholsterers, electrical, plastering, bricklaying, carpentry, heat,
ventilating, plumbing and painting, contractors engaged in the class of
heavy building or other construction of any kind or in the alteration,
maintenance or repair thereof, repairers of electrical, electronic and
automotive machinery and equipment or other machinery and equipment
and other wares and merchandise and other businesses, trades, occupations
and professions in which there is offered any service or services to the
general public or a limited number thereof.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period January 1 to December 31, inclusive,
except that for 1981, "calendar year" shall mean the period February 1 to
December 31, inclusive.
ESTIMATED RETURN — Tax return to be filed on or before April 15th of the
tax year and based upon the estimated gross volume of business.[Amended
11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 679]
FINAL RETURN — Tax return to be filed on or before April 15th of the
year following the tax year and based upon the actual gross volume of
business.[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 679]
§ 215-17 CHARTER § 215-18
C:511
LICENSE YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive,
except that for 1981, "license year" shall mean the period February 1 to
December 31, inclusive.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm, or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
RETAIL DEALER — Retail vendors or of dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise; that is, those vendors or dealers who are not wholesale
vendors or dealers.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The person or firm contracted with to collect said
tax.
TAXPAYER — A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
TREASURER — The Finance Director of the Township of Middletown.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 215-19. Method of levy. [Amended 2-17-1987 by Ord. No. 401]
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1981 and annually thereafter a tax
for general revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein
defined in the Township of Middletown as follows:
A. The rate of the tax on each and every dollar of the whole gross volume
of business transacted within the territorial limits of the Township of
Middletown shall be 2 1/4 mills, 2 1/4 mills shall mean $2.25 per $1,000
of gross volume of business; except that the rate of tax on each and
every dollar of the whole or gross volume of business transacted by
wholesale dealers or the wholesale vendors within the territorial limits
of the Township of Middletown shall be 1 1/2 mills. All non-wholesale
business or such wholesale dealers or wholesale vendors shall be taxed
at the general rate of 2 1/4 mills.
B. Computation of volume of business.
(1) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced his business prior to the full calendar year prior to
the tax year shall compute his annual estimated gross volume of
business upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by
him during said immediately preceding calendar year. (As example,
for the tax year 1981, if a person is in business as of January 1,
1981, and continues to be in business for the full calendar year,
§ 215-18 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-19
C:512
then the figures for 1980 shall be the basis for the computation for
his annual estimated gross volume of business.)
(2) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or who commences his business before the
beginning of the tax year but after the beginning of the full
calendar year prior to the tax year, shall compute his estimated
annual gross volume of business for the tax year upon the gross
volume of business transacted by him during prior calendar year,
taking the monthly average during said period and multiplying the
same by 12. In the event that he shall be in business fewer than 90
days in the prior calendar year, he shall be permitted to use
sufficient days in calendar year in which the tax year begins to
equal 90 successive days after commencement of business, to take
a monthly average thereon, and to multiply the average by 12.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced or commences his business subsequent to the
beginning of the tax year, if there shall be less than three months
from the commencement of his business to the end of the tax year,
shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon the actual
gross amount of business transacted by him during the tax year; if
there shall be more than three months from the commencement of
his business to the end of the tax year, he shall compute his
estimated gross volume of business for such tax year upon the
gross volume of business transacted by him during the period from
the commencement of his business to the end of the tax year, taking
the monthly average during the first three months of business and
multiplying the same by the number of months from the
commencement of business to the end of the tax year.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature,
shall compute his estimated gross of business to be transacted by
him for the period said person engages in such temporary, seasonal
or itinerant business within the Township by a method to be
determined by the Tax Administrator.
(5) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept payment
under protest of the amount of business privilege tax claimed by
the Township in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity
or amount of the Township's claim for tax. If it is thereafter
judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that the
Township has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall
be refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be
applicable to cases in which the facts are similar to those in a case
litigated in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(6) Payments made under Article I, Mercantile Tax, for business to
which this tax is applicable shall be credited to this tax and vice
§ 215-19 CHARTER § 215-19
C:513
versa. Any person required to pay both a business privilege tax and
a mercantile license tax may file one joint return.
C. Persons, business and receipts exempted.
(1) Persons and business. Persons employed for a wage or salary,
nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the Government of
the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
business of any political subdivision, or of any authority created or
organized under and pursuant to any act of assembly are exempt
from the provisions of this article.
(2) No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege,
transaction, subject, or occupation which is subject to a state tax or
license fee or which has been held by the Courts of Pennsylvania to
be the basis for the exemption from the imposition of a privilege tax
by a municipality and specifically all businesses or occupations
being presently taxed under Article I, Mercantile Tax, being
Ordinance No. 182, approved March 3, 1975.
(3) Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross
receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates
of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission; or on any public utility service rendered by any such
person or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
(4) State tax on tangible property. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on the privilege of employing such tangible property as is
subject to a state tax except on sales of admission to places of
amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or possession of
property.
D. Gross or whole volume of business upon which the tax hereunder is
computed shall include the gross consideration credited or received for
or on account of sales made, rentals and/or services rendered, subject
only to the following allowable deductions and exemptions:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken by any dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods,
wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price
exceeds the trade-in allowance.
(2) Refunds, credits, or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser
on account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold, or on
account of goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of
a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with
such other broker.
§ 215-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-19
C:514
§ 215-20. Returns. [Amended 2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 338]
(4) Bad debts where the deduction is also taken in the same year for
federal income taxation purposes.
(5) Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township of Middletown.
E. Where gross or whole volume of business in its entirety cannot be
subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provision of
law, the Tax Administrator with the approval of the Township Council of
the Township of Middletown shall establish rules and regulations and
methods of allocation and evaluation so that only the part of the gross of
whole volume of business which is properly attributable and allowable
to doing business in the Township of Middletown shall be taxed
hereunder.
F. If any person is liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed
under the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, December 21, Pamphlet Law
1257,91 and its amendments, to the Township and one or more political
subdivisions of the state, then and in that event the tax shall be
apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed upon by such
political subdivisions, but, in no event shall the combined taxes of both
subdivisions exceed a maximum rate of tax as fixed by the Enabling Act
permitting the imposition of such taxes.
G. The taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing enumerated exclusions and
deductions, shall keep books and records of his business so as to show
clearly, accurately, and separately the amount of such sales and
services as are excluded from the tax and the amounts of such sales and
services which he is entitled to deduct from the gross volume of
business as hereinbefore provided.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax
Administrator. Every person making a return shall certify the
correctness thereof by affidavit. Every person making a return shall
furnish such additional information, including copies of tax returns,
forms and schedules, filed for federal and state taxes, as the Tax
Administrator shall, in his discretion, require to determine or verify the
tax due under this article.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall be required
to file two tax returns each year: an estimated return and a final return
unless otherwise provided for in this article. Each time an estimated
return is required to be filed, the following year, if it is determined that
the amount of tax paid in the estimated return was greater than
required by the final return, the taxpayer shall be entitled to either
apply the overpayment to the estimated return for the year in which the
final return in question is being filed or, in the alternative, is entitled to
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 215-19 CHARTER § 215-20
C:515
a refund. In the event that the estimated tax was less than the amount
finally determined to be owed in the final return, the taxpayer shall be
liable to pay said tax upon the filing of the final return plus interest at
the rate of 6% per annum. In the event that the amount paid at the time
of the filing of the estimated return is 80% of the total tax due for the
entire tax year, including the estimated tax paid as well as the final tax
paid.
(1) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
commenced his business on or before January 1 of the full calendar
year previous to the beginning of any tax year shall on or before
March 31 of the tax year file with Tax Administrator an estimated
return setting forth his name, his business, his business address,
and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
preceding calendar year, and the amount of tax due.
(2) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business before the beginning of the tax year but
after January 1 of the full calendar year previous to the beginning
of the tax year shall on or before March 31 of the tax year file with
the Tax Administrator an estimated return setting forth his name,
his business, business address, and such other information as may
be necessary in arriving at the estimated gross amount of business
transacted by him as calculated under § 215-19B(2) hereof and the
amount of tax due.
(3) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
commences business subsequent to the beginning of any tax year
shall, within 100 days from the date of commencing said business,
file with the Tax Administrator either an estimated return or a final
return, in accordance with § 215-19B(2) hereof, setting forth his
name, his business and business address, and such other
information as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated or
actual gross amount of business transacted by him as calculated
under § 215-19B(3) hereof in the amount of tax due.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant
by its nature shall, at the time application is made for the business
privilege license, file a return with the Tax Administrator setting
forth his name, his business, his business address, and such other
information as may be necessary in arriving at the estimated gross
amount of business to be transacted by him as calculated in
accordance with § 215-19B(4).
(5) Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within
seven days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return
showing the actual gross volume of business conducted and done
by such person during that tax year in which said person ceased
doing business, and pay the tax due as computed thereon at the
§ 215-20 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-20
C:516
§ 215-21. License.
After the effective date of this article, any person desiring to conduct,
or to continue any business, as herein defined, within the Township of
Middletown, shall file with the Tax Administrator an application for a
business privilege license and shall pay a fee of $10 for each renewal
thereof. Taxpayers who pay a license fee under Article I, Mercantile Tax,
shall not be required to pay the fee for the business privilege license issued
hereunder.
§ 215-22. Posting.
The license shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for which
the such license is issued, and shall remain in effect for the license year or
fraction of year for which said license was issued. In cases where more than
one place of business is conducted, a separate license shall be issued for
each place of business. Any taxpayer who is in default in payment of tax due
hereunder shall be refused a license until such tax is paid in full.
§ 215-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall conduct, transact or engage in any of the businesses
subject to the tax imposed by this article, without having first secured a
business license for the year, or any person who shall fail to file a tax
return as required by the provisions of this article, or any person who
shall willfully file a false return, shall, upon summary conviction before any
Magisterial District Judge of Delaware County, be sentenced to pay a fine
not to exceed the sum of $300 for any one offense, recoverable with costs,
or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, if the amount of said fine and costs
shall not be paid.
§ 215-24. Continuing offense.
Each day on which such person violated this article may be considered as a
separate offense and punishable as such as aforeprovided.
§ 215-25. Duties of Tax Administrator and Treasurer.
rate herein provided for at the time of filing said return. If such
tax has been previously paid based upon estimated gross receipts,
the taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of any
excess tax paid for the tax year in which business was terminated.
C. The business privilege tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due
and payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a
return as set forth above and if the same is not paid on said date, 5%
shall be added thereto, plus an additional 1% per month or fractional
part of a month until paid.
D. The Treasurer shall, upon payment to him of the business privilege tax,
give the person paying the same a receipt thereof.
§ 215-20 CHARTER § 215-25
C:517
§ 215-26. Confidential nature of returns.
Any information gained by the Tax Administrator or any other official, agent
or employee of the Township, as a result of any returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this article, shall be
confidential except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
§ 215-27. Suit on collection and penalty.
A. The Treasurer is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Tax Administrator and his duly appointed deputies, under the
direction of the Treasurer, are hereby empowered to collect and receive
the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article, to keep records
relating to same, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination
and correction of returns, and payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed, or found to have
occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of this article and
any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
C. In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a
return, then in such case the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed
deputies shall assess said person on such an amount of whole or gross
volume of business as said Tax Administrator or his deputies deem
reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Tax
Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall give the parties
assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade, business,
occupation or class, and the amount of the business privilege tax
imposed or levied.
D. The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will
enable him to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Such accounts and records must disclose in
detail the gross volume of business, and must be sufficiently complete
to enable the Tax Administrator or his deputies to verify all
transactions. The Tax Administrator or his deputies are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers, and records of any person or
persons subject to or supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this
article, in order to verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no
return was made, ascertain the tax due.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other
cases.
§ 215-25 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-27
C:518
§ 215-28. Savings; severability.
§ 215-29. When effective.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 1965, December 31, Pamphlet Law 1257,92 as amended, and shall
become effective on the 31st day after it has been passed by the Township
Council of the Township of Middletown and shall continue thereafter unless
amended or repealed.
A. The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power in the name of the Township to institute proceedings against any
and all persons who violate the provisions of this article after first
advising Township Council of the Township of Middletown of such
action.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for the
recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor, shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection and interest and penalties herein
imposed.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, or
any business, or any portion of any business not within the taxing power
of the Township under the Constitution of the United States and the
laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any provision thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent power
or jurisdiction to be violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision of the law,
the decisions of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose
the taxes, or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other persons as
herein provided.
92.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 215-27 CHARTER § 215-29
C:519

ARTICLE III
Enforcement and Collection Procedures
[Adopted 9-28-1981 by Ord. No. 292 (Ch. II, Art. 3, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 215-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXING DISTRICT — The Township of Middletown.
§ 215-31. Allocation of business done and gross volume of business.
A. General. Generally, receipts will be considered allocable to the place of
business in the taxing district if any significant aspect of the transaction
arises out of the place of business located in the taxing district.
B. Lessors of tangible personal property. Persons doing business within
the taxing district who own and hold title to tangible personal property
which is leased to others are required to report the gross receipts from
the rental of or license to use such property according to the following
rules:
(1) Where the original situs of the property is within the taxing district,
the receipts from tangible personal property leased to others are
deemed to be:
(a) Wholly taxable receipts, if the property is delivered to lessees
inside of Pennsylvania.
(b) Nontaxable receipts, if the property is delivered to lessees
outside Pennsylvania.
(2) Where the original situs of the property is outside Pennsylvania, the
receipts from tangible personal property leased to others are
deemed to be:
(a) Allocable receipts, if the property is delivered to lessee within
the taxing district.
(b) Nonallocable and nontaxable receipts, if the property is
delivered to lessees outside the taxing district within or
without the United States.
(c) The term "original situs," as used herein, means the place at
which the property is warehoused when not leased to others
and to which place the property is returned upon termination
of the lease. Where there is no such established place, the term
"original situs" shall mean the principal office of the taxpayer.
(d) This subsection does not apply to conditional sales of tangible,
personal property.
§ 215-30 CHARTER § 215-31
C:521
§ 215-32. What constitutes doing business in the taxing district.
§ 215-33. Interstate commerce.
C. Lessors of real property. Persons doing business within the taxing
district who own and hold title to real property which is leased to others
are required to report the gross receipts from the rental of all such
property which is situated in the taxing district. This subsection does
not apply to conditional sales of real property. Where a lessor has no
more than two rental units in his principal place of residence such
rentals are excluded from taxable receipts, provided he has no other
rental units of realty located within the taxing district.
D. Place of origin and delivery outside of the taxing district. Where the
place of origin of goods, wares and merchandise in a sales transaction
is a location owned or leased by the seller outside of the taxing district
and the place of delivery is a location outside of the taxing district
regularly maintained by the other party to the transaction, the receipts
are nonallocable and nontaxable.
E. Location of vendee. Receipts from the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise delivered to a vendee located outside of the taxing district
by an employee of the taxpayer who works in or from, or is attached to
the taxing district place of business of the taxpayer, is fully taxable if
the vendee is located within Pennsylvania and nontaxable if the vendee
and place of delivery is located outside of Pennsylvania.
A. Whether or not a person carries on a taxable activity within the
meaning of the Business Privilege and/or Mercantile Tax Act is
essentially a question of fact. In general, taxable activity includes any
trade, business, profession, vocation or commercial activity that is
carried on in the taxing district. The tax is imposed on any person who
exercises the privilege of carrying on certain activities in the taxing
district and on any wholesale or retail vendor in goods, wares or
merchandise, and is measured by receipts received.
(1) Inter- and intrastate business. Doing business includes any trade,
business, profession, vocation or commercial activity of an
intrastate or interstate character.
(2) Residence or domicile. A person who engages in a taxable activity
in the taxing district is subject to this tax whether or not he is a
resident and whether or not he has a permanent place of business
in the taxing district.
(3) Foreign corporation. A foreign corporation is subject to this tax if it
carries on a taxable activity in the taxing district whether or not it
is licensed to do business in Pennsylvania.
A. General. Receipts from transactions involving more than one state are
not exempt from tax, but are to be included in the tax base either in
§ 215-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-33
C:522
their entirety or excluded in their entirety as provided in these
regulations. Transactions defined below as interstate commerce are
exempt from the tax. Those which do not constitute interstate
commerce are taxable in full.
B. What constitutes "interstate commerce"? Transactions will be deemed
to involve interstate commerce only when they directly involve the sale,
exchange or transportation of commodities between the states, the
transportation of passengers between states, or the transmission of
intelligence or communications between the states. The citizenship or
residence of the parties to the transaction is of no significance. Where a
sale transaction is involved, it is of no importance in which state title to
the goods passes, or whether the goods are shipped FOB one state or
another.
C. Sale and delivery in Pennsylvania. Interstate commerce is not deemed
to be involved in sales made by a taxing district seller to customers
located outside of Pennsylvania where the property is delivered directly
to the purchaser or his agent within Pennsylvania, notwithstanding the
fact that the purchaser or his agent intends to, and later does, transport
the property to a point outside Pennsylvania.
D. Shipment from taxing district by seller. Sales will be considered as
having been made in interstate commerce when the seller, as a
necessary incident to the contract of sale, agrees to, and does, deliver
the property to the purchaser at a point outside of Pennsylvania, or
delivers the property to a common carrier consigned to the purchaser
at a point outside Pennsylvania.
E. Shipment into the taxing district from seller's out-of-state place of
business. With respect to sales made by a taxing district seller, the
transaction will be considered to be one in interstate commerce. If, by
the express terms of the contract of sale, or the established practice of
doing business, the seller is required to deliver by transporting or
shipping the property from his place of business situated outside of
Pennsylvania directly to the purchaser at a point within the taxing
district.
F. Shipments into the taxing district from a third party's out-of-state place
of business. Interstate commerce is not deemed to be involved if the
taxing district seller causes direct delivery to be made to the purchaser
at a point in the taxing district from an out-of-state source of supply
owned or operated by a third party (one from whom the seller buys).
G. Delivery from the seller's out-of-state place of business via his office.
Interstate commerce is not deemed to be involved with respect to sales
made to a Pennsylvania purchaser if the property is shipped from the
seller's place of business located outside of Pennsylvania to the seller's
place of business in the taxing district from which point the goods are
delivered to the purchaser.
§ 215-33 CHARTER § 215-34
C:523
§ 215-34. Contractors performing building or construction work
outside the taxing district.
§ 215-35. Brokers and agents with out-of-taxing district offices.
§ 215-36. Persons, business and receipts exempted.
A. Contractors with field offices. Taxing district contractors or
subcontractors engaged in the performance of building and
construction contracts as a point outside the territorial limits of the
taxing district may exclude from the measure of the tax the receipts
derived therefrom, provided that a field office was maintained on the
premises of the project during the performance of the contract to such
an extent as to constitute doing local business at the situs of the job.
B. Alterations and repairs. The provisions of this section apply only to
contractors engaged either in the erection of new buildings or in the
complete alteration and remodeling of old buildings. They do not apply
to contractors who engage in alteration and repair jobs of a limited
scope, such as a roofer repairing a damaged roof of a building situated
outside the taxing district, or a painter renovating an apartment in an
apartment house located outside the taxing district.
C. Engineers and technicians. The exemption provisions of this section do
not apply to engineers and other technicians rendering personal
services outside the taxing district.
D. Qualifications for exemptions. To qualify hereunder, the contractor
must show that he established a place of business at the situs of the job
by setting up a field office thereat with machinery and equipment for
use in the fulfillment of the contract, and performed such other act as to
constitute doing local business at the situs of the job.
A. Where a general agent or broker of an insurance, real estate, or other
firm maintains a branch office outside of the taxing district, the
commissions attributable to such branch office may be excluded from
gross receipts. If any significant aspect of the transaction occurs in the
taxing district as a result from the efforts of brokers, subagents or
employees who work in, or from, or are attached to the taxing district,
such commissions shall be included in gross receipts.
A. Nonprofit corporations or associations, religious, charitable and
educational institutions, persons, entities, transactions and other
matter exempted by the provisions of the act or other applicable law.
Business income not excluded. The exclusion from taxation of receipts
from the business of nonprofit religious, charitable or educational
organizations is limited to those receipts derived from activities which
are connected with the noncommercial operations of the organization.
Commercial activities carried on by such an organization are taxable.
All business income of nonprofit religious charitable and educational
organizations is taxable.
§ 215-34 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-36
C:524
§ 215-37. State tax or license.
B. Receipts from sales to governmental agencies and nonprofit
organizations. Sales to institutions, receipts from sales made or
services rendered to governmental bodies, and to religious charitable
and educational corporations and associations shall not be excluded
from the tax base. The statute does not grant any exemption to
taxpayers transacting business with such agencies or institutions.
A. Nominal or registration fees. The fact that a taxpayer receives a
certificate or other document which is designated a "license" from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for which the taxpayer pays a sum of
money does not exempt the taxpayer from the business privilege and/or
mercantile tax. Flat annual fees, fees which are not related to gross
income or amount of production, or fees that are nominal in nature are
not considered true license fees and hence, payment of such fees will
not exempt the taxpayer from the business privilege and/or mercantile
tax.
B. Payment to the taxing district for housing permits, building and
plumbing permits, etc. will not exempt the taxpayer from the business
privilege and/or mercantile tax.
C. Nonlicensed functions taxable. The reports of any person who falls
within the state tax or license fee exemption which are derived from any
activity which if conducted separate and apart from other business
activities would be subject to the state tax or license fee shall not be
excluded from the tax base.
D. Local tax under state authority. Local taxes by counties, municipalities
or other public bodies though authorized by state legislation are not
considered state taxes or license fees.
E. Monies returned to municipalities by the state. Any tax which is
collected by the state but which, with the exception of administrative
costs, is returned to the municipalities, is not considered a state tax or
license fee. Such taxes include, but are not limited to:
(1) Gross receipt taxes of non-Pennsylvania Fire and Casualty
Insurance Companies.
(2) License fees for hotel, restaurant and club liquor licenses.
F. State license fees which exempt receipts earned thereunder include but
are not limited to those fees levied under the following acts:
(1) The Pennsylvania Securities Act of June 24, 1939, P.L. 748, as
reinacted and amended (70 P.S. § 31 et seq.).93
93.Editor's Note: Said act was repealed 4-12-1978 by P.L. 202, No. 53, effective 6-27-1980.
§ 215-36 CHARTER § 215-37
C:525
§ 215-38. Utilities.
§ 215-39. Terminology.
§ 215-40. Real estate brokers.
(2) Small loan companies, Act of June 17, 1915, P.L. 1012, as amended
(7 P.S. § 6151 et seq.).94
(3) Consumer discount companies, Act of April 8, 1937, P.L. 262 as
amended (7 P.S. § 6201 et seq.).
A. Nonutility functions taxable. The receipts of any public utility, operating
under the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, derived from supplying services at rates specified in its
tariffs shall be excluded from the tax base. Public utilities shall not
exclude from their tax base receipts derived from sales of appliances,
equipment, advertising, etc. A contract carrier is not a public utility.
A. "Gross receipts" means gross consideration received in, or by reason of,
any sale made, or services rendered or commercial or business
transaction occurring in or attributable to the taxing district including
cash, credits, and property of any kind of nature without deduction on
account of the cost of materials, labor, services, or other costs, interest
or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
B. In general, the word "sale" is used in the definition of the term "gross
receipts" includes, but is not limited to any transfer of title for a
consideration. It includes exchange, barter, and bailments.
C. Products manufactured or grown in the taxing district.
(1) Gross volume of business derived from the above mentioned is not
subject to the tax.
A. Generally, real estate brokers and agents are required to report as
taxable receipts the commissions and fees received for services
rendered as agent in promoting the purchase and sale of real property
for others. Brokers and agents not having an office in the taxing district
shall report as taxable receipts commissions received on the sale of
properties within the taxing district. Such amount does not include the
gross selling price of property, except as set forth in Subsection C.
B. Deduction of shared fee. A real estate broker, or agent may exclude
from his tax base, any commissions paid by him to another broker, or
agent, on account of a contract or purchase or sale initiated, executed,
or cleared in conjunction with the broker, salesman or agent to whom
the commission or part of the commission is paid. Commissions paid to
a salesman by a broker or agent when the salesman is affiliated with the
94.Editor's Note: Said act was repealed 3-3-1976 by P.L. 40, No. 18.
§ 215-37 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-40
C:526
§ 215-41. Traveling expenses.
§ 215-42. Trade discounts.
§ 215-43. Other discounts.
§ 215-44. Freight, delivery, or other transportation charges.
broker or agent are not excludable from the broker's or agent's tax
base.
C. Broker's sale of owned property. If a person is in the business of taking
title to real property and selling the property, he is required to include
the gross selling price of the property taxable receipts. The same
person may be taxed both as a broker and as a seller, depending on the
nature of the transactions. If he acts as a broker, salesman or agent, his
tax is based on commissions.
D. If he buys and sells real estate, whether in his own name or in the name
of a straw party, he is taxed on the gross selling price of the real estate.
A. Reimbursement of traveling expenses excluded from gross receipts
only if the taxpayer incurred such traveling expenses as agent for
another from whom the taxpayer receives reimbursement for such
expenses.
A. Deductions allowed. Trade discounts allowed to customers may be
deducted from the gross amount charged in ascertaining the amount to
be reported as receipts from sales. Trade discounts include:
(1) Discounts deducted from the face amount of the bill as a method of
adjusting the list price.
(2) Discounts unconditionally deducted by customers at settlement of
their bills and allowed as a matter of established custom of the
trade without regard to the due date of such bills or the form or
terms in which such discounts are described or stated on bills.
A. Deductions allowed. Discounts allowed to customers as cash discounts
for prompt payment of their bills may be deducted from gross receipts.
A. If seller contracts to deliver. If the seller contracts to deliver the
property sold to some designated place, or is obligated under the terms
of the contract to pay transportation charges to some designated place,
the transportation services are rendered to the seller and the freight,
delivery or other transportation charges so incurred by the seller may
not be deducted from gross receipts.
B. If buyer deducts cost of delivery from payment. If property is sold on
terms requiring the seller to deliver such property to a designated place
but the purchaser pays the amount of freight, delivery or other
transportation charged in the first instance, and deducts such charges
§ 215-40 CHARTER § 215-44
C:527
§ 215-45. Principal and agent.
from the invoice price in making remittance to the seller, no deduction
from gross receipts may be taken therefor by the seller.
C. If seller advances charges. Where the seller advances the freight,
delivery or other transportation charges for the account of the
purchaser in accordance with the terms of the contract of sale, such
charges may be excluded from the gross receipts of the seller, provided:
(1) That such charges are the actual charges incurred and are billed as
such to the purchaser; and
(2) That the books and records of the taxpayer clearly indicate such
facts.
A. General. Receipts from sales made, or services rendered, by an agent
for the account of his principal are to be reported by the principal. It is
immaterial in such cases whether the customer or client remits directly
to the principal, or to the agent for transmittal to the principal. The
agent is required to report as gross receipts only the commission
withheld by him as compensation for his services before remitting to his
principal and any commission paid to him after remitting to his
principal. No deduction from gross receipts may be taken by the
principal for commission paid to, or withheld by, the agent. A
manufacturer's representative is taxable on his gross commissions
unless his relationship to his principal is that of employer and
employee. This relationship of employer and employee exists if the
principal pays social security and unemployment compensation taxes
on behalf of the person claiming exemption and if, in the event of an
accident in the course of unemployment, the manufacturer's
representative might become entitled to workmen's compensation.
B. Undisclosed principal. A person selling property, including real
property or rendering services for an unknown or undisclosed principal,
is subject to tax as a principal unless there is disclosed in the agent's
return the identity of the principal and the amount of the sale made on
his behalf.
C. Condition as to recognition of agency. A person will be regarded as
acting as agent or broker in promoting or soliciting sales or rendering
services for the account of a principal when it appears:
(1) That the contract or agreement between such persons clearly
establishes the relationship of principal and agent;
(2) That the books and records of the agent or broker show the name of
the actual owner of the property on whose behalf the sale is made;
(3) That the books and records of the agent or broker show the amount
of gross sales and the amounts of commission due thereon.
§ 215-44 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-45
C:528
§ 215-46. Conditional and installment sales.
§ 215-47. Exchanges between dealers in similar lines.
Where dealers engaged in similar lines of business exchange articles of
tangible personal property and one of them makes payment to the other in
addition to the property exchanged by him, the transactions constitute sales
to each other. The receipt of each dealer is measured by the gross value of
the consideration received by him. Where a dealer transfers property, such
as an automobile, to another dealer with the understanding that property of
identical description will be returned at a subsequent date, such transaction
does not constitute a sale and the value of the property exchanged need not
be included in the gross receipts of either dealer. Receipts by dealers from
sales to other dealers in the same line where the dealer transfers title or
possession at the same price for which he acquired the merchandise may be
excluded from gross receipts.
§ 215-48. Leased departments.
D. Collection by agent. Money or property received by a taxpayer, as
agent, for transmittal to a third party is not to be reported by such
taxpayer as gross receipts, but any commission received by him for his
services as agent must be included in gross receipts.
E. This section shall apply to advertising agencies, public relations, and
any other service business which meets the agency criteria.
A. Reported as cash sales. A person making conditional sales or other
installment sales of property is required to report the total selling price
of such sales as gross receipts for the tax year in which the contracts of
sale are entered into, without regard to the fact that the seller may
arrange to receive payment from the purchaser on an installment basis
or that such contracts may be discounted or pledged with, or sold to, a
finance company.
B. Property repossessed. Where tangible personal property, sold under a
conditional or other installment sales contract, is repossessed by the
seller, and the repossessed property is subsequently sold, the receipts
from such sales are to be included in the measure of the tax only to the
extent that the amount of the sale exceeds the balance due on the
original sale at the time of repossession. No deduction from gross
receipts may be taken for any unpaid balance due at the time of
repossession. Such deduction shall be allowed upon resale, if the resale
price is less than the unpaid balance.
A. Return by lessor. Where a person leases a department of his business to
another, such person may include in his return the gross receipts from
business done and sales made by lessee. When the business of such
leased department is included in the return made by the lessor, a
schedule must be attached to the return containing the name of the
lessee, a description of the department operated, and a statement to
§ 215-45 CHARTER § 215-48
C:529
§ 215-49. Persons erecting buildings or otherwise altering,
repairing or improving real property.
the effect that the lessor assumes liability for reporting the gross
receipts and paying the tax accruing against the lessee of such
department. The lessee, however, is not relieved from his liability for
business privilege taxes if the lessor fails to make a proper return or
fails to pay the tax due. Should a change occur in the ownership or
status of any leased department, the lessor shall notify the Collector of
Taxes promptly.
B. Return by lessee. If the lessee wishes to file returns independently, such
lessee is required to include in his return the entire gross receipts of
said lessee whether collected by the lessor, or the lessee without
deducting any expense or commissions charged to him by the lessor. To
expedite the examination and audit of returns filed by such lessee, the
Collector of Taxes may require the lessor to furnish a statement of the
entire gross receipts collected on behalf of the lessee.
A. General. A contractor or subcontractor, resident or nonresident,
engaged in the business of erecting buildings, or otherwise altering,
repairing or improving real property, or other major construction work,
is required to report as gross receipts all receipts derived from the
performance of such contract. The amount of receipts to be included in
the tax base shall be the full contract price, that is, the total amount
received or receivable by way of a fixed or determinable amount under
the terms of the contract. The contract price will be considered to
include all charges made by a contractor, or subcontractor, for
materials, labor, supervision, overhead costs, and profit. In the case of
the general contractor, prime contractor or subcontractor employing
lower-tier subcontractors, no deduction may be made with respect to
amounts paid to subcontractors and materialmen, unless it can be
shown that the subcontractor has paid the business privilege tax to the
taxing district on the same gross receipts stemming from the same
contract.
B. Cost-plus contracts. A general contractor performing contracts on the
basis of a "cost-plus-a-fixed-fee" or "cost-plus-a-percentage" is required
to report as gross receipts the full contract price as explained above,
unless he has no connection whatsoever with the purchase of materials
and/or the hiring of labor. In cases where the owner of the property
buys the materials and hires all labor in his own name and pays the
general contractor a fixed fee, or a percentage of the total cost to
supervise and direct the construction project, the general contractor
will be required to report only the gross amount of the fee or
percentage received. Where the owner authorizes the general
contractor to make for him such purchases of tangible personal
property, or hire such labor or engage such subcontractors as are
necessary for the performance of the contract and pledges his credit
and is liable in the first instance to the materialmen, suppliers, laborers
§ 215-48 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-49
C:530
§ 215-50. Contractors who repair, alter and improve tangible
personal property.
Persons engaged in business in the taxing district as contractors who repair,
alter and improve tangible personal property for the account of others are
subject to tax under the provisions of this article. When contractors perform
labor or services on articles of tangible personal property furnished by the
other party to the contract, such contractors are required to report only the
amount due them for labor or services rendered.
§ 215-51. Buildings, hotels, motels, apartment houses, boarding
houses, nursing homes, etc.
or subcontractors, as distinguished from merely guaranteeing payment
of them or undertaking to reimburse the general contractor for the
cost of such materials, services or subcontracts, and agrees to make
payment directly to the materialmen, suppliers, laborers and
subcontractors, such sales or services will be regarded as made directly
to the owner, and the general contractor will not be required to include
such items in his gross receipts.
C. Contractors or subcontractors permanently or temporarily doing
business in the taxing district shall register and file a tax return.
(General contractors are required to withhold final payment to
subcontractors, temporarily doing business in the taxing district, until
proof of payment of the tax is furnished to them by such contractors.)
D. Contractors or subcontractors with an office in the taxing district who
are engaged in the performance of building, construction or
engineering contracts at a point outside the territorial limits of the
taxing district may exclude from the measure of the tax the gross
receipts derived therefrom, provided that a bona fide field office was
maintained on the premises of the project during the performance of
the contract wherein all control over such project was exercised to the
extent that it constituted the doing of local business at the situs of the
job. Receipts for services performed outside the taxing district may also
be excluded if it can be shown that no part of the service was performed
in the taxing district.
A. Persons operating hotels, apartment houses, boarding houses, nursing
homes, rooming houses and all other such establishments are taxable
on receipts from renting of rooms, furnishing of meals and any other
services rendered.
B. Any person carrying on the business of renting buildings, offices, space,
stores, dwelling houses, etc., shall include gross rentals received in the
tax base. No deductions may be made for depreciation, cost of
maintenance, repairs, etc.
(1) Persons who have obtained real property with no affirmative action
on their parts, that is, fortuitously through inheritance, gift,
§ 215-49 CHARTER § 215-51
C:531
§ 215-52. Insurance agents, brokers, and underwriters.
reverter, or other legal processes, and who furnish only those
elementary services and maintenance which are required by law,
are not subject to the tax unless the property was received from
a person who engaged in the business of renting the property and
that business is continued by the recipient.
(2) Business corporations which hold rental property as a source of
income in addition to their regular business, which may or may not
be real estate, are subject to the tax whether or not services are
rendered.
(3) Persons, corporations or partnerships holding rental property in
the taxing district, who employ rental agents or other such
assistance in administering such property are doing business and
are subject to the tax whether or not they provide services.
(4) Agencies or entities which manage and/or operate cooperatives
and/or condominiums must pay the tax based on all receipts
received for maintenance, cleaning, and other service provided,
including insurance. Receipts received from owner-tenants for
taxes, interest and principal payments may be excluded from the
taxable gross receipts.
A. General agents. General agents for insurance companies are required
to report as gross receipts the entire commissions received as
compensation for their own efforts on policies sold by them directly and
the overriding commissions received by them upon business produced
by brokers or subagents.
B. Brokers or subagents. Brokers or subagents are required to report as
gross receipts the commissions received as compensation for their
service.
C. Employee of single company. A person who represents a single
insurance company is subject to tax hereunder unless he:
(1) Devotes his entire time to the company,
(2) Is considered by the company to be its employee, and the company
pays social security and unemployment compensation taxes on
behalf of the person claiming the exemption and in the event of an
accident in the course of employment, said person is entitled to
workmen's compensation; and
(3) Does not employ solicitors, subagents, or other persons to whom he
pays salaries, commissions or other compensation in connection
with insurance business solicited.
§ 215-51 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-53
C:532
§ 215-53. Particular business or transactions.
Administrative or executive offices. Receipts of a taxpayer whose only office
in the taxing district is an administrative or executive office may or may not
be taxable depending on the activity performed in the office. The general
rule is that receipts for services will not be taxable in the taxing district
if no part of the service is performed in the taxing district. If the activity
at such an office relates only to internal bookkeeping functions of the
taxpayer, then those activities are not part of the "service" which is being
rendered to customers. However, administrative matters which do relate
to the service rendered, e.g., processing of orders, arranging shipments,
making telephone calls to customers or clients, or overseeing or controlling
employees engaged in performing such services, are generally part of the
service for which payment is received. Accordingly, if any of these kinds of
services are performed at the place of business in the taxing district, then
the entire receipt for that service is a taxable receipt unless an allocation is
appropriate.
§ 215-54. Persons engaged in professions, or vocations, or in
rendering personal services.
A. General. A person who is engaged in a profession or vocation or in
rendering personal services in the taxing district in any capacity, except
as an employee of another, is subject to the tax. All compensation,
however characterized, received in such capacity must be included in
the tax base.
B. Attorneys. An attorney may exclude that portion of the receipts from
legal services which are distributed directly to or on behalf of a client
such as a distribution of a sum of money recovered in a lawsuit, the sale
of real estate, or a collection matter. An attorney may exclude any fee or
portion of a fee paid to another attorney where a matter has been
forwarded either from or to the first attorney to or by the second
attorney except where either is an employee of the other.
C. Accountants. An accountant may exclude services rendered to clients
outside of the taxing district only if all activity connected with the
rendering of such services, including the audit, summary and
completion of the financial statement, takes place at the client's
business situs outside the taxing district.
D. Physicians and surgeons.
(1) A physician with offices in the taxing district must include in his
gross receipts all revenues derived from such offices, i.e., place of
business.
(2) A physician with offices located outside the taxing district may
exclude from gross receipts revenues derived from such offices,
i.e., place of business.
§ 215-53 CHARTER § 215-54
C:533
§ 215-55. Theaters and motion picture houses.
Persons operating theaters or motion picture houses and other places of
amusement where admission is charged in the taxing district, whether
owner or lessee, are subject to the business privilege tax on the gross
receipts from house or film rentals and from commissions received on
vending machine sales, public telephone booths and sources of revenue
other than sale of tickets of admission (which are exempt from tax by state
law).
§ 215-56. Social and recreational clubs.
§ 215-57. Public officials.
Persons who act as agents or officials of the United States, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision thereof are not subject to the tax
with respect to their activities as such agents or officials. For this purpose,
notaries public are considered agents of the commonwealth.
§ 215-58. Public utilities.
The taxing district may not tax the gross receipts of a public utility subject
to the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission which are derived from
supplying services at rates specified in tariffs authorized or approved by the
PUC. Receipts derived from advertising and rentals or charges levied for
services not subject to PUC regulations are subject to tax.
(3) A physician with hospital affiliations within the taxing district must
include in his gross receipts all revenue derived or generated by his
connection with such hospitals.
(4) A physician with hospital affiliations outside the taxing district may
deduct from gross receipts all revenues derived or generated by his
connection with such hospitals.
A. Under state law, the taxing district may not tax "membership in or
membership dues, fees, or assessments of charitable, religious,
beneficial or nonprofit organizations including but not limited to
sportsmen's, recreational, golf, and tennis clubs, girl and boy scout
troops and councils." Accordingly, receipts from such sources are not
subject to the tax.
B. Many such organizations, however, sell food, beverages and
recreational equipment to, or perform noncharitable services (such as
catering services) for members as a regular part of their activities.
Although such items may be exempt from federal income tax, they are
not exempt from the taxing district taxes. Accordingly, any such
organization which does offer its members such goods or services must
register and pay the tax. (This rule does not apply to religious,
charitable or educational organizations, which are entirely exempt from
tax.)
§ 215-54 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-59
C:534
§ 215-59. Government contracts.
Receipts from the performance of contracts entered into with the taxing
district, or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the United States of
America or any subdivision of such governments are to be included in the
measure of the tax.
§ 215-60. Undertakers, morticians, and funeral directors.
Persons engaged in business as undertakers, morticians or funeral directors
are required to report as gross receipts the total charges made to clients,
without deducting therefrom any costs or expenses whatsoever. Both the
sale of tangible personal property and a charge for rendering service must
be included in the tax base.
§ 215-61. Sale of capital assets.
§ 215-62. Deposit on container.
A person making a sale of products in a container on which there is a
deposit to insure the return of the container is required to report only the
gross selling price of the product in the container.
§ 215-63. Vending machines.
The entire gross receipts of vending machines and other mechanical devices
which dispense goods, wares, and merchandise are to be included in the
gross volume of business of the owner or lessor thereof. No deduction may
be made therefrom for splits, rentals, commissions or other remuneration
to persons in charge of the machines and/or to the lessee of the premises
upon which the machines are located.
A. Generally. The profits (not gross proceeds) resulting from the sale of
capital assets, such as plant machinery and equipment, furniture,
fixtures, delivery equipment, etc., are to be included in the tax base. If a
loss is sustained on such sales, it may not be offset against gross
receipts from other sources. In computing the profits to be included in
the tax base, the costs of the asset, less allowable depreciation, is to be
deducted from the gross proceeds of the sale.
B. Asset located outside taxing district. Where the capital asset sold was
located at an established place of business of the taxpayer outside the
taxing district, the profit realized on the sale thereof may be excluded
from the tax base.
C. Bulk sale or exchange, merger. Where a corporation realizes a gain as
the result of a sale or exchange of substantially all of its assets, or as the
result of a merger or consolidation with another corporation, the
amount of such gain must be included in the tax base.
§ 215-59 CHARTER § 215-64
C:535
§ 215-64. Intercompany transactions.
Receipts from transactions between affiliated companies, other than those
of a purely accommodation nature, are subject to inclusion in gross volume
of business.
§ 215-65. Interdepartmental transactions.
Where one department, branch or division of a corporation or other
business entity, furnishes goods, wares, and merchandise to another
department, branch or division of the same corporation or business entity,
the amounts recorded on the books to reflect such interdepartmental
transactions shall not be included in the gross volume of business of the
taxpayer.
§ 215-66. Property traded in.
In the case of a trade-in or part payment in goods, wares and merchandise
in a transaction in which goods, wares and merchandise are sold and
allowances made, the taxpayer may at his option deduct the value of the
trade-in or part payment from gross receipts so long as done on the face of
the invoice at the time of the original transaction as a medium for adjusting
the price of the goods, wares or merchandise; provided, however, that if no
such deduction is taken by the merchant, then the value allowed for the
trade-in or part payment in goods, wares or merchandise must be deducted
by the dealer at the time of resale of the trade-in or part payment so that no
tax is levied or collected on the dollar volume of business derived from the
resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken by any dealer as a trade-in
or as part payment for other goods, wares and merchandise, except to the
extent that the retail price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
§ 215-67. Refunds or credits.
Refunds or credits will be issued upon appropriate verification of
overpayment.
§ 215-68. Commissions paid by brokers.
Any broker, agent or salesman who splits or otherwise divides a commission
with another broker, agent or salesman in the same type of business by
reason of the fact that the second broker initiated, executed, cleared or
completed a portion of the transaction for which the fee is paid shall be
permitted to exclude from the gross receipts that portion of the fee paid
to the other broker, agent or salesman. This section does not exempt socalled
finders' fees, kickbacks, commissions, or other remuneration paid by
the broker, agent or salesman to another individual not in the same type
of business as the broker, agent or salesman. Nor does this section exempt
from the gross receipts of a broker or agent a commission paid by said
broker or agent to a salesman affiliated with him.
§ 215-64 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-69
C:536
§ 215-69. Bad debts.
Bad debts may be taken from the gross volume of business where the
deduction is also taken in the same year for IRS purposes.
§ 215-70. Taxes collected as agent for United States of America,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or taxing district.
Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, or the taxing district are excludable from taxable receipts.
§ 215-71. Partial exemption.
Where gross or whole volume of business in its entirety cannot be subjected
to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provisions of the
Constitution of the United States or any other provision of law, the Collector
of Taxes, with the approval of the taxing district, shall establish rules and
regulations and methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part
of the gross or whole volume of business which is properly attributable and
allowable to doing business in the taxing district shall be taxed hereunder.
§ 215-72. When same tax is imposed by two taxing bodies.
If any person is liable for the same tax on the same subject imposed under
the Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, December 31, Pamphlet Law 1257 and
its amendments, to the taxing district and one or more political subdivisions
of the state, then and in that event the tax shall be apportioned by such
percentage as may be agreed upon by such political subdivisions, but, in no
event, shall the combined taxes of both subdivisions exceed a maximum rate
of tax as fixed by the said Enabling Act permitting the imposition of such
taxes.
§ 215-73. Records.
The taxpayer shall keep books and records of his business so as to show
clearly and accurately the amount of taxable gross receipts minus any
allowable deductions pertaining to the business privilege and/or mercantile
tax.
§ 215-74. Partnerships.
A partnership is considered to be a taxable unit. The respective partners are
not required to file separate returns as individuals, but they are jointly and
severally liable for payment of the tax.
§ 215-75. Signature.
If the taxpayer is an individual, he shall sign the return. If the taxpayer is
a partnership, the return should be signed by at least one of the general
partners. If the taxpayer is a corporation, the return should be signed by an
officer of the corporation.
§ 215-69 CHARTER § 215-76
C:537
§ 215-76. Multiple places of business.
If a taxpayer maintains more than one place of business in the taxing
district, he is required to file only one return and may include therein the
receipts from transactions occurring in all of his places of business in the
taxing district.
§ 215-77. Refund.
Any tax payment made under protest which the taxing district thereafter
determines to have been improperly paid shall be refunded to the taxpayer
upon request and with the filing of proper forms.
§ 215-78. Posting registration form and mercantile license.
§ 215-79. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be a supplement to Ordinance No. 266, known as the
"Middletown Business Privilege Tax Ordinance," and Ordinance No. 182,
known as the "Mercantile Tax Ordinance,"95 and shall be interpreted as
providing rules and regulations for the collection of facts as imposed by said
ordinances. In the event of any conflict between this article and Ordinance
Nos. 266 and 182, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 266 and 182 shall
control.
A. Generally, the registration form and/or license must be posted
conspicuously at each place of business of licensee at all times.
B. Vending machine owners. A person who sells goods, wares or
merchandise by means of vending machines and who has not otherwise
procured a license under this article, shall procure one license covering
all of his vending machines and shall post it at its principal place of
business.
C. Persons with no place of business in the taxing district. Persons
conducting business within the taxing district but having no place of
business there shall not be required to post their registrations. But if
such time as such person establishes a place of business within the
taxing district, he shall notify the Collector of Taxes of the location of
such place of business and shall thereafter post his registration at such
place business.
D. Contractors. Contractors, regardless of the number of field offices
maintained within the taxing district, shall be considered to have one
place of business for the purpose of registering.
95.Editor's Note: See Arts. I and II of this chapter.
§ 215-76 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-79
C:538
ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 398 (Ch. II, Art. 4, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 215-80. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of
Middletown Township."
§ 215-81. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within
Middletown Township, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 215-82. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 215-87 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 215-80 CHARTER § 215-82
C:539
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation, whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including
without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees,
and other improvements, conveyance or land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in an cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
§ 215-82 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-82
C:540
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 215-83. Imposition of tax; interest.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend to term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate: provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure or a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor
developed by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under clause 1. or 2., the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor of a related corporation, association or
partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the
transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
§ 215-82 CHARTER § 215-83
C:541
§ 215-84. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 215-85. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 215-83 shall not be imposed upon:
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder/other designee
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the Township under the authority of that
Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as
hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and such 1/2 rate
shall become effective without any action on the part of Middletown
Township; provided, however, that the Township and any other political
subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or transfer may
agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate
herein provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the total
of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local
Tax Enabling Act.
D. Any tax imposed under this section that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53
P.S. § 7101 et seq.) as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
[Amended 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 678]
§ 215-83 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-85
C:542
A. A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner or record at the time of
condemnation, which reconveyance is made within one year from the
date of condemnation.
B. A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired
by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such
child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister, and
between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer fee for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
recorder of deeds in presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
§ 215-85 CHARTER § 215-85
C:543
K. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the
agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under
this article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee
in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from
taxation under this clause.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association or real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee
owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the
same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and
(2) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred.
P. A transfer from a mortgagor to the holder of a bone fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possess a tax exempt status pursuant
to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or 1954 [68A Stat. 3,
26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose preservation
§ 215-85 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-85
C:544
§ 215-86. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 215-85, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purpose of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 215-87. Acquired company.
of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space
opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
V. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof. In order to exercise any exclusion
provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer
shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania
Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this
purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement
of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document
is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company, and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance of transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
§ 215-85 CHARTER § 215-87
C:545
§ 215-88. Credits against tax.
§ 215-89. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 215-90. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 215-87 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-91
C:546
§ 215-91. Duties of recorder of deeds.
§ 215-92. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the recorder of deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which
are exempt from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents
presented for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified
copy of the document and statement of value executed by a responsible
person connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting
forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why
such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 215-93. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the recorder of deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Middletown
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from Middletown Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to
Middletown Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
§ 215-91 CHARTER § 215-93
C:547
§ 215-94. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 215-95. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recovered as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 215-96. Administration. [Amended 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 678]
The tax imposed under § 215-83 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act";
provided that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date
prescribed for timely payment, the Township of Middletown, pursuant to
Section 1102-D, authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable causes, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 215-93 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-96
C:548
ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 741]
§ 215-97. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Local Services Tax Ordinance of
Middletown Township."
§ 215-98. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms, words and/or phrases shall
have the meanings indicated, except where the context or language clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53
P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., as amended.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by Middletown Township to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 501
of the Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.501, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 501 of the Act,
53 P.S. § 6924.501, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Middletown, County of Delaware, Pennsylvania.
SCHOOL DISTRICT — The Rose Tree Media School District.
TAX — The local services tax levied by this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 215-97 CHARTER § 215-99
C:549
§ 215-99. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2014, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within Middletown
Township during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax of
that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance
with the provisions of the Act and this article. This tax may be used solely
for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by the Township
Council from time to time: 1) emergency services, which shall include
emergency medical services and/or fire services; 2) road construction and/
or maintenance; 3) reduction of property taxes; or 4) property tax relief
through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead
property exclusion). If required, Middletown Township shall remit to the
School District the School District's share of any tax, if any, in accordance
with provisions of the Act. Middletown Township shall use no less than
25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax
is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by
Middletown Township. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person
for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
§ 215-100. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that tax year. In addition, the following persons are exempt
from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
§ 215-99 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-100
C:550
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the tax may annually
file an exemption certificate with Middletown Township and with
the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably expects
to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the
political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the tax year for which
the exemption certificate is filed. In the event Middletown
Township utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of
the exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate
shall have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs
or W-2 forms from employment within the political subdivision for
the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is
requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the
exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by Middletown
Township or except as required by Subsection B(2), the employers
shall not withhold the tax from the person during the calendar year
or the remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that the exemption
certificate forms are readily available to employees at all times and
shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of hiring.
The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided
by Middletown Township.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given tax
year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or
by Middletown Township that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that tax year or that
the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that tax
year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of earned
income within Middletown Township in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that tax year, an employer shall withhold the
tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given tax year from the
tax becomes subject to the tax for the tax year under Subsection
B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of that
tax year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection
B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not
withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the
person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll amount due for
that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll
period for the remaining payroll periods in that tax year shall be the
same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the
employment of a person subject to withholding of the tax under this
subsection is subsequently severed in that tax year, the person
shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and
Middletown Township may pursue collection under this article.
§ 215-100 CHARTER § 215-100
C:551
§ 215-101. Duty of employers to collect.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent to this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the tax.
C. Refunds. Middletown Township, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a tax year that do not
exceed $1. Middletown Township or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the tax year by the number of payroll periods established by
the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro
rata share, an employer shall round down the amount of the tax
collected each payroll period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar.
Collection of the tax collected shall be made on a payroll-period basis
for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an
occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and Middletown
Township.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the tax by more than one
political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
§ 215-100 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-101
C:552
§ 215-102. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commission paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 215-103. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 215-104. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and
a statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each tax year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. Middletown Township shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to Middletown Township if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the
employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B of § 215-100 of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the taxes 30 days after the end of
each quarter of a tax year.
§ 215-101 CHARTER § 215-105
C:553
§ 215-105. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 215-106. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, Middletown Township
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 215-107. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the tax shall be in the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision; and
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that tax year
declaring that the taxpayer has made a prior payment constitutes prima
facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of Middletown Township.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to approval by Middletown Township, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions
for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this
§ 215-105 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-107
C:554
§ 215-108. Suits for collection.
§ 215-109. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 215-110. Interpretation.
article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights under Act 50 of 1998.96
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Middletown Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Middletown Township
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
96.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 215-107 CHARTER § 215-110
C:555
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 215-110 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 215-110
C:556
Chapter 220
TREE MAINTENANCE
§ 220-1. Maintenance required.
§ 220-2. Notice of violation.
In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township determines
that an apparent violation of this chapter exists, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall provide the property owner(s) with a written notice of violation,
by certified and regular mail, containing the following minimum
information:
A. The maintenance, care or removal of any tree, including all costs
related thereto, and the required compliance with any provision of this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of the property upon
which the tree is located, inclusive of any area of public right-of-way
extending to the paved cartway of any public street.
B. The condition of any tree, or portion thereof, is declared to constitute a
public nuisance wherever and whenever the same shall cause or
contribute to the causing of any of the following conditions to exist:
(1) Upon inspection by a certified arborist, a determination that the
tree creates a hazardous or dangerous condition or poses a threat
to the health and safety of the public;
(2) The lowest branch or limb of any tree or other overhanging part
thereof is maintained less than eight feet from the surface of any
sidewalk or less than 11 feet from the surface of any public
roadway; or
(3) Irrespective of height, a determination is made that the tree
interferes with or obstructs the illumination or view of any public
streetlight, traffic signal or other traffic control device.
C. In the event it is determined that the condition of a tree, or any part
thereof, constitutes a public nuisance, the Township shall notify the
property owner(s), in writing, of said determination, and the property
owner(s) shall remediate the condition within 30 days of the notice. If
the property owner(s) fails to remediate the nuisance within the
required time, a notice of violation will be provided to the property
owners(s) in accordance with § 220-2 of this chapter.
A. The name(s) of the property owner(s) of record of the property in
violation;
B. The address of the property in violation;
C. A description of the specific violation under this chapter;
§ 215-110 CHARTER § 220-2
C:557
§ 220-3. Emergency removal.
§ 220-4. Violations and penalties; cost of removal.
In the event that said notice of violation is not complied with as directed, the
Township shall take any of the following actions as it may deem necessary
to enforce the provisions of this chapter:
D. The steps necessary for compliance and the date by which the
compliance must be completed; and
E. That failure to comply within the time and manner specified constitutes
a violation of this chapter, and the Township shall invoke one or both of
§ 220-4A or B of this chapter necessary to enforce the provisions hereof.
A. In the event that the Township shall determine that a violation of this
chapter is occurring within a public right-of-way and poses an
immediate or imminent threat to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public, and the written notice required in § 220-2 hereof is not
possible given the emergency nature of the violation, the Township may,
without prior notice, correct the violation.
B. The Township may charge the costs of such emergency action under
this section to the property owner(s) responsible for the violation. If
such costs are not paid in full within 90 days, such costs may be filed as
a lien against the property and collected in the same manner as other
municipal liens or by personal action commenced in the Court of
Common Pleas of Delaware County.
C. In the event that the Township corrects a violation under this section,
the Township shall leave all logs, cordwood, branch wood or other
forms of wood resulting from the emergency action on the property. It is
the responsibility of the property owner(s) to remove the logs,
cordwood, branch wood or other forms of wood resulting from the
emergency action on the property left within the public right-of-way
within 10 days of the Township's emergency action taken hereunder.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Township from removing
obstructions or roadside trees or vegetation which may be thrown down
by wind or weather or lodged in a position so as to be a nuisance to
public travel or which by reason of any other cause may become a
source of danger to the public. The Township shall leave all logs,
cordwood, branch wood or other forms of wood resulting from the
emergency action on the property. It is the responsibility of the property
owner(s) to remove the logs, cordwood, branch wood or other forms of
wood resulting from the emergency action on the property left within
the public right-of-way within 10 days of the Township's emergency
action taken hereunder.
A. Commence a summary enforcement proceeding before the Magisterial
District Justice against the property owner(s), and upon conviction
§ 220-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 220-4
C:558
Chapter 227
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 155.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 161.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 235.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 227-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motor-propelled, off-road, recreational
vehicle capable of cross-country travel on land, snow, ice, marsh,
swampland or other natural terrain, which has a net weight of less than 800
pounds, a width of less than 50 inches, which is designed to be straddled by
the operator and steered by handle bars and which is designed to travel on
three or more low-pressure tires.
ATV — Includes an all-terrain vehicle or motorcycle.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person charged with enforcement of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, any member of the Pennsylvania
State Police, the Middletown Township Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning
Officer or Township Manager, or any other person or agency authorized by
law to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
MOTORCYCLE — A two-wheeled motor-propelled vehicle which is designed
to be straddled by the operator and steered by handle bars, and which is
designed or manufactured primarily for off-road use.
OPERATE — To use an ATV in any manner within Middletown Township,
whether or not the ATV is moving.
thereof, be punishable by a fine of up to $200 for each violation thereof.
Violators shall also be responsible for court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees of the Township, as permitted by law.
B. Cause the condition to be removed or abated by the Township, the costs
for which removal plus a service fee will be charged to the property
owner(s). If such costs are not paid in full within 90 days, such costs
may be filed as a lien against the property and collected in the same
manner as other municipal liens or by personal action commenced in
the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County. Any voluntary action
taken by the Township pursuant to this section shall not create any
obligations on the part of the Township to continue such action, nor
shall it limit, ameliorate or change the obligation of the property
owner(s).
§ 220-4 CHARTER § 227-1
C:559
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, rights-of-way, roads or other real property
owned, maintained or otherwise under the control of any person or entity
other than Middletown Township, Delaware County and not available for
general use by the public.
STATE LAW — Any law, statute ordinance, rule or regulation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any agency, department or
instrumentality thereof.
TOWNSHIP PROPERTY — Any land, rights-of-ways or roads owned,
maintained or otherwise under the control of Middletown Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 227-2. Compliance with state law.
Any person who operates an ATV within Middletown Township shall do so
only in full compliance with applicable state law, including but not limited
to registration and licensing.
§ 227-3. Prohibited operation of ATVs.
A. No person shall operate an ATV in Middletown Township except in full
compliance with all applicable state laws.
B. No person shall operate an ATV on any Township property (see also
§ 161-1E).
C. No person shall operate an ATV on any private property except with the
written consent of the owner of the private property which consent
shall be kept in the possession of the ATV operator at all times during
the operation of the ATV. The operator of an ATV shall stop and identify
himself and produce the written consent to operate the ATV on private
property upon the request of the owner of the private property or his
representative or a Law Enforcement Officer.
D. No person shall operate an ATV in any manner which may endanger any
person (including the operator of the ATV) or property.
E. No person shall operate an ATV at a speed greater than that reasonable
and prudent considering the existing conditions.
F. No person shall operate an ATV without an effective and suitable
muffling device on its engine which effectively deadens or muffles the
noise of the exhaust.
G. No person shall operate an ATV within 50 feet of any dwelling or other
occupied building or structure, except as provided in § 227-4A of this
chapter.
H. No person shall operate an ATV in violation of the provisions of
§ 155-2G.
§ 227-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 227-3
C:560
§ 227-4. Exceptions.
§ 227-5. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of such fine and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 30 days. Each violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 235
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 204. All-terrain vehicles — See Ch. 235.
I. No person shall operate an ATV from sunset until 9:00 a.m. of the
following day.
A. The operation of an ATV on private property owned by the owner of the
ATV shall not require the written permission of the property owner and
the ATV may, in such case, be operated within 50 feet of the property
owner's dwelling or other occupied building or structure on the owner's
property and within 50 feet of a dwelling on an adjacent property if the
owner of the ATV has the written consent of the adjacent property
owner.
B. Motorcycles, when duly registered and licensed for operation on public
roads and highways, shall be permitted on Township property, but only
in areas designated for use by motor vehicles, such as Township roads
and parking facilities.
C. Operation of an ATV shall be permitted on Township property by
Township personnel in connection with Township business or by any
Law Enforcement Officer or emergency personnel in the performance
of official duties.
D. The operation of an ATV for snow plowing or yard maintenance or by a
farmer in connection with agricultural operations shall not be subject to
the prohibitions of this chapter.
§ 227-3 CHARTER § 227-5
C:561

ARTICLE I
Traffic Regulations
§ 235-1. Truck and trailer traffic prohibited.
A. Specific highways denied to truck and trailer traffic.97 Hereafter it shall
be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or drive any truck,
trailer, semitrailer or any commercial vehicle upon the following
designated highways within the Township of Middletown except for
local deliveries:
Name of Street Location
Church Road From Elwyn Avenue to Indian Lane
Clothier Road From Indian Lane to Ridley Creek
Road
Darlington Road From New Darlington Road to Old
Forge Road
Elm Avenue From Lenni Road to the end of Elm
Avenue
Harvard Drive From Middletown Road (Route 352) to
Mount Alverno Road
Highland Avenue From Lenni Road to Pennell Road
Indian Lane From Middletown Road to Elwyn Road
Oak Avenue From Elm Avenue to Highland Avenue
Old Forge Road From Forge Road to Middletown Road
Painter Road From Rose Tree Road to Barren Road
Pembroke Drive From Middletown Road (Route 352) to
Mount Alverno Road
South Middletown Road Between New Middletown Road and
Duttons Mill Road
Valley Road From New Darlington Road (Leg.
Route 23022) to Baltimore Pike (U.S.
Route 1)
Wynmoor Road From Mount Alverno Road to
Pembroke Drive
Yearsley Mill Road Entire length
B. Signs. The Township Road Superintendent is hereby authorized and
directed to erect and to maintain official signs designating the
provisions of this section at each end of the several highways affected
hereby and at the intersections thereof.
97.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902 et seq.
§ 235-1 CHARTER § 235-1
C:563
§ 235-2. Trucks and trailers weighing 10 tons prohibited.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this section shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $50 to be collected by summary conviction before any
Magisterial District Judge as fines and penalties are now by law
collected and in the event of nonpayment of fines and cost of
prosecution the Magisterial District Judge may sentence any person
convicted of violating this section to undergo imprisonment in the
County Jail for a period of not exceeding 10 days,98 provided, however,
that said person shall have all of the rights conferred by the Act of 1929,
P.L. 905, Section 1212, as amended. All fines and bail forfeited shall be
payable to the Treasurer of the Township of Middletown for the
construction, repair and maintenance of the highways thereof.
A. The Township Supervisors find as a fact that it is necessary for the
protection of the following roads and for the safety of traffic thereon to
prohibit the operation of motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers in
excess of a combined gross weight of 10 tons (20,000 pounds). It shall
be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on the following roads when such motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall be in excess of a gross weight of 10
tons (20,000 pounds).
Name of Street Location
Forge Road From Valley Road (also known as
Ashbridge Road) to Middletown
Road
Forge Road From Valley Road (also known as
Ashbridge Road) to entrance of
General Crush Stone Company
Mount Alverno Road Entire length
B. Signs. It shall be the duty of the Township Road Superintendent to
cause to be erected and maintained official signs designating the
provisions of this section at each end of Forge Road and at each end of
Mount Alverno Road and at any intersection thereof.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
shall violate the provisions of this section shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50 to be collected by summary
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge as fines and penalties are
now by law collected under the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania; and in the
event of nonpayment of fines and costs of prosecution, the Magisterial
98.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 188, which added the schedule entry for South Middletown
Road between new Middletown Road and Duttons Mill Road, provided that any person
convicted of violating this ordinance to undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not exceeding five days as provided in Section 908 of The Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code. In the event of some subsequent amendment or alteration to Section 908,
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, the penalty here provided shall be similarly changed.
§ 235-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-2
C:564
§ 235-3. Maximum speed limits.
District Judge may sentence any person so convicted of violating this
section to undergo imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not
exceeding 10 days and further provided that any person so convicted
shall have the right of appeal or of giving bond and waiving hearings as
provided in the Vehicle Code.
A. Schedule of speed limits.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
East Old Baltimore Pike
[Amended 5-21-1979 by
Ord. No. 233; 11-9-1998
by Ord. No. 591]
25 From Middletown Road (Route
352) to School Lane
East St. Andrews Drive
(T-541) [Added
11-26-2007 by Ord. No.
688]
25 Entire length
Fox Road [Amended
8-26-2013 by Ord. No.
740]
25 Between Old Middletown Road
and Knowlton Road
Highmeadow Drive (Route
352) [Added 6-12-2000
by Ord. No. 601]
25 Between Middletown Road
(Route 352) and Ridley Creek
Drive
Howarth Road 25 From Mount Alverno Road to
Glen Riddle Road
Knowlton Road 35 Between Middletown Road and
Bortondale Road or Wellcrest
Road
Mount Alverno Road 35 Between Glen Riddle Road and
Township Line at Chester
Creek
Nelson Drive (T-454)
[Added 6-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 601]
25 Between Ridley Creek Drive
and Meadowglen Lane
Olde Farm Road (T-507)
[Added 6-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 601]
25 Between East Knowlton Road
and Linda Lane
Old Forge Road 35 Between Forge Road and
Middletown Road
§ 235-2 CHARTER § 235-3
C:565
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Painter Road (T-31)
[Added 12-13-1965 by
Ord. No. 93; amended
3-25-2002 by Ord. No.
622]
25 Between Rose Tree Road and
East Forge Road
Riddlewood Drive [Added
10-17-1977 by Ord. No.
212]
25 From War Trophy Lane to
Pennell Road
Ridge Avenue [Added
2-21-1977 by Ord. No.
205]
25 Between Spring Street and
East Knowlton Road
Ridley Creek Drive (T-453)
[Added 6-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 601]
25 Between East Knowlton Road
and Ridley Creek Drive cul-desac
St. Andrews Drive (T-539)
[Added 11-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 688]
25 Entire length
South Old Middletown
Road (T-429) [Amended
9-10-2001 by Ord. No.
616]
25 Between Elwyn Avenue and
Bortondale Road
South Old Middletown
Road [Amended
11-24-1997 by Ord. No.
579]
25 Between Middletown Road
(Route 352) and Dutton's Mill
Road
Spring Valley Road (T-494)
[Amended 6-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 601]
25 Between Mount Alverno Road
and Linvill Road
Valley Road 35 Between Baltimore Pike and
Forge Road
West St. Andrews Drive
(T-540) [Added
11-26-2007 by Ord. No.
688]
25 Entire length
B. Speed signs. The Road Superintendent is hereby directed to erect
speed signs in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person violating the provisions hereof,
upon summary conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and
the cost of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, shall
§ 235-3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-3
C:566
§ 235-4. One-way streets. [Amended 7-25-1983 by Ord. No. 341]
§ 235-5. Stop signs.
undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 10
days (Ordinance Nos. 54, 69 and 80) or five days (Ordinance Nos. 93,
97, 158, 174 and 186).
A. Schedule of one-way streets.99
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
South Old Middletown
Road
North Between Rhoads Lane and
New Middletown Road
Spur Street South From Middletown Township-
Brookhaven Borough line to
Meadowcroft Lane
B. Signs and road plan. The Township Engineer be and is hereby
authorized to mark the road plan of the said Township in accordance
with the provisions hereof and is hereby authorized and directed to
erect appropriate signs indicating one-way traffic on the aforesaid
streets.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this
section upon summary conviction before a Magisterial District Judge
shall be subject to a fine of no more than $10 and the costs of
prosecution, or upon failing and refusing to pay said fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for a period of five days.
A. Stop sign locations. Stop signs shall be erected in the Township at the
following locations:
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Brooke Lane Forge Road
Chestnut Avenue Highland Avenue
East Forge Road [Added
6-8-2020 by Ord. No. 818]
Painter Road
East Glen Circle Pinetree Drive
Fair Acres Drive Old Forge Road
Fox Road Cook Avenue (three-way stop)
Fox Road Entrance to Delaware County
Sportman's Club (three-way stop)
Georgetown Road Forge Road
Highmeadow Drive Ridley Creek Drive
99.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3308.
§ 235-3 CHARTER § 235-5
C:567
§ 235-6. Three-way and four-way stop intersections. [Amended
7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 424; 1-9-1989 by Ord. No. 435; 8-28-1989 by
Ord. No. 451; 2-26-1990 by Ord. No. 462; 2-25-1991 by Ord. No.
486; 9-23-1991 by Ord. No. 491; 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 494]
Stop Sign on At Intersection of
Linda Lane [Added 11-25-1991
by Ord. No. 494]
Old Farm Road
Meadowbrook Lane Highmeadow Drive
Meadowburn Lane Highmeadow Drive
Meadowcroft Lane Highmeadow Drive
Meadowhurst Lane Highmeadow Drive
Meadowpark Lane Highmeadow Drive
Meadowvale Lane Highmeadow Drive
Mt. Alverno Road Hidden Hills Drive (3-way)
Oak Avenue [Added
11-21-1977 by Ord. No. 216]
Highland Avenue
Painter Road [Added 6-8-2020
by Ord. No. 818]
East Forge Road
Patricia Place Highmeadow Drive
Ridley Creek Drive Nelson Drive
St. Andrews Drive Mt. Alverno Road
School Lane [Added 2-2-1992
by Ord. No. 503]
East Baltimore Pike, except for
right-turn movements onto East
Baltimore Pike
West Glen Circle Arrowhead Trail
West Glen Circle Pinetree Drive
Willowgate Lane Mt. Alverno Road
B. Signs. The Township Road Master be and is hereby directed to install
the signs forthwith.
C. Penalty. Any person violating the terms of this section, upon conviction
thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine not exceeding $10 and the cost of prosecution.
A. Three-way stop intersections.
Three-Way Stop Intersection
Moore Drive and Elizabeth Drive
North Old Middletown Road and Blacksmith Lane [Added 4-13-2009
by Ord. No. 703]
Olde Farm Road and Farm House Lane
§ 235-5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-6
C:568
Three-Way Stop Intersection
Old Forge Road and Rushley Way [Added 7-22-2002 by Ord. No.
628]
Old Forge Road and Yearsley Mill Road [Added 8-26-2013 by Ord.
No. 739]
Old Forge Road and West Forge Road [Added 6-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 693]
Painter Road and Vineyard Lane. [Added 3-25-2002 by Ord. No.
623]
Paul Lane and Acorn Way
Pembroke Drive at Wynmoor Road [Added 6-11-2018 by Ord. No.
792]
Paul Lane and Glenmore Road
Ridley Creek Drive and Nelson Drive
South Middletown Road and entrance to property owned by Christian
Academy.100
Spring Street and Ridge Avenue
Spring Street and Smedley Avenue
War Admiral Lane at Man O'War Drive [Added 4-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 756]
B. Four-way stop intersections.
Four-Way Stop Intersection
Highland Avenue and Chestnut Avenue [Added 7-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 553]
Highmeadow Drive and Meadowbrook Drive and Meadowburn Drive
Highmeadow Drive and Patricia Place and Meadowbrook Drive
Iris Lane and Iris Lane [Added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 730]
Linville Road at Clover Circle and Spring Valley Road
Mt. Alverno Road, Linville Road and Catchpenny Lane
Riddlewood Drive and War Trophy Lane
100. Editor's Note: This intersection was further explained as follows: "Stop signs shall be
erected on and for South Middletown Road at and near the entrance to the property
owned by the Christian Academy on the west side of South Middletown Road immediately
south of its intersection with Rhoads Lane. Three separate stop signs shall be erected for
the control of traffic, which stop signs shall be positioned as follows: one sign on the west
side of South Middletown Road immediately north of the driveway to the Christian
Academy property, controlling traffic moving in a southerly direction on South Middletown
Road; one sign on the east side of South Middletown Road immediately south of the point
where the driveway to the Christian Academy property intersects that road, controlling
traffic moving in a northerly direction on South Middletown Road; and a third sign on the
westerly side of South Middletown Road immediately south of the driveway leading to the
Christian Academy driveway, controlling traffic exiting from that driveway onto South
Middletown Road."
§ 235-6 CHARTER § 235-6
C:569
Four-Way Stop Intersection
Valley Road and Darlington Road [Added 10-17-1977 by Ord. No.
213]
C. Signs. The Township Road Superintendent be and is hereby directed to
install such signs accordingly.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this
section, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and the cost of prosecution and, in
default thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not more than three
days, as provided in Section 1016, Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.101
In the event of some subsequent amendment or alteration to Section
1016, Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, the penalty herein provided
shall similarly change. [Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 424;
1-9-1989 by Ord. No. 435; 8-28-1989 by Ord. No. 451; 2-26-1990
by Ord. No. 462; 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 486; 2-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 491; 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 494]
101. Editor's Note: See now 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323.
§ 235-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-6
C:570
ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
§ 235-7. No parking permitted on either side of road.102 [Amended
11-21-1977 by Ord. No. 217; 8-22-1983 by Ord. No. 342]
§ 235-8. No parking permitted on one side of road.
A. Parking schedule.
Name of Street Location
Baltimore Pike (U.S. Route 1)
[Amended 11-21-1977 by Ord.
No. 217; 8-22-1983 by Ord.
No. 342]
From the Township boundary line
at Ridley Creek to the Township
boundary line at Chester Creek
Blacksmith Lane Entire length
Creek Road Between Dutton Mill Road and
Knowlton Road
Elwyn Avenue [Added
2-21-1977 by Ord. No. 206;
repealed 9-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 677]
Iris Drive [Added 2-27-2017 by
Ord. No. 775]
From the intersection with Mt.
Alverno Road east for a distance of
400 feet
North Old Middletown Road North and south of Blacksmith
Lane and Middletown Road
Pennell Road Between Township Line and bridge
over Pennsylvania Railroad
South Old Middletown Road
[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No.
577]
Between South New Middletown
Road and Rhoads Lane
B. Signs. The Township Council of the Township of Middletown is hereby
authorized and empowered to direct that any and all signs that may be
required by law in order to make effective the provisions of this section
be obtained, erected, and maintained.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate the provision of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District
Judge, be subject to a fine of $5, and the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for not
more than five days. [Amended 11-21-1977 by Ord. No. 217;
8-22-1983 by Ord. No. 342]
A. Parking schedule.
102. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 235-7 CHARTER § 235-8
C:571
Name of Street Side Location
Baltimore Pike North From the intersection of Route
452 (Pennell Road) west for a
distance of 500 feet
Bortondale Road
[Amended 6-21-1976
by Ord. No. 198;
7-11-1989 by Ord. No.
424; 3-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 465;
6-11-1990 by Ord. No.
467]
East From East Knowlton Road north
to bridge crossing Ridley Creek
East Knowlton Road East From a point 800 feet east of
Long Point Lane to its
intersection with Bortondale
Road
East Old Baltimore Pike North From its intersection with the
cloverleaf ramp east for a
distance of 600 feet
Highland Avenue East Between Oak Avenue and Lenni
Road
Highland Avenue North Between Pennell Road and Oak
Avenue
Howarth Avenue [Added
2-21-1977 by Ord. No.
207]
North From Bortondale Road to Apple
Avenue
Oriole Avenue [Added
5-21-1979 by Ord. No.
232]
East Between Baltimore Pike (Route
1) and Middletown Road (Route
352)
Ridley Creek Drive East From a point 100 feet south of
Knowlton Road to a point 100
feet north of Nelson Drive
Ridley Creek Drive West Between Nelson Road and
Knowlton Road
Woodland Avenue One side
only
From Park Avenue to Knowlton
Road
Yearsley Road Both From Middletown Road to Old
Forge Road
B. Signs. The Road Superintendent is hereby directed to erect no-parking
signs, as required by the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,103 where
designated by the Township Council.
103. Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 235-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-8
C:572
§ 235-9. Parking prohibited specific hours.
§ 235-10. No parking/tow-away zones. [Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No.
677]
C. Violations and penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this
section, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs of prosecution or
undergo imprisonment for a period of not more than five days.
[Amended 4-16-1979 by Ord. No. 230]
A. Parking schedule.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Blackhorse Lane
[Added
11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 700]
West From 8:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m./Mondays
through Fridays
From its intersection
with East Baltimore
Pike north for a
distance of 450 feet.
Deer Run [Added
7-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 586]
Both From 8:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m./Mondays
through Fridays
Devon Lane
[Added
7-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 586]
Both From 8:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m./Mondays
through Fridays
Entire length
Hunting Hills Lane
[Added
7-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 586]
Both From 8:00 a.m.
to 3:00
p.m./Mondays
through Fridays
From Rose Tree Road
to Deer Run
Middletown Road Both From 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m., and
from 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00
p.m./weekdays
From Pine Tree Drive
to Bortondale Road
B. Signs. The Road Superintendent is hereby directed to erect signs as
required by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code104 at this location.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person violating the provisions hereof,
upon summary conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $10 and the costs of prosecution or undergo imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not exceeding 10 days.
A. The parking of vehicles is prohibited along the following areas of
Middletown Township:
104. Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 235-8 CHARTER § 235-10
C:573
§ 235-11. Creation of positions of parking enforcement officers.
[Added 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 699]
The Township Council hereby creates the positions of parking enforcement
officers and the positions of parking enforcement officers shall be included
in the Township Manning Table. Parking enforcement officers are hereby
granted full law enforcement powers to enforce the provisions of any
Township ordinances regulating the parking of vehicles, including but not
limited to the issuance of parking tickets for violations of the provisions
of this chapter, the institution of criminal proceedings through the filing
of citations, and the participation in any summary proceedings or appeals
Name of Street Side Location
Darlington Road
[Added 10-14-2019
by Ord. No. 812]
Both Darlington Road from the bridge
over Chester Creek to the
Southeastern Pennsylvania
Transportation Authority bridge
Elwyn Avenue Both From Middletown Road to Church
Lane
B. Signs. The Council of the Township of Middletown is hereby authorized
and empowered to direct that any and all signs that may be required by
law, in order to make effective the provisions of this section, be
obtained, erected and maintained. Official signs shall be erected and
maintained on both sides of Darlington Road from the bridge over
Chester Creek to the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation
Authority bridge in accordance with rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code to warn the public that no parking at any time is permitted
and that any vehicles parked in violation of this section will be towed.
[Amended 10-14-2019 by Ord. No. 812]
C. Penalties and towing authorized for violations. Any police officer or
parking enforcement officer may remove or cause to be removed to a
nearby garage or other place of safety any vehicle found to be parked in
violation of the terms of § 235-10, and the costs of such removal and any
related storage costs shall be borne by the owner of said vehicle as
determined by the registration records of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, or similar office of any other state, province or
territory. Notice of such removal shall be given to the registered owner
by United States Mail within 48 hours of the removal, which notice shall
set forth the place where the vehicle can be recovered, the costs of the
removal and where such costs can be paid. In addition, any person, firm
or corporation who shall violate § 235-10 shall, upon conviction thereof
before a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine of $15 plus the
costs of prosecution and in default of payment thereof, shall be subject
to imprisonment for not more than five days. [Amended 10-14-2019
by Ord. No. 812]
§ 235-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-11
C:574
involved in the enforcement of the provisions of any Township ordinances
regulating the parking of vehicles.
§ 235-11 CHARTER § 235-11
C:575
Chapter 242
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Sewers — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
§ 235-11 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 235-11
C:576
ARTICLE I
Connection to System
[Adopted 5-17-1976 by Ord. No. 195105 (Ch. VI, Art. 3, of the 1976
Ordinance Book)]
§ 242-1. Connection requirement for Water District No. 5.
All abutting property owners of Water District No. 5 shall hereby connect
with and use the water lines provided herein. In the event that any owner
of said property shall neglect or refuse to connect with and use said water
system for a period of 90 days after notice to do so has been served upon
him by the Township of Middletown, either by personal service or registered
mail, the Supervisors or their agents may enter upon said property and
construct such connection. In such case, the Supervisors shall forthwith,
upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill for the cost of
construction of such connection to the owner of the property to which
connection has been made, which bill shall be payable forthwith, or the
Supervisors may authorize the payment of the cost of construction of
connection in equal monthly installments, said installments bearing interest
at a rate not to exceed 7% per annum. In case of the neglect or refusal
by the owner of a property required to connect to said system to pay said
bill or installment payment, the Township Supervisors shall file a municipal
lien for the said construction within six months of the date of completion of
said connection, the same to be subject in all respects to the general law
providing for the filing and recovering of municipal liens.
105. Editor's Note: Sections 1, 2, and 3 of this ordinance pertain to the actual agreement with
the Borough of Media for water service.
§ 242-1 CHARTER § 242-1
C:577
Chapter 266
WEEDS AND VEGETATION
§ 266-1. Instances of public nuisance.
It is the responsibility of the property owner(s) to inspect and maintain
the vegetative growth on the owner's property within the Township of
Middletown, including the vegetative growth located within the right-of-way
of a public street on the owner's property. The growth or accumulation of
weeds, grasses, trees, vines, bushes and other vegetative growth is declared
to constitute a public nuisance, wherever and whenever the same shall
cause or contribute to the causing of any of the following conditions to exist:
§ 266-2. Land subject to regulations.
A. Encroachment upon any sidewalk, street, alley or roadway to the
danger or impediment of persons passing on said streets or sidewalks;
B. Preventing the clear view of operators of motor vehicles by users of the
adjoining streets;
C. Being of such a nature as to cause or aggravate hay fever or other
allergy diseases;
D. Causing or tending to cause the breeding, growth or harboring of
mosquitoes, flies or other insects;
E. Causing or tending to cause the breeding, growth or harboring of rats,
mice or other rodents;
F. Causing or creating a fire hazard;
G. Being in any way detrimental to the health or safety of the public; or
H. Grasses, weeds and/or other similar vegetation not edible or planted for
a useful or ornamental purpose that shall have grown or are maintained
at a height in excess of 10 inches on any property within any developed
area.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following:
(1) Lots in a platted subdivision with a structure;
(2) Vacant lots within platted residential subdivisions in which
buildings have been erected upon 60% or more of the lots, except
lots which are naturally wooded areas; or
(3) On lots along improved streets to a depth of 165 feet or the depth of
the lot, whichever is less.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 242-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 266-2
C:578
§ 266-3. Notice of violation.
In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township determines
that a violation of this chapter exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
provide the property owner(s) with a written notice of violation, by certified
and regular mail, containing the following minimum information:
§ 266-4. Violations and penalties; cost of removal.
In the event that said notice of violation is not complied with as directed, the
Township shall take any of the following actions as it may deem necessary
to enforce the provisions of this chapter:
(1) Land used for agricultural purposes including weeds in fields
devoted to growing any small grain crops such as wheat, oats,
barley or rye;
(2) Portions of lots used for flower gardens, shrubbery or vegetable
gardens;
(3) Naturally wooded areas, wetlands or meadows; or
(4) Areas designated as undeveloped open space.
A. The name(s) of the property owner(s) of record of the property in
violation;
B. The address of the property in violation;
C. A description of the specific violation under this chapter;
D. The steps necessary for compliance and the date by which the
compliance must be completed; and
E. That failure to comply within the time and manner specified constitutes
a violation of this chapter and the Township shall invoke one or both of
§ 266-4A or B of this chapter necessary to enforce the provisions hereof.
A. Commence a summary enforcement proceeding before the Magisterial
District Justice against the property owner(s), and upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of up to $200 for each violation thereof.
Violators shall also be responsible for court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees of the Township, as permitted by law.
B. Cause the condition to be removed or abated by the Township, the costs
for which removal plus a service fee will be charged to the property
owner(s). If such costs are not paid in full within 90 days, such costs
may be filed as a lien against the property and collected in the same
manner as other municipal liens or by personal action commenced in
the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County. Any voluntary action
taken by the Township pursuant to this section shall not create any
obligations on the part of the Township to continue such action, nor
§ 266-2 CHARTER § 266-4
C:579
Chapter 275
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control — See
Ch. 186.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 198.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
210.
shall it limit, ameliorate or change the obligation of the property
owner(s).
§ 266-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 266-4
C:580
ARTICLE I
Preamble
§ 275-1. Short title. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Middletown
Township Zoning Ordinance of 1986," as amended.
§ 275-2. Amendment of previous zoning provisions.
This chapter amends Chapter IX of the Township Code of Ordinances by
replacing all of the previous provisions.
§ 275-3. Applicability.
No building, sign or other structure or land shall be used or occupied
and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity
with the regulations of this chapter. This chapter shall apply to the
applications for subdivision and/or land development approvals and
conditional use and special exception approvals to the extent allowed by the
Municipalities Planning Code. (See 53 P.S. §§ 10508(4) and 10603.2.1.106)
§ 275-4. Purpose. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
A. The regulations and districts established by this chapter are designed
to advance the following general purposes:
(1) To promote, protect and facilitate the following: the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, appropriate population densities,
emergency management preparedness and operations, provision of
adequate light and air, adequate vehicle parking and loading space
and to provide for public needs such as transportation, sewage,
water and recreational facilities.
(2) To prevent the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and
congestion in travel and transportation, threats to health, life or
property from fire, flood or other dangers.
(3) To prevent inappropriate use and development of scenic and
natural resources such as floodplains, wetlands, aquifers, steep
slopes and forests.
(4) To encourage the preservation of historic and cultural resources.
(5) To encourage the preservation of prime agricultural and farm land
and open spaces.
106. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10603(c)(2.1) was repealed 6-23-2000 by P.L. 495, No. 68.
§ 275-1 CHARTER § 275-4
C:581
§ 275-5. Conflicts.
(6) To require that development and land use reflect appropriate use of
the topography, soils and other natural features.
(7) To provide a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic,
commercial, agricultural or industrial uses.
(8) To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and provide opportunities for
development of a variety of residential dwelling types and
nonresidential uses.
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the health, safety and general
welfare in the Township. However, this chapter is not intended to
interfere with or abrogate or annul or modify directly or by implication
any covenants in deeds, easements or other agreements affecting real
estate; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
B. Where the provisions of any applicable statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions
of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
C. The Township has prepared a Comprehensive Plan to identify policies
and actions to implement the general purposes stated in § 275-3. In
accordance with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan,
this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the following
community development objectives:
(1) To preserve the semirural nature of the Township's northern
agricultural, botanical, institutional and recreational areas.
(2) To provide an appropriate setting for the expansive institutional
and commercial uses in the central portion of the Township and to
buffer those intense uses from other less intense uses.
(3) To protect and encourage the preservation of the agricultural,
residential and recreational resources in the southern sections.
(4) To maintain and promote attractive, safe, healthy and stable
residential areas and to enhance and encourage rehabilitation of
existing neighborhoods.
(5) To remedy the sewage disposal, water supply or drainage
problems.
(6) To require maintenance and adequate provisions for circulation,
screening, parking and related needs.
(7) To permit various housing types and intensities in suitable areas
which can support new development with efficient water supply
§ 275-4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-5
C:582
and sewage disposal systems; and to limit the intensity of
development in relation to the efficient expansion of such systems.
(8) To promote a complementary relationship among land uses in order
to: protect property values, maintain a unified character and
minimize traffic, noise and visual conflicts.
(9) To protect natural and cultural resources in particular: natural or
artificial bodies of water; places of steep and very steep slope;
areas with sensitive geological or topographic features and
floodplain areas.
(10) To protect the integrity of places having a special character or use
affecting and affected by their surrounding, such as areas along the
Ridley and Chester Creeks and their tributaries, and places having
historical interest or value.
(11) To encourage the provision and preservation of usable and
functional open spaces areas: to aid in natural and cultural
resource protection; to provide increased opportunities for
recreational use and activities; to create visual buffers and to
promote high-quality design and land development.
(12) To control and improve the character of commercial and industrial
development so that it will be compatible with and complementary
to surrounding land uses and circulation systems.
(13) To promote traffic safety and minimize congestion along major
roads and highways by allowing planned business, office and
commercial uses with limited access, few curb cuts and moderate
campus-like settings.
(14) To encourage safe and convenient access throughout the Township:
to help insure the compatibility of major roads, residential streets,
parking areas and driveways for existing and planned uses; and to
promote the safe and efficient movement of people and goods.
(15) To provide for development which will be designed to provide
effective buffer areas and landscaped areas along roads,
particularly major traffic thoroughfares, and between uses and
development areas.
(16) To require that all development and uses have the necessary utility
systems and infrastructure such as public water, public sewer,
storm sewers, permanent erosion and sedimentation control
structures and other facilities.
(17) To encourage the provision of recreational, cultural and
educational facilities and services to meet the needs of those who
live and/or work in the Township.
(18) To promote effective soil conservation practices, to prevent soil
erosion and increased stormwater runoff.
§ 275-5 CHARTER § 275-6
C:583
§ 275-6. Repealer.
Any provisions of the Township Code which are inconsistent with this
chapter are hereby repealed. This repeal shall not affect the following:
A. Any offense or act committed or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or
any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this chapter.
B. The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Township which are
not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Any ordinance or resolution concerning subdivision or zoning matters
filed prior to the effective date of this chapter.
D. The terms of any final subdivision or land development approval or any
development agreement.
§ 275-6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-6
C:584
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 275-7. Interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates another
meaning, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout
this chapter so that:
§ 275-8. Definitions. [Amended 7-24-1989 by Ord. No. 448; 1-8-1990
by Ord. No. 461; 7-23-1990 by Ord. No. 470; 4-27-1992 by Ord. No.
506; 10-25-1993 by Ord. No. 527; 6-27-1994 by Ord. No. 542;
7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 554; 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 556; 6-25-2001 by
Ord. No. 612; 8-28-2000 by Ord. No. 605]
A. The present tense includes all other tenses; the singular includes the
plural and the plural includes the singular; the masculine gender
includes the feminine and the neuter; the word "used" includes the
words designed or arranged; the work "person" includes any individual,
estate, trust, fiduciary, partnership, association, corporation or any
other organization or entity, including the principal officers thereof or
any person or entity acting directly or indirectly by, through or under
any of the foregoing; the word "occupied" includes the words designed,
or intended to be occupied; the word "structure" includes building; the
word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always permissive
and the word "will" is always directory. The words "as amended" as
applied to any statute, ordinance, code, regulation, plan or map, include
replacements, supplements or restatements thereof; and reference to a
particular article, section or subsection which inherently refers to other
articles, sections or subsections, includes all articles, sections or
subsections referred to.
B. The word "Township" means Middletown Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania; the term "Township Council" means the Township
Council of Middletown Township; the term "Planning Commission"
means the Planning Commission of the Township; and the term "Zoning
Hearing Board" means the Zoning Hearing Board of the Township.
C. The terms "such as", "including" and the like are intended to introduce
matters which are illustrative of the meaning of the sentence, clause or
phrase in which such terms appear without limiting or derogating from
the general application of the sentence, clause or phrase in which such
terms appear.
A. In this chapter, words, terms and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of a use of a property (land and/or
structures) by the owner, with the intention of neither resuming the use
or transferring rights to the property to another who will so use the
property.
§ 275-7 CHARTER § 275-8
C:585
ABUTTING OWNER — The owner of record of a parcel of land which is
contiguous at any point to the parcel in question or which is contiguous
to a section of road or street (public or private) on which the subject
parcel has frontage, i.e., a lot across from the subject parcel.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Any building
or other structure subordinate to and separate from the principal
permitted building or other structure on the lot and designed and used
for purposes which are accessory to the principal permitted use of
the lot, including but not limited to buildings, sheds, garages, stables,
swimming pools and tennis courts. "Accessory buildings or accessory
structures" shall be divided into three classes or classifications, as
follows:
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily conducted in connection with the particular use of the
parcel and on the same lot as a principal use.
ACCESSWAY — In the context of an interior lot, that narrow portion of
the lot, the width of which is regulated by Section 3003J,107 on which
the driveway is situated to provide a means of ingress and egress for
the dwelling located on the balance of the lot to the street or road. An
accessway may, but need not, contain a shared drive to provide ingress
and egress for adjacent interior lots.
ADVERSE EFFECTS — Results contributing to a harmful or degraded
condition and/or producing an unfavorable result, such as
environmental harm or degradation. Adverse effects may include: a
negative impact on surrounding land uses; negative impacts which are
contrary to the Comprehensive Plan and the intent of this chapter; and
negative impacts which may create a threat to the public health, safety
and general welfare.
Class A accessory building or accessory structure: an "accessory
building or accessory structure" which has a floor area of 240
square feet or less and a height of 14 feet or less, and which does
not exceed one story.
(1)
Class B accessory building or accessory structure: an "accessory
building or accessory structure" which has a floor area of more
than 240 square feet and/or a height of more than 14 feet and/or
which exceeds one story.
(2)
Class C accessory building or accessory structure: an "accessory
building or accessory structure" which is not a Class A or Class
B accessory building or accessory structure, including but not
limited to hot tubs, spas, swimming pools, fences, walls and
communication structures such as ham radio antennas.
(3)
107. Editor's Note: Section 3003J was repealed by Ordinance No. 510, approved October 26,
1992.
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:586
AGRICULTURAL USE; AGRICULTURE — A principal use involving the
cultivating of the soil, the raising and keeping of livestock and poultry
and the harvesting of the products of the soil, including horticulture
and forestry, but excluding commercial greenhouses, garden centers,
garden marts or nurseries.
ALLEY — An improved right-of-way or easement providing secondary
vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more lots. It may be
public or private and is not intended for through traffic use. Its primary
function is to provide access to the side or rear of the abutting lots.
ALTERATION OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — See "structural
alteration."
ALTERNATIVES — Choices between or among two or more plans,
layouts, approaches, solutions and/or results.
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a
given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from any
sources, near and far.
ANCHOR STORE — A building within the B-2 Major Shopping Center
Zoning District occupying 100,000 square feet or greater gross floor
area, such as a department store or supermarket, which is prominently
located in a shopping mall to attract customers who are then expected
to patronize the other shops in the mall.[Added 5-24-2010 by Ord.
No. 713]
ANTIQUE CAR — Cars for which a current antique or classic license
plate has been issued by the State of Pennsylvania.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, including heirs, successors,
assigns and grantees, who has filed an application for subdivision and/
or land development, as hereinafter defined, or an application for a
special exception, variance or conditional use.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level, in decibels,
as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The
level so read is designated dB(A).
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood").[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH and A1 to 30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent-or-greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
BASEMENT — For Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (PA UCC)
purposes, "basement" shall be held to mean that portion of a building
partly or completely below grade; for floodplain management purposes,
"basement" shall be held to mean any area of the building having
its floor below ground level on all sides; for Zoning Code purposes,
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:587
"basement" shall be considered a story for the purpose of height
measurement if the basement ceiling is five feet or more above the
average ground level around the building.[Amended 11-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 715]
BENEFICIAL EFFECTS — Results contributing to an improvement in
condition and/or producing a favorable result such as making a use
more compatible with the intent of this chapter and the goals of the
Comprehensive Plan and promoting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
BILLBOARD — A structure erected, operated and maintained as the
principal commercial use on a lot for the purpose of advertising a
product, activity or business not conducted on the lot.[Added
9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 707]
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural
environment manifest in its flora and fauna. The disposition of these
characteristics is typically expressed in vegetation and/or wildlife units
such as tree, woodland or forest stands and related understory and
ground cover growth; and aquatic and terrestrial wildlife and/or their
habitats.
BUFFER AREA — A pervious area with natural ground cover which
does not contain any structures, except for those permitted by
§ 275-213 of this chapter, and which is landscaped and maintained as
required by Article XXXIV of this chapter. The width of the buffer area
shall be as provided in the applicable zoning district regulations. The
buffer area shall be measured from the street line for that portion of
a lot abutting a street and from the lot line for those portions of a lot
which do not abut a street.[Added 8-28-2000 by Ord. No. 605]
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP — A strip of land within the required buffer
area which is landscaped with trees and shrubs and maintained as
required by this chapter and in a manner as required in Article XXXIV,
Special Provisions, and the applicable district regulations.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING AREA — The net lot area after subtracting the area of the
accessway.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The coverage of the lot area by buildings.
BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD — The line normally parallel
to the public or private street right-of-way line at a distance equal to
the minimum depth of the required front yard. All yards adjacent to a
public or private street right-of-way normally shall be considered front
yards. However, in the case of an interior lot, such setback line shall
coincide with the front lot line.
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:588
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD — The line normally parallel to
the front lot line and equal to the required minimum depth of the rear
yard.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, SIDE YARD — The line normally parallel to
the front lot line and equal to the required minimum depth of the rear
yard.
BULK — The term used to describe the size of buildings or other
structures and their relationship to each other, to open areas, such as
yards, and to lot lines. The term may include the size, height and floor
area of buildings or other structures and all open areas in yard space
relating to buildings and other structures.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point 4 1/2
feet from the ground surface at the center of the base of the tree for
all existing trees; and at a point six inches from the ground surface at
the center of the base of the tree for all trees to be planted.[Added
11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 658]
CAMPUS MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — A combination of singlefamily
attached dwellings and related community-related business uses
built and maintained according to regulations of § 275-38.1.[Added
12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
CAMPUS MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT TRACT — One or more
contiguous lots assembled for the purpose of development in
accordance with the regulations of a campus mixed use
development.[Added 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
CAMPUS-TYPE SETTING — A unified development whereby buildings
are grouped together around open space areas in the form of greens,
parks, quadrangles, plazas, squares and other public/pedestrian
gathering areas, and complies with the design and development
standards of § 275-38.1E and F.[Added 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
CANOPY STRUCTURE — A structure or portion thereof with a roof,
but no outer walls, providing cover for that portion of a lot upon which
there are motor vehicle fueling positions for the dispensing of motor
vehicle fuel.[Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 658]
CARTWAY — The minimum paved area of a public or private street
within which vehicles are permitted, including travel lanes, but not
including shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or drainage swales.
CENTER LINE, STREET — A line in the center of a street which is
equidistant from and parallel to the street lines.
CHARITABLE USE — A use conducted by a nonprofit organization, as
a service to the general public or to a significant portion of the public,
for no fee or at a fee which is less than would be charged by a profitmaking
organization.
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:589
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings including customary
accessory buildings, designed or intended for organized religious
services. The word "church" includes chapels, cathedrals and temples.
CLEAR CUTTING — The felling of all trees on a tract of land or any
portion thereof at one time.
CLUB or LODGE — A social, professional or philanthropic organization
characterized by the payment or dues, regular meetings and a
constitution and bylaws. A building is used for a club or lodge purposes
when it serves as a meeting place for such organization and is not an
adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a public tavern, cafe
or other public place, although it may be used for recreational and/or
dining facilities for the membership and their guests.
COMMERCIAL SECTION — The area within a campus mixed use
development designated for community-related business uses.[Added
12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a land development
or subdivision, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of
residents or occupants thereof, not including streets, off-street parking
areas and areas set aside for public facilities. (See Article XXXV and
"designated open space.")
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the
transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone,
pager, commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless
communications signals, including, without limitation, omnidirectional
or whip antennas and directional or panel antennas, owned or operated
by any person or entity licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This definition shall not
include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television
antennas or amateur radio equipment, including, without limitation,
ham or citizen band radio antennas.[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No.
588]
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned
building or cabinet containing communications equipment required for
the operation of communications antennas and covering an area on the
ground not greater than 250 square feet.[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure other than a building, such
as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to
support communications antennas.[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No.
588]
COMMUNITY CENTER — A facility operated principally by a nonprofit
entity and used as a community center and for community-based
activities, that includes, but is not limited to, facilities for community
meetings, gatherings and conferences, child-care facilities,
gymnasiums, exercise facilities, swimming pool, locker rooms, tracks,
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:590
playing fields for various sports, recreational facilities and such other
accessory facilities and uses as are normal and customary for a
community center.[Added 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 582]
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — The services which provide for various
community health, education, safety, leisure and like needs and the
locations at which these services are provided. Typical community
facilities include: schools, parks and recreation areas, libraries,
hospitals and other health care facilities, fire protection, police,
ambulance and rescue service and postal services.
COMMUNITY-RELATED BUSINESS USES — Commercial uses
enumerated in § 275-38.1B(2) that are part of a campus mixed use
development in the R-4 District.[Added 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 709]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Middletown Township Plan, as may
be amended from time to time, including maps, tables and text which
constitute a policy guide for decisions regarding land use, circulation,
community facilities and utilities within the Township.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may be approved or denied by the
Township Council after recommendation by the Planning Commission,
when in compliance with all applicable standards and criteria set forth
in this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION OR ACTIVITY — The erection, repair,
renovation, demolition, removal, rehabilitation or other work
performed for, to, on or with regard to any building or structure;
including the excavation, filling and grading of lots in connection
therewith or in preparation thereof.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A development
that provides a continuum of accommodations and care for senior
persons, including a combination of independent living units, personal
care units, a skilled nursing facility and accessory uses.[Added
12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 659]
CONTINUOUS VISUAL BUFFER — A visually impenetrable screen
created with plant materials, fencing, walls and/or earthen berms.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store of not less than 3,000 square
feet or more than 8,000 square feet of gross floor area for the sale
of food and beverages for off-premises consumption, personal care
items and other similar items and which may include an ATM banking
machine.[Added 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 658]
CUL-DE-SAC — A street having vehicular access to and from the public
street system at one end and terminating in a circular vehicular
turnaround at the other end. Such street provides access to abutting
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:591
properties but is not or may not be intended to provide traffic
circulation through a tract.
CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE USE — See "cultural use,
religious use and/or charitable use."
CULTURAL USE — A use which promotes art, music, science and
history in the form of a museum, botanical garden or like facility.
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any premises in which child day care is provided
for children who are not relatives of the operator, including nursery
schools.
DECIBEL (DB) — A unit for measuring the sound pressure level, equal
to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of
the sound measured to the reference pressure.
DENSITY — Unless otherwise provided, the term "density" means gross
density, which is determined by dividing the total number of dwelling
units by the total amount of land in the tract minus all land within the
rights-of-way or easements of streets or utilities.
DESIGNATED OPEN SPACE — Areas, identified on an applicant's plan,
which will be limited to open space use in perpetuity.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, equitable owner or authorized agent
of such landowner or tenant with permission of the landowner who
formally proposes or makes, or causes to be made, a subdivision, land
development or any other development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
land, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other
paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging;
drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the
subdivision of land.[Amended 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The documents and maps and other graphics
outlining a proposal for development of a planned residential
development, prepared in accordance with this chapter, including a plat
of subdivision, location of various uses, all covenants relating to use,
location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of development, streets, parking facilities, common open space,
public facilities and the like.
DWELLING — A building designed for residential use by a family or
occupied as a residence of a family.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a residence for two or more households living
independently of each another.
APARTMENTS — A multifamily dwelling, where individual dwelling
units share a common outside access and share a common yard
area. Apartments or garden apartments contain three or more
(1)
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:592
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A dwelling with party
walls separating two or more single-family dwelling units including
duplex, quadruplex, multiplex and townhouse buildings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building designed for
and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family and having
no party wall in common with an adjacent dwelling unit. Where a
garage is structurally attached to such building, it shall be considered
a part of the dwelling.
dwelling units in a single structure, and each individual apartment,
i.e., having a minimum total floor area of 600 square feet.
RETIREMENT RESIDENCE — A dwelling or group of dwellings
specifically designed for retired or elderly persons. Retirement
dwellings may be of any dwelling type defined, but are only allowed
in accordance with the specific terms and conditions of this
chapter.
(2)
DUPLEX OR TWIN HOUSE — A single-family, semidetached
dwelling having two individual dwelling units separated by one
common party wall from ground to roof with no communicating
openings.
(1)
MULTIPLEX — An attached dwelling in a building with more than
two dwelling units where each dwelling unit has independent
outside access. Such dwelling units may be arranged in a variety of
configurations such as side by side, back to back or vertically and
may involve a quadruplex configuration, where four dwelling units
are attached in a structure or group.
(2)
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family, attached dwelling within a
building with more than two other single-family attached dwelling
separated by any portion of the one or two unpierced party walls
from ground to roof.
(3)
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family detached
dwelling unit intended for permanent occupancy contained in one
unit or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations; and is
constructed as permitted in Article XX, so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation, but with the same, or equivalent,
electrical, plumbing and sanitary facility as for a conventional
single-family detached dwelling. A mobile home shall include any
addition or accessory structure such as porches, sheds, decks or
additional rooms, which is attached to it. For the purpose of
floodplain management, the words "mobile home" shall be replaced
with the words "manufactured home" within any delineated
floodplain area.
(1)
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:593
DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling or portion thereof, forming a single
habitable unit with a private access and facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating exclusively
by one family.
EASEMENT — The right to use or prevent use of another's land for a
particular purpose.
ELECTRICAL CHANGEABLE COPY DISPLAY — The portion of a sign
whose message copy or content can be changed by means of remote
through an electrically energized, on-off switching combination of
alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display surface.
Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized
by lamps or other light-emitting devices from an internal light
source.[Added 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 737]
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical or mental trauma to persons or significant
property damage, typically unforeseen and sudden in nature.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of
preventing or mitigating the physical/mental trauma or property
damage threatened or caused by an emergency.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area or increase in size
of an existing structure, an increase in the area of a parcel which is
occupied by an existing use, or an increase in the intensity of a use
as a result of increased parking, traffic generation or alternate sewage
disposal system or other impacts on surrounding land uses, existing or
zoned.
ENVIRONMENT — The conditions, resources and/or characteristics
which exist within and surround the area to be affected by a proposed
subdivision and/or land development, including natural elements such
as land, water, air, minerals, natural flora and natural fauna; and manmade
components such as objects of historic or aesthetic significance,
infrastructure and man-related attributes of a social and economic
nature.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS — The performance standards set forth
in Article XXXIII pertaining to environmental quality and environmental
degradation.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT — An assessment
which objectively describes, analyzes and documents both the
beneficial and adverse environmental effects of a proposed subdivision
and/or land development and the measures to be undertaken to
mitigate adverse effects in accordance with the provisions set forth in
this chapter.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of
water.[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:594
FAMILY — One or more individual living together in a dwelling unit
as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, i.e., a household; excluding
occupants of a club, fraternity house, lodge, or rooming house, or group
quarters not owned or leased by the individuals.
FILL — Material, exclusive of structures, placed or deposited so as to
form an embankment or raise the surface elevation of the land.
FLOOD — Stormwater that temporarily inundates land areas not
normally covered by water.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain of the one-hundredyear
flood which is outside the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Those areas as described in Article XXIX and
delineated on the Floodplain Conservation District Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.[Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord.
No. 715]
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur only once every 100 years, that is, one that has as one-percent
likelihood of occurring each year, but may occur more than once in any
one-hundred-year period.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area, adjoining a river,
stream, watercourse or body of water, which area is subject to partial
or complete inundation; an area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source, e.g., stormwater
drainage courses and basins.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Those areas as described in Article XXIX and
delineated on the Floodplain Conservation District Map.
FLOODPROOFED — Watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydraulic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.[Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:595
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.[Amended 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
FLOOR AREA — See "gross floor area" and "net floor area."
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total floor area divided by the net area of
that lot.
FOREST — See "woodland and forest."
FRONT PROPERTY LINE — That line which, in the case of a normal lot,
is the front street line; in the case of a corner lot, is the street line of
both abutting streets; and, in the case of an interior lot, the property
line toward which the building faces or is to face. (See the definitions
for "normal lot," "lot, interior," and "lot, corner.")
FRONT YARD — The required open space extending along the street
line of any street on which the lot abuts; or, in the case of an interior
lot, along the front property line. In the case of a corner lot, there shall
be two front yards and two side yards.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the
deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory use or part of a permitted principal
building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by
the owner, residents, employees or visitors to such permitted principal
building.
GOVERNMENTAL USES — Buildings, facilities or activities used or
conducted for a governmental, as opposed to a proprietary, purpose.
GROSS DENSITY — See "density."
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls
or from the center line of a common wall separating two buildings,
including interior parking spaces, interior loading space for motor
vehicles and any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is more than
six feet.
HEIGHT — The height of a structure shall be the distance between
the mean level of the ground surrounding the structure and a point
midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided
that chimneys, spires, towers or antennas; roof structures for housing
stairways; air-conditioning, ventilating or elevator equipment; tanks;
and similar projections shall not be included in calculating the height.
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a
communications tower, including antennas mounted on the
tower.[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:596
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
HISTORIC RESOURCES — Sites, areas, structures, trails and/or routes
which are valued due to their significance as locations of events and/or
examples of architecture, customs, skills or arts of the past.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 12-14-2009
by Ord. No. 709]
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity conducted within a dwelling unit
by the residents, including occupations such as: manufacturer's
representative, insurance salesperson, dressmaker, teacher, artist and
the like; but shall not include: morticians, barbers, beauticians and the
like or uses such as commercial kennels, tearooms, tourist rooms and
the like.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office for the personal use of
a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect or other learned
professional practitioner, provided that such office is located within the
residence of such professional.
HORTICULTURE — The art and practice of propagating and cultivating
plants for their procedure or for ornament.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and
medical and/or surgical care to persons, some of whom are inpatients,
suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other physical or
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:597
mental problems. When conducted as an integral part of the hospital,
related accessory facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient or training
facilities or offices for doctors and other medical personnel affiliated
with the hospital may be an accessory use to the hospital.
HOTEL, MOTEL OR INN — A building or group of buildings containing
10 or more guest rooms, without cooking facilities of any kind,
especially designed for the temporary lodging of transient guests. Such
establishments shall provide guests with customary hotel services such
as maid service and the furnishing and laundering of linen. Eating and
drinking facilities may be an accessory use to the hotel, motel or inn.
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Domestic animals normally considered to be
kept in or in conjunction with a dwelling unit for the pleasure of the
resident family, such as dogs, cats, small birds, gerbils and other similar
pets normally sold by retail pet stores.
ILLUMINATED or ILLUMINATION — To be lightened up or to give light
to, by means of either an internal or external light source other than by
natural light.
IMPACT — The power of an event or condition to produce changes in
other conditions. In the context of impact exerted on the environment,
changes which affect existing conditions and/or quality are of greatest
concern.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE — The coverage of the lot area
by materials that normally shed most rainfall, e.g., buildings, paved
areas, including streets, parking lots and similar surfaces, and other
improvements that generate significant stormwater runoff.
IMPROVEMENTS — Physical additions and changes to land, such as
grading, paving, streets, curbing, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary
sewers, capped sewers, storm sewers storm drains, catch basins,
culverts, sidewalks, monuments, crosswalks, bridges, earthworks,
streetlights, street trees and other plantings and other structures that
may be necessary to produce usable and desirable land development.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of "impulsive
sound" include explosions, drop-forge impacts and the discharge of
firearms.
INDEPENDENT LIVING UNIT — An apartment dwelling unit in a
multifamily dwelling apartment building used exclusively for occupancy
by one or more senior persons in a continuing care retirement
community.[Added 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 659; amended
11-28-2005 by Ord. No. 667]
INFRASTRUCTURE — The basic installations and facilities on which
the continuance and growth of a community depend, such as roads,
schools, electrical transmission facilities and transportation,
communication, sewer and water systems.
INTERIOR LOT — See "lot, interior."
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:598
JUNK VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is so disabled, disassembled,
dismantled or damaged as to be incapable of being used safely for its
intended purposes and is left in such condition for 30 days or more;
vehicles stored for their parts or scrap value.
KENNEL — An establishment where six or more dogs, cats or like
domesticated animals, more than one-year old, are kept, boarded,
groomed, trained, raised or bred for compensation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities described in
Subsections (1) and (2) below, but excluding any activities described in
Subsection (3) below:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land; the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition) or a lessee if he is authorized
under the lease to exercise the rights of the owner.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
The addition of a single accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building if, and only if, all of the following criteria are met:
The use of the proposed accessory building will be other than
residential; and
(a)
The lot area of the lot on which the accessory building is to be
placed is 10 acres or larger; and
(b)
The proposed accessory building does not exceed 1,000 square
feet in gross floor area and the total cumulative gross floor
area of the proposed accessory building and all other
accessory buildings previously exempted from the definition
of land development pursuant to this section does not exceed
2,500 square feet; and
(c)
The height of the proposed accessory building does not exceed
35 feet.
(d)
(3)
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:599
LANDSCAPED AREA — That portion of a tract or lot in which plantings
have been installed in accordance with the special provisions for
landscaping in Article XXXIV. The "landscaped area" includes the buffer
planting strip and those plantings which serve a functional and/or
aesthetic purpose and are located around and between buildings,
roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, sitting areas, service or
maintenance structures, courtyards and the like.
LANDSCAPING PLAN — A plan for the installation and maintenance of
plantings, prepared according to the provisions of Article XXXIV.
LIFE CARE COMMUNITY — A land development which includes
residential units within a planned retirement community and accessory
uses for the continuing care of the residents.
LIVESTOCK — Animals of any kind raised for sale, resale or agricultural
field production. For the purposes of this chapter, the keeping of
common household pets such as dogs, cats and the like shall not be
considered as keeping of livestock.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A space in a building or on a lot
which is accessible from the public street system for the temporary
use of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise, materials or
passengers.
LONG-TERM EFFECTS — Results which are manifest for or extended
over a long period of time.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — For purposes of determining compliance with the
minimum lot area requirements of this chapter, the area of a lot shall
be measured to the street line only; and areas subject to driveway,
drainage and permanent utility easements and areas separated from
the proposed principal use by a street right-of-way shall not be counted
unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets or upon
two parts of the same street, including shared driveways, forming an
interior angle of less than 135°. A corner lot has two front yards and
two side yards.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area that is occupied by
the building area.
LOT DEPTH — The distance along a straight line drawn from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which has limited frontage on a public street or
has access to a public street by a relatively thin strip of land referred to
as an "accessway"; a flag-shaped lot or a lot which has access to a street
only by way of an easement or right-of-way, such as a shared driveway,
and does not front on a public street.
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:600
LOT LINE — A property boundary line shown on a recorded plan or
described in a recorded deed.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line abutting a street and coinciding with
the street line. In the case of a corner lot, the street abutting the lot line
identified on the approved subdivision and/or land development plan as
the front line; or, in the case of an existing lot, the lot line designated
on an approved site plan; or, in the case of an interior lot, the "front
lot line" shall be that property line generally parallel to the street line
providing access to the lot; or, in the case of any other lot, the "front
lot line" shall be construed to be the lot line on the side of the main
entrance.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line which is opposite to the street line or,
in the case of an interior lot, the front yard.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear lot
line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance measured between the side lot
lines at the required or proposed front yard building setback line.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
709]
MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY DISPLAY — The portion of a sign whose
message copy or content is changed manually through placement of
letters or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system.[Added
3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 737]
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family
detached dwelling unit intended for permanent occupancy contained in
one unit or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations; and is constructed as
permitted in Article XX, so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation, but with the same, or equivalent, electrical, plumbing and
sanitary facility as for a conventional single-family detached dwelling. A
mobile home shall include any addition or accessory structure such as
porches, sheds, decks or additional rooms, which is attached to it. For
the purpose of floodplain management, the words "mobile home" shall
be replaced with the words "manufactured home" within any delineated
floodplain area. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for
more than 180 consecutive days.[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
709]
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:601
MENU BOARD OR MENU SIGN — A freestanding sign which depicts
the menu of food for sale at the drive-through section of a fast-food
restaurant. Such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
MITIGATION — The act of precluding a potentially adverse effect and/
or making a potentially adverse effect less severe through measures
which will improve a condition and/or lessen the impact.108
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes. For the
purpose of floodplain management, the words "mobile home park" shall
be replaced with the words "manufactured home park" within any
delineated floodplain area.
MOTEL — See "hotel, motel or inn."
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A building or place of business
where gasoline and automobile accessories are dispensed directly to
the motor vehicle trade and/or where automotive repair services may
be rendered.
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device designed or
used for decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an
engine, machinery or like system.
MUNICIPAL USE — A use conducted on a lot and/or in a building or
structure by Middletown Township, the Middletown Township Sewer
Authority or a fire company or library supported by Township tax
revenues.[Amended 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 794]
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT — A composition of land, water and/or air
represented by its inherent physical and biological resources.
NET FLOOR AREA — The total of all horizontal floor areas of a building,
excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior
vehicular parking or loading and all floors below the first or ground
floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation or
service to the public.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. Any construction started after February 15, 1979, and
before the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
108. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "mobile home, "which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709. See now the definition of
”manufactured/mobile home."
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:602
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.[Added 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709; amended 8-24-2015
by Ord. No. 758]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS —
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or animals
or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or
physiological effect on humans or animals.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which endangers or injures the
safety or health of humans or animals, endangers or injures personal
or real property or is in excess of the sound levels by zoning districts
established in Article XXXIII.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or
structure which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, as
amended, where such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of this chapter or amendment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record lawfully existing at the
passage of this chapter or amendment hereto, which does not have
the minimum width or other requirements set forth in this chapter, as
amended.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which does not conform to the sign
regulations in this chapter, as amended, but which was in existence
lawfully before the regulation creating the nonconformity was enacted.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this
chapter, as amended, where such use was in existence lawfully prior to
the enactment of the regulation(s) creating the nonconformity.
A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential
dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic,
whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally
associated with residential use, and which satisfies all of the
following requirements: [Added 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 712]
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(a)
The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(b)
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
(c)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(d)
(1)
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:603
NORMAL LOT — A lot which abuts on only one street and when
developed will have a front yard along the street.
OPEN SPACE — Natural, cultivated or landscaped areas restricted
in perpetuity to natural resource conservation, recreation, buffer or
other uses as authorized in the open space provisions, Article XXXV. To
determine the areas which may be counted as required open space, see
Article XXXV.
OPEN SPACE OPTION — The choice which may be exercised in the R-1
and R-2 Residence Districts, on tracts greater than 15 acres, to arrange
lots with particular consideration of a sensitivity toward environmental
resources in exchange for allocating open space for various
conservation and recreational purposes. Under this approach, the
minimum net lot size requirement could be less than otherwise would
be required and the relative density could be greater than otherwise
permitted.
PAD LOT — A fee simple parcel created for financing and/or
conveyancing purposes within a tract qualifying for a mall
conversion.[Added 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 760]
PARK — A tract of land designated and used by the public primarily for
recreation of an active or passive nature.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, available for the
temporary parking of one motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways,
driveways or other means of circulation or access. A parking space shall
include either covered garage spaces or uncovered parking lot space
located off the street right-of-way and in back of the front yard building
setback line. The size of parking spaces shall be as required in Article
XXXI and in the PRD and SU districts.
PERSON — Any individual, association, trust, partnership or
corporation, including any members, directors, officers, employees,
partners or principals thereof. Whenever used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the members, trustees,
partners, directors, officers, managers and supervisors, or any of them,
of partnerships, associations, corporations or other form of entity.
PERSONAL-CARE FACILITY — A premises operated by a legal entity
holding a certificate of compliance document issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health (license) permitting the operation
of a personal-care home (PCH), at the location of said premises,
according to appropriate Pennsylvania Department of Health program
licensure or approval regulations, in which food, shelter and personal
assistance or supervision are provided for a period of at least 14
days for four or more aged adults who do not require the services
in or of a Pennsylvania Department of Health licensed long-term care
facility, but who do, because of their advanced age, require assistance
or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial
management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an emergency
or medication prescribed for self-administration.
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:604
PERSONAL-CARE UNIT — A dwelling unit in a building of multiple
dwelling units for occupancy by one or more senior persons in a
personal care facility in a continuing care retirement
community.[Added 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 659]
PHASE — An area or tract which is part of a proposed development
which will be constructed according to a timetable for development
over a period of years included by the applicant in the development
plan.
PHYSICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural environment
manifest in its landforms, soils, geological structure of surface and/
or subsurface rock, minerals, natural bodies of water and/or manmade
impoundments, watercourses, groundwater and the like. The
disposition of these characteristics is typically expressed in
physiographic, topographic and/or hydrologic units such as: rock
formations, slopes, elevations, soil types, watersheds, surface water
types, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers or aquifer recharge areas and the
like.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A contiguous area of
land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for
a number of dwelling units the development plan complying with the
provisions of Article XI.
PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act 247, of 1968, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 to 11202, as amended by Act 170 of
1988.
PLANTINGS — Trees, shrubs and ground cover which are installed
and maintained in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the
Township Council.
PRIMARY EFFECTS — Results of a direct nature which have a principal
influence on a particular condition.
PRINCIPAL OCCUPANT — A tenant space within the B-2 Major
Shopping Center Zoning District with a gross floor area of 20,000
square feet or greater gross floor area within a multi-occupancy
building.[Added 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 713]
PRIVATE ALLEY LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a privately
owned alley easement line.[Added 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "garage, private."
PRIVATE STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a
privately owned street easement line.[Added 12-23-2013 by Ord. No.
744]
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water, tank, pond or other
receptacle for water containment, whether indoors or outdoors, in or
above ground, even if portable or temporary, having a depth at any
point of 18 inches or more or containing over 750 gallons of water,
which is used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing by the
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:605
owner, resident or occupant and their guests. A private swimming pool
is considered an accessory use to a residence under this chapter.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building, not a private garage, used for the
storage or repair of motor vehicles.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT ENHANCEMENTS — Functional and
aesthetic improvements pertaining to vehicular and pedestrian
circulation; pedestrian gathering areas; and the positioning of open
spaces and pedestrian amenities in a campus-type setting as part of
a campus mixed use development as specified in § 275-38.1F.[Added
12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. When such notice is for a public hearing, it shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to
be considered. The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and
the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date
of the hearing.
PUBLIC SEWER and PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — Sewers
owned and/or operated by the Township, a municipality, a municipal
authority or a public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
transmission lines.[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
RECORDED — Properly recorded at the office of the Delaware County
Recorder of Deeds.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure-time activities, usually of a more
formal nature and performed with others, often requiring equipment
and taking place at prescribed sites or fields.
RECREATIONAL AREA — A place designated and equipped for the
conduct of leisure-time activities, such as games, sports and other
customary and usual active recreational activities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
709]
A vehicle which is:
(a) Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(b)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light-duty truck;
(c)
(1)
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:606
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Any leisure time activity not considered
active.
REFORESTATION — The restocking of an area with forest trees,
including natural regeneration as well as tree planting.
REGIONAL RAIL FACILITY — A passenger railroad transit operation
including, but not limited to, a railroad station, passenger platform,
parking facilities within a parking garage or parking deck or surface
parking lot, passenger pickup and drop-off areas, railroad tracks,
bridges, tunnels, accessory retail (including the sale of transportation
tickets/passes, parking permits, newspapers, periodicals and any
miscellaneous items related to public transportation operations)
administrative and operational control buildings, crew facilities and
maintenance buildings owned by a regional transportation authority
and erected within the authority’s right-of-way.[Added 7-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 720]
RELIGIOUS AREA — A use involving a structure or place at which
religious worship and ceremonies are held regularly by a group which
practices the religion.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
RESERVE PARKING — A parking space or spaces which the Township
Council, in its sole discretion, permits a landowner or developer or
any other person to defer the construction, installation, paving or
completion of until such time as the Township Council requires the
construction, installation, paving or completion thereof or until such
time as the parking space or spaces are otherwise satisfactorily
constructed, installed, paved and completed.[Added 8-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 587]
RESIDENTIAL SECTION — The area within a campus mixed use
development designated for single-family attached dwellings.[Added
12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
RESTAURANT — A building used for the purpose of furnishing food to
the public to be consumed within the building and in outdoor dining
space adjoining the building.[Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No.
744]
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(d)
Snowmobiles, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts and boat
trailers are also deemed recreational vehicles.
(2)
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:607
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — A fast-food restaurant
or section of such a restaurant which is designed to allow for the
serving and pickup of food, without leaving the vehicle, for off-premises
consumption.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A building used for the propose of
furnishing food to the public for consumption on the premises and
within the building. Such a restaurant may include drive-through
service.
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A land development which is designed
and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Article X.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
alley or similar place which is owned by a governmental entity and/or
the general public.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution, or the water-carried waste resulting
from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines,
sinks, dishwashers or any other source of water-carried waste of human
origin.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe that conveys sanitary sewage.
SECONDARY EFFECTS — Results of an indirect nature which have
an influence on a particular condition or state derived from a primary
effect.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The felling of certain, but not all, trees in an
area for the purposes of: removing dead, diseased, damaged, mature or
marketable timber; improving the quality of a tree stand or species; or
meeting personal domestic needs.
SEWAGE — The total of organic waste and wastewater generated
by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional or other
establishments.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or
stormwater runoff from the generating source to treatment plants and
to a receiving stream or other drainageway.
SEWERAGE — All effluent carried by sewers whether it is sanitary
sewage, residential, commercial or industrial wastes or stormwater
runoff.
SEWER AUTHORITY — The Sewer Authority of the Township.
SHORT-TERM EFFECTS — Results which are manifest for, or extended
over, a short period of time.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof, or
any device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on a
structure or other surface that displays or which includes any letter,
work, insignia, flag or representation which is in the nature of an
advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction or is
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:608
designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the
public. Flags of any governmental unit or branch of any charitable or
religious organization, interior signs not visible from a public right-ofway
or adjoining property and cornerstones built into or attached to a
wall of a building are excluded.
SIGN, ACCESSORY — Any sign which specifically relates to the
permitted use of the premises on which said sign is erected and which
serves as a further description of products available to or services
provided for the general public.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign shall be construed to include all
lettering, working and accompanying designs and symbols together
with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed but not including any supporting framework and bracing
which are incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists
of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface, building, wall
or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest
rectangle or other shape, including the sign background which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE — A freestanding sign containing a portion of
display with the capability of content change by means of manual or
remote input, including manual changeable copy display and electrical
changeable copy display.[Added 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 737]
SIGN, FLASHING — A sign, the illumination of which, when in use, is
not kept constant in intensity at all times, and which exhibits sudden
or marked changes in lighting effects. Illuminated signs which indicate
the time, temperature or date information shall not be considered a
flashing sign.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by, or suspended from, a
freestanding column or other support(s) located in or upon the ground
surface.
SIGN, GROUND — A sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon
the ground, and not attached to any building. A ground sign shall be
considered a freestanding sign.[Amended 3-25-2013 by Ord. No.
737]
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign designed to give forth artificial light
directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source
of light within such sign or a sign with illumination derived from an
external artificial source so arranged that no direct rays of light are
projected from such artificial source to areas other than the sign being
illuminated.
SIGN, MANUAL CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign or portion thereof on
which the copy or symbols are changed manually through placement of
letters or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system.[Added
3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 727]
SIGN, MENU — See "menu board or menu sign."
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:609
SIGN, MULTI-PURPOSE VISUAL DISPLAY — A sign that uses digital
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), or similar technology, to create a visual
display area composed of images, characters, and/or messages for
advertising and communication purposes, which sign is capable of
frequent display area changes.[Added 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 783]
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — A sign relating in its subject matter to the
premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations,
services or activities available on the premises.
SIGN, PARALLEL — A sign which is mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical building surface not extending beyond the edge of any wall or
other surface to which it is mounted and not projecting more than 15
inches from the wall surface.
SIGN, POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
single support.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign which is attached directly to the wall of
a building or other structure which extends more than 15 inches from
the face of such wall.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or
advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard,
wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to
be displayed for 30 days or less.
SIGN, WALL — See "sign, parallel."
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign which is oriented to the public right-of-way, is
legible to persons in vehicles and is located on the outside or inside of
a window to direct attention to an activity conducted on the same lot.
SITE RESTORATION — Measures taken following completion of land
disturbance activities which will stabilize the land surface and minimize
exposure to possible erosion or sedimentation.
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY — A facility which provides for personal
health care in a continuing care retirement community and is licensed
to provide skilled nursing care by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[Added 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 659]
SLOPE — See "steep slope" and "very steep slope."
SOIL SURVEY — The soil survey of Chester and Delaware Counties,
prepared by the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:610
description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the
use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such
as A, B or D, as specified in American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1974 or the latest
revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated,
the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and
any applicable weighting network used to measure sound pressure
levels which meets or exceeds the requirement for a Type I or Type
II sound level meter as specified in ANSI Specification S1.4-1974 or
the latest revision thereof. The manufacturer's published indication of
compliance which such specifications shall be prima facie evidence of
such compliance.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use which may be authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board, in accordance with Article XXXVII of this chapter, when
the applicant establishes that the ordinance allows the proposed use by
special exception and that the use complies with all applicable specific
standards and criteria.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given
year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1 to A30, AE, A99, or
AH.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
SPECIAL PERMIT — Special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks or subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing manufactured home
parks or subdivisions when such development is located partially or
entirely within a designated floodplain.
STABLE — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is used
in whole or in part for the shelter or care of horses or cattle, either
permanently or transiently.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:611
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord.
No. 715]
STEEP SLOPE — The area of land which is characterized by a change
in elevation of 15% or more but not exceeding 25% over a specified
distance as set forth in Article XXX.
STORY — That part of a structure included between the floor and the
floor or roof next above. When applied to the permissible height of
buildings, the term "story" shall not include a basement if the floor
thereof is more than five feet below the average ground level around
the structure.
STREET — A publicly or privately owned right-of-way serving as a
means of vehicular travel furnishing access to three or more abutting
lots.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the right-of-way
line of an opened or officially platted public street or between a lot and
a privately owned street easement line.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the
supporting or structural members of a building or other structure such
as the bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders or any
change to adapt a structure to a different use.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object or improvement having an
ascertainable stationary location on land or in the water, whether or not
affixed to the land. This term includes anything constructed or erected
on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to,
buildings, sheds, gas or liquid storage tanks that are principally above
ground, manufactured homes, signs and other similar items.[Amended
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709; 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, conveyance or other transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or residential dwellings, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION PLAN — A sketch or preliminary or final plan which
complies with Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development. See
also "land development plan."
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:612
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.[Amended
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709; 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]109
USE — An activity or the specific purpose for which land or a building
is designed, arranged, intended or improved or for which it is or may
be occupied or used.
VARIANCE — Permission, approval or authorization granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, constituting a modification or deviation from
the provisions of this chapter, as applied to a specific property, in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXVII and Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code Section 912.110
VERY STEEP SLOPE — The area of land which is characterized by a
change in elevation of 25% or more over a specified distance as set
forth in Article XXX.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in the Code of Federal Regulations 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4),
(c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.[Added 11-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 715]
VISUAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural and/or cultural
environment which are visible. The visual resources of a particular
area are typically expressed in terms of their visibility, character and/or
attractiveness relative to their amenity value and/or quality.
WATERCOURSE — A stream with year-round or substantially yearround
flow such as a creek, run or other body of running water.
109. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "travel trailer," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715.
110. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
§ 275-8 CHARTER § 275-8
C:613
WOODLAND and FOREST — Those areas of extensive vegetation in
which the dominant plants are healthy trees that are indigenous to the
area.
WOODLAND MANAGEMENT PLAN — A description, by means of text
and maps, of proposed actions involving the removal of trees from
a tract of land. Such plan shall be prepared by a person(s) with
demonstrable expertise in forest management and shall document
measures to be taken to protect water quality; to minimize impacts
from skid trails and logging roads, landing areas and the tree-removal
process; and to assure site restoration.
YARD — An open area with no buildings that lies between the permitted
principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line.
Such yard shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as provided otherwise in Article XXXIII.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the
front lot line and extending in depth from where a building is permitted.
In the case of corner lots or reverse frontage lots, front yards of the
required depth shall be provided along all streets. In the case of an
interior lot, the front yard shall extend along the front lot line the entire
width of the lot and shall not include any portion of the right-of-way or
accessway connecting the lot with the street.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear
lot line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the nearest point
on the lot where a building is permitted.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along the side
lot line and extending in width from such side lot the nearest point on
the lot where a building is permitted.
B. Words not defined above shall have the meaning given in the
Municipalities Planning Code, Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development 111 or other Township codes and ordinances and, if not
defined in the aforementioned documents, the most recent edition of
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 275-8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-8
C:614
ARTICLE III
Districts
§ 275-9. Establishment of districts.
§ 275-10. Classes of districts. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 442;
2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 582; 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 725; 11-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 760]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Middletown is hereby
divided into 21 districts and four overlay districts as follows:
R-1A Residence District
R-1 Residence District
R-2 Residence District
R-3 Residence District
R-4 Residence District
R-5 Residence District
PRC Planned Retirement Community District
PRD Planned Residential Development District (Overlay District)
I-1 Institutional District
I-2 Institutional District
I-3 Institutional District
A. The Township is divided into different districts, each with a specified
purpose and intent to implement the purpose and intent to implement
the purpose of this chapter and the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Whenever federal or state-owned property is included in one or more
zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provision of this chapter to the
maximum extent permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United
States of America and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Every parcel of land and every building or other structure in the
Township, except as otherwise provided by law or by the ordinance,
shall be subject to the provisions specified for the district in which it is
located.
D. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied
only for the uses permitted by right, accessory uses, or conditional uses
which adhere to explicit standards and criteria and the uses permitted
by special exception or variance, when approved, in the zoning district
in which the building or lot is located. No other use shall be permitted
unless the Township Council approves an amendment to this chapter
either permitting another use in the zoning district or rezoning the lot
to permit another use.
§ 275-9 CHARTER § 275-10
C:615
OR-1 Outdoor Recreation District
OR-2 Outdoor Recreation District
OR-3 Outdoor and Indoor Recreation District
SU-1 Special Use District
SU-1-A Mixed Use District
SU-2 Special Use District
B General Business District
B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center District
B-2 Major Shopping Center District
MCO Mall Conversion Overlay Disrict
PBC Planned Business Center District
O Office District
OC-2 Office Campus 2 District
OC Office Campus Overlay District
M Manufacturing and Industrial District
FP Floodplain Conservation District (Overlay District)
SS Steep Slope Conservation District (Overlay District)
§ 275-11. Zoning maps.
The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown on the maps attached
to and made a part of this chapter, which shall be designated "Middletown
Township Zoning Map," "Middletown Township Floodplain Conservation
District Map" and "Middletown Township Steep Slope Conservation District
Map." Said maps and all the notations, references and other data shown
thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be
as much a part of this chapter as if all were fully described herein.112
§ 275-12. Rules for interpreting district boundaries.
A. In the case of the Floodplain Conservation District and the Steep Slope
Conservation District, the rules for interpretation of district boundaries
are contained in Articles XXIX and XXX. For all other districts, the
boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the
center lines of streets as indicated, either the center lines of streets as
existing at the effective date of this chapter, or railroad rights-of-way or
such lines projected or lines parallel thereto. Where dimensions are
shown on the Zoning Map between a street and a district boundary line,
they indicate that the district boundary line runs parallel to the center
line of the street at a distance therefrom equivalent to the number of
feet so indicated.
112. Editor's Note: Said maps are available in the online version of the Township Code or in the
Township offices.
§ 275-10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-12
C:616
§ 275-13. Indication of streets on Zoning Map.
The depiction of any street, road, lane or alley on the Zoning Map or any
reference to a street, road, lane or alley shall not constitute any acceptance
of dedication of any such street, road, lane or alley if said street, road,
lane or alley has not been otherwise accepted in accordance with law, nor
shall the depiction of a street on the map be construed as a commitment to
construct such a street if one does not already exist.
B. Where there is uncertainty as to the location of boundaries, the
following rules shall apply:
(1) Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following
the center line of a street, right-of-way or watercourse, such center
line shall be construed to be such boundary.
(2) Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a
lot or other property line as of the effective date of this chapter,
such lot or property line shall be construed to be such boundary.
(3) Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided
property, the location of such boundary, unless specified by figures
on the Zoning Map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on said map.
(4) Where dimensions are shown on the Zoning Map, such dimensions
shall be used even if scaled distances may not agree with the
figures.
(5) Where physical features existing on the ground vary with those
shown on the Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered
by Subsection A or Subsection B(1) through (4), the Township
Council shall interpret the district boundaries.
§ 275-12 CHARTER § 275-13
C:617

ARTICLE IV
R-1A Residence District
§ 275-14. Purpose.
The R-1A Residence Districts are designed primarily to regulate residential
development so that it will be compatible with and promote conservation
of existing farmlands and other agricultural areas; to protect the rural
character of existing residential development; and to protect and conserve
groundwater and other natural resources by encouraging planned
development which will not require public sewer systems.
§ 275-15. Use regulations.
A. Permitted principal uses. A building may be erected, altered or used
and land may be used, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and
XXX, for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal use.
(3) Agricultural uses and buildings, subject to the provisions of Article
XXXIII.
(4) Silviculture, wildlife and nature preserve or other conservation
uses.
(5) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A herein and as governed by
the general provisions for accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(2) The sale of farm products, provided that such products are
produced on the property, subject to the general provisions for
accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(3) Private parking space and private garage, in accordance with
Article XXXI, related to off-street parking and loading.
(4) Private stable.
(5) Private (noncommercial) swimming pools, tennis courts or other
private recreational facilities, for the use and enjoyment of
residents and their guests, subject to the general provisions for
such accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
§ 275-14 CHARTER § 275-15
C:619
§ 275-16. Height regulations.
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures shall be 35 feet,
except as provided in Article XXXIV. The height of structures designed for
agricultural use may be increased to a maximum of 65 feet, provided that
for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to each yard
requirement two feet of depth or width.
§ 275-17. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 4-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 506]
Except as restricted under Articles XXIX and XXX, the following area and
bulk regulations shall apply:
(6) Signs, in accordance with Article XXXII, related to sign regulations.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Conversion of single-family detached dwellings to apartments,
subject to the general provisions for conversions in Article XXXIII.
(4) Home professional offices and home occupations, subject to the
provisions in Article XXXIII.
(5) Public utility and governmental uses, subject to the provisions in
Article XXXIII.
(6) Community tennis courts and swimming pools operated for the use
and benefit of the members of the community association and their
guests.
(7) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV and all other standards and
criteria for approval of conditional uses in this chapter. [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 595]
A. Residential dwelling units and municipal use.
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre for each principal permitted building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area and building coverage: Not
more than 40% of the area of any lot shall be covered by impervious
surfaces and not more than 20% of any lot area shall be occupied
by buildings.
§ 275-15 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-17
C:620
(5) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum width of side yards: Each lot shall have at least two side
yards having a minimum average width of 30 feet and neither side
yard shall have a width of less than 25 feet. On each corner lot
there shall be two front yards; the yards abutting the street shall
have a width of not less than 50 feet; and the side yard not abutting
the street shall have a width of not less than 25 feet.
B. Other uses. The area and bulk regulations for the following conditional
uses shall be as follows:
(1) Cemeteries.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 400 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 300 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 40%.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 150 feet.
(g) Minimum width of each side yard: 75 feet.
(2) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 35%.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum width of each side yard: 50 feet.
(3) Governmental, including municipal and public utility, uses except
for easements, land used for pumping stations, land in the OR-2
District and land in open space in accordance with Article XXXV.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 35%.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
§ 275-17 CHARTER § 275-17
C:621
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum width of each side yard: 100 feet.
§ 275-17 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-17
C:622
ARTICLE V
R-1 Residence District
§ 275-18. Purpose.
The R-1 Residence District is designed primarily to make provisions for
low-density, suburban-type, single-family residential development and to
encourage the preservation of open space, green space and natural
resources through cluster development in areas planned for or accessible to
public sewer and water systems.
§ 275-19. Use regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
A. Permitted principal uses. A building may be erected, altered or used
and land may be used, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and
XXX, for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal use.
(3) Agricultural uses and buildings, subject to the provisions of Article
XXXIII.
(4) Silvaculture, wildlife and nature preserve.
(5) Open space for recreation and conservation purposes.
(6) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A, subject to the provisions
in Article XXXIII.
(2) Sale of farm products, provided that such products are produced on
the property and subject to the provisions in Article XXXIII.
(3) Private parking space and private garages, in accordance with
Article XXXI.
(4) Private stables.
(5) Private (noncommercial) swimming pools, tennis courts or other
private recreational facilities for the use and enjoyment of
residents and their guests, subject to the general provisions for
such accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(6) Signs, in accordance with Article XXXII.
§ 275-18 CHARTER § 275-19
C:623
§ 275-20. Height regulations.
The maximum heights of the dwellings and other structures erected,
enlarged or used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV.
The heights of structures designed for agricultural use may be increased
to maximums of 65 feet, provided that for every foot of height in excess of
35 feet there shall be added to each yard requirement two feet of depth or
width.
§ 275-21. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 4-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 506]
Except as restricted under Articles XXIX and XXX, the following area and
bulk regulations shall apply:
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings where the cluster option is
exercised, subject to § 275-22.
(2) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(3) Conversion of single-family detached dwellings to apartments,
subject to the provisions in Article XXXIII.
(4) Home professional office and home occupation, subject to the
provisions in Article XXXIII.
(5) Public utility and governmental uses, subject to the provisions in
Article XXXIII.
(6) Community tennis courts and swimming pools operated for the use
and benefit of the members of the community association and their
guests.
(7) Communications Antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-16 of Article XXXIV and all other standards and
criteria for approval of conditional uses in this chapter. [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 595]
(8) Regional rail facilities. [Added 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 720]
A. Residential dwelling units and municipal use.
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre for each principal permitted building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area and building coverage: not more
than 40% of the area of any lot shall be covered by impervious
§ 275-19 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-21
C:624
surfaces, and not more than 20% of any lot area shall be occupied
by buildings.
(5) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum width of side yards: Each lot shall have at least two side
yards having a minimum average width of 30 feet and neither side
yard shall have a width of less than 25 feet. On each corner lot
there shall be two front yards; the yard abutting the street shall
have a width of not less than 50 feet and the side yard not abutting
the street shall have width of not less than 25 feet.
B. Other uses. For certain conditional uses, the area and bulk regulations
shall be as follows:
(1) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 35%.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum width of each side yard: 50 feet.
(2) Governmental, including municipal and public utility, uses except
for easements, land used for pumping stations, land in the OR-2
District and land in open space in accordance with Article XXXV.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 35%.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum depth of each side yard: 50 feet.
(3) Regional rail facilities located within SEPTA right of way. [Added
7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 720]
(a) There shall be no minimum tract or lot area requirements.
§ 275-21 CHARTER § 275-21
C:625
§ 275-22. Cluster subdivision option.
(b) Setbacks for parking garages, parking lots, station buildings
and other occupied buildings shall be located no closer than 50
feet from adjacent residential property lines.
(c) There shall be no minimum setbacks from the street line.
A. As a conditional use, a landowner or developer may be allowed to
reduce the requirements of § 275-21A, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) The area of the tract to be subdivided must be at least 15 acres.
(2) A minimum of 30% of the tract shall be designated as restricted to
open space uses, subject to the provisions in Article XXXV.
(3) Designated open space areas shall be owned, maintained and
administered in accordance with the provisions in Article XXXV.
(4) The cluster subdivision shall be served by public sewer, which shall
be constructed and operational at the time when residential
occupancy begins, except as hereinafter provided:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings on lots of one acre or more
may be served by an on-lot sewage disposal system.
(5) The proposed development must conform to all standards an
criteria for in Article XXXVI an all other articles, sections,
ordinances and regulations referred to therein. If, in the opinion of
Township Council, the proposed development does not conform to
such standards and criteria or to the requirements of this section,
the application for the approval of the conditional use may be
denied.
B. When the cluster subdivision option is exercised, the area and bulk
regulations for single-family detached dwellings with public sewer
service may be reduced as follows, provided that the gross density shall
not be greater than that permitted for a single-family detached unit
under Subsection A(1):
(1) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acre.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area and building coverage: 45%.
(5) Maximum building coverage area: 20%.
(6) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 35 feet.
(7) Each lot shall have a minimum of two side yards.
§ 275-21 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-22
C:626
(8) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 40 feet.
(9) Minimum width of each side yard: 15 feet.
(10) For corner lots, the minimum width for yard abutting a street shall
be 35 feet and the minimum for the other side yard shall be 15 feet.
§ 275-22 CHARTER § 275-22
C:627

ARTICLE VI
R-2 Residence District
§ 275-23. Purpose. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 554]
The R-2 Residence District is designed primarily to make provisions for
single-family residential development at low and moderate suburban-type
densities; to relate residential density to environmental and health concerns
by limiting development to low-density when water and sewer service are
to be on-lot, but allowing moderate suburban-type densities when public
sewer service is used; to encourage the preservation of open space and
natural resources through cluster development; to maintain the identity and
character of existing suburban-type residential neighborhoods; and to allow
for campus-like, low-intensity uses which serve as a transition from existing
higher intensity development fronting along those portions of Route 352
and Route 452, which are on or north of Route 1, to the lower-intensity
development beyond the properties fronting on Route 352 and Route 452,
north of Route 1.
§ 275-24. Use regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461;
7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 554]
A. Permitted principal uses. A building may be erected, altered or used,
and land may be used or occupied, subject to the provisions of Articles
XXIX and XXX, for any of the following uses and for no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Municipal use.
(3) Agricultural uses and buildings, subject to the provisions in Article
XXXIII.
(4) Park or recreation area.
(5) Open space for recreation and conservation purposes.
(6) Woodlands, silvaculture, wildlife and nature preserve or other
conservation use.
(7) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A herein, and as governed
by the general provisions for accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
§ 275-23 CHARTER § 275-24
C:629
§ 275-25. Height regulations.
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV.
(2) Sale of farm products, produced in the property, subject to Article
XXXIII.
(3) Private parking space and private garage, in accordance with the
off-street parking and loading regulations in Article XXXI.
(4) Private stable.
(5) Private (noncommercial) swimming pool, tennis court or other
private recreational facility, for the use and enjoyment of the
residents and their guests, subject to the general provisions for
such accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(6) Signs, in accordance with the sign regulations in Article XXXII.
(7) Accessory uses must comply with the general provisions for
accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings where the cluster subdivision
option is exercised, subject to § 275-27.
(2) Cultural religious and charitable uses.
(3) Conversion of single-family detached dwellings for apartments,
subject to the general provisions for conversions in Article XXXIII.
(4) Home professional offices and home occupations, subject to the
general provisions for home professional offices and home
occupations in Article XXXIII.
(5) Public utility and governmental uses, subject to the provisions in
Article XXXIII.
(6) Personal-care facility, subject to the regulations in §§ 275-26B(2)
and 275-28.
(7) Day-care center, subject to the regulations in §§ 275-26B(2) and
275-29.
(8) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building, or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV and all other standards and
criteria for approval of conditional uses in this chapter. [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 595]
§ 275-24 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-26
C:630
§ 275-26. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 4-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 506; and 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 554]
Except as restricted under Articles XXIX and XXX, the following area and
bulk regulations shall apply:
A. Residential dwelling units and municipal use.
(1) Lots without public sewer (with on-lot sewage disposal systems)
shall meet or exceed the following standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 40% of the area of the lot.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 20% of the area of the lot.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 60 feet.
(h) Minimum width of each individual side yard: 25 feet.
(i) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 50 feet.
(2) Lots with public sewer shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acre for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 45% of the area of the lot.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 20% of the area of the lot.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 35 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 45 feet.
(h) Minimum width of each individual side yard: 20 feet.
(i) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner: 35 feet.
B. Other uses. For certain conditional uses, the area and bulk regulations
shall be as follows:
(1) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
§ 275-26 CHARTER § 275-26
C:631
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 35%.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum width of each side yard: 50 feet.
(2) Personal-care facilities and day-care centers.
(a) Minimum lot area: 2 1/2 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 200 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 40%.
(e) Maximum total building coverage: 20%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front yard: 35 feet.
(g) The rear yard setback shall be as follows: [Amended
6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 805]
Number of Stories
Rear Yard Setback
(feet)
1 35
2 or more 75
(h) The side yard setback shall be as follows: [Amended
6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 805]
Number of Stories
Side Yard Setback
(feet)
1 35
2 or more 70
(i) Minimum aggregate side yard required for a one-story
building: 75 feet. [Added 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 805]
(3) For all other conditional uses, the area and bulk regulations shall
be similar to those set forth in Subsection A or B above, depending
on which uses they are most similar to.
§ 275-26 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-27
C:632
§ 275-27. Cluster subdivision option.
A. As a conditional use, a landowner or developer may be allowed to
reduce the requirements of § 275-26A, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The area of the tract to be subdivided must be at least 15 acres.
(2) A minimum of 30% of the tract shall be designated as restricted to
and used for open space uses, subject to the provisions in Article
XXXV.
(3) Designated open space shall be owned, maintained and
administered in accordance with the provisions in Article XXXV.
(4) The cluster subdivision shall be served by public water and sewer,
which shall be constructed and operational at the time when
occupancy of the development begins, except as hereinafter
provided:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings on lots of one acre or more
may be served by on-lot water supply systems and on-lot
sewage disposal systems.
(b) Single-family detached dwellings on lots of 1/2 acre may be
served by community water supply system if the tract is not
accessible to public water and if such system is feasible.
(5) The proposed development must conform to all standards and
criteria for conditional uses in Article XXXVI and all other articles,
sections, ordinances and regulations referred to therein. If, in the
opinion of Township Council, the proposed development does not
conform to such standards and criteria or to the requirements of
this section, the application for the approval of the conditional use
may be denied.
B. When the cluster subdivision option is exercised, the area and bulk
regulations for lots for single-family detached dwellings may be
reduced as follows, provided that the gross density shall not be greater
than that permitted for a single-family detached dwelling unit under
§ 275-26A(1).
(1) Lots with public water.
(a) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acre.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 45%.
(e) Maximum building coverage area: 20%.
§ 275-27 CHARTER § 275-27
C:633
§ 275-28. Personal-care facility regulations. [Amended 7-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 554; 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 559]
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 35 feet.
(g) Each lot shall have a minimum of two side yards.
(h) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 40 feet.
(i) Minimum width of each side yard: 15 feet.
(j) For corner lots, the minimum width for yard abutting a street
shall be 35 feet and the minimum width for the other side yard
shall be 15 feet.
(2) For lots with public sewer and public water.
(a) Minimum lot area: 1/4 acre for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 50% of the area of the
subdivision tract.
(e) Maximum building coverage area: 25% of the area of the
subdivision tract.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 30 feet.
(h) Minimum width of each side yard: 10 feet.
(i) Minimum width for yard abutting a street on corner lot: 30
feet.
A. The proposed development must conform to all standards and criteria
for conditional uses in Article XXXVI and all other articles, sections,
ordinances and regulations referred to therein. If, in the opinion of
Township Council, the proposed development does not conform to such
standards and criteria or to the requirements of this section, the
application for the approval of the conditional use may be denied.
B. The proposed use must have at least 200 feet of frontage along those
portions of Route 352 or Route 452, which are on or north of Route 1.
C. All development shall be served by public sewer and public water.
D. No more than 35 beds per acre of lot area shall be provided.
E. All signage shall comply with Article XXXII. However, all signage shall
be 1/3 smaller than the sizes set forth in Article XXXII.
§ 275-27 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-28
C:634
§ 275-29. Day-care center regulations. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord.
No. 254; 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 559]
F. Crosswalks shall be line-striped across all streets at intersections or
where sidewalks would otherwise extend across the street.
G. Lots, buildings, streets and related structures shall be organized in as
compact an arrangement as possible to promote a form of development
characteristic of a campus-like setting.
H. Buildings shall be designed with the gable end facing the street
frontage(s).
I. Landscaping shall be an essential feature of any personal-care facility.
At least 60% of the lot area shall be landscaped. All landscaping shall
comply with § 275-214.
J. Bus stop shelters, benches and other pedestrian amenities shall be
provided.
K. Other vertical infrastructure in the form of such elements as hedges,
fences, walls, pergolas, gazebos, pavilions and the like are encouraged
to add human scale and amenity.
L. Parking shall be provided at the rate of 1/2 off-street parking space for
each bed, plus one for each employee on the shift of greatest
employment.
M. All development shall be shown on a sketch plan to be submitted before
any preliminary plan is filed. The sketch plan shall depict compliance
with this article and other related ordinance requirements.
N. The use shall meet all licensing and certification requirements of state
and other regulating agencies.
O. The applicant shall submit a report to describe compliance with the
provisions of this article and other related ordinance requirements.
P. Notwithstanding § 275-200, the maximum height of a fence constructed
and used in connection with a personal care facility shall be eight feet.
[Added 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 805]
A. The proposed development must conform to all standards and criteria
for conditional uses in Article XXXVI and all other articles, sections,
ordinances and regulations referred to therein. If, in the opinion of
Township Council, the proposed development does not conform to such
standards and criteria or to the requirements of this section, the
application for the approval of the conditional use may be denied.
B. The proposed use must have at least 200 feet of frontage along those
portions of Route 352 or Route 452, which are on or north of Route 1.
C. All development shall be served by public sewer and public water.
§ 275-28 CHARTER § 275-29
C:635
D. All signage shall comply with Article XXXII. However, all signage shall
be 1/3 smaller than the sizes set forth in Article XXXII.
E. Crosswalks shall be line-striped across all streets at intersections or
where sidewalks would otherwise extend across the street.
F. Lots, buildings, streets and related structures shall be organized in as
compact an arrangement as possible to promote a form of development
characteristic of a campus-like setting.
G. Buildings shall be designed with the gable end facing the street
frontage(s).
H. Landscaping shall be an essential feature of any day-care facility. At
least 60% of the lot area shall be landscaped. All landscaping shall
comply with § 275-214.
I. The provision of day-care services shall be limited to infants through
kindergarten, except during summer programs, in which case services
may be extended to children through the third-grade level.
J. Playground areas shall be completely enclosed with fencing, walls,
buildings or a combination thereof.
K. Parking shall be provided in accordance with requirements for private
kindergarten or child institutional home in § 275-182.
L. All development shall be shown on a sketch plan to be submitted before
any preliminary plan is filed. The sketch plan shall depict compliance
with this article and other related ordinance requirements.
M. The use shall meet all licensing and certification requirements of state
and other regulating agencies.
N. The applicant shall submit a report to describe compliance with the
provisions of this article and other related ordinance requirements.
§ 275-29 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-29
C:636
ARTICLE VII
R-3 Residence District
§ 275-30. Purpose.
The R-3 Residence District is designed primarily to make provisions for
single-family residential development at low and moderate suburban-type
densities; to relate residential density to environmental and health concerns
by limiting development to low density where water and sewer are to be
on-lot, but allowing moderate suburban-type densities when public sewer or
public water service is used; and to maintain the identify and character of
existing suburban-type residential neighborhoods.
§ 275-31. Use regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
A. Permitted principal uses. A building may be erected, altered or used
and land may be used or occupied, subject to the provisions in Articles
XXIX and XXX, for any of the following uses and for no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Park or recreation area.
(3) Woodlands, silviculture, wildlife and nature preserve or other open
space use.
(4) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A herein, and as governed
by the general provisions for accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(2) Private parking space and private garage, in accordance with the
off-street parking and loading regulation in Article XXXI.
(3) Private (noncommercial) swimming pool, tennis court or other
private recreational facility, for the use and enjoyment of residents
and their guests, subject to the general provisions for such
accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(4) Signs, in accordance with the sign regulations in Article XXXII.
(5) Accessory uses must comply with the general provisions for
accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
C. Conditional uses.
§ 275-30 CHARTER § 275-31
C:637
§ 275-32. Height regulations.
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV.
§ 275-33. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461]
Except as restricted under Articles XXIX and XXX, the following area and
bulk regulations shall apply:
(1) Agricultural uses and buildings, subject to the provisions in Article
XXXI.
(2) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(3) Conversion of single-family detached dwellings to apartments,
subject to the general provisions for conversions in Article XXXIII.
(4) Home professional office and home occupation, subject to the
general provisions for home professional offices and home
occupations in Article XXXIII.
(5) Public utility and governmental uses subject to the provisions in
Article XXXIII.
(6) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV and all other standards and
criteria for approval of conditional uses in this chapter. [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 595]
A. Residential dwelling units.
(1) Lots with on-lot sewage disposal systems and on-lot water supply
systems shall meet or exceed the following standards.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 40% of the area of the
subdivision tract.
(e) Maximum building coverage area: 20% of the area of the
subdivision.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 60 feet.
§ 275-31 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-33
C:638
(h) Minimum width of each side yard: 25 feet.
(i) Minimum width for yard abutting a street on a corner lot: 50
feet.
(2) Lots with public sewer but no public water shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acre for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 45% of the area of the
subdivision tract.
(e) Maximum building coverage area: 20% of the area of the
subdivision tract.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 35 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 45 feet.
(h) Minimum width of each side yard: 20 feet.
(i) Minimum width for yard abutting a street on a corner lot: 35
feet.
(3) Lots with public sewer and public water shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1/4 acre for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 50% of the area of the
subdivision tract.
(e) Maximum building coverage area: 25% of the area of the
subdivision tract.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 30 feet.
(h) Minimum width of each side yard: 10 feet.
(i) Minimum width for yard abutting a street on a corner lot: 30
feet.
§ 275-33 CHARTER § 275-33
C:639
B. Other uses. The area and bulk regulations for certain conditional uses
shall be as follows:
(1) Agricultural uses shall meet or exceed the area and bulk
regulations started at Subsection A(1).
(2) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum total impervious surface area: 35%.
(e) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum width of each side yard: 50 feet.
(3) For all other conditional uses, the area and bulk regulations shall
either be those set forth in Subsection A(1) or B(2) above,
depending on which uses the particular conditional use in question
is most similar to.
§ 275-33 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-33
C:640
ARTICLE VIII
R-4 Residence District
§ 275-34. Purpose.
The R-4 Residence District is designed primarily to make provision for
single-family detached and semidetached residential development at low
and moderate suburban-type densities; to relate single-family residential
density to environmental and health concerns by limiting single-family
development to low density when water and sewer services are to be onlot,
but allowing moderate suburban-type densities when public sewer or
public sewer and water services are used; to make provision for townhouse
development at moderate suburban-type densities when public sewer and
water is used and the size of the tract is adequate to ensure that such
development will result in substantial open space areas; and to preserve the
identity and character of the existing residential development. This district
is intended to provide for economically feasible development alternatives
for land which may be subject to natural constraints such as steep slopes,
high water table or shallow bedrock.
§ 275-35. Use regulations.
A. Permitted principal uses. A building may be erected, altered or used,
and land may be used or occupied, subject to the provisions of Articles
XXIX and XXX, for any of the following uses and for no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings (twin or duplex dwelling
units).
(3) Park or recreation area.
(4) Open space for recreation and conservation purposes.
(5) Woodlands, silvaculture, wildlife and nature preserve or other
conservation use.
(6) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A herein, and as governed
by the general provisions for accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(2) Private parking space and private garage, in accordance with the
off-street parking and loading regulation in Article XXXI.
§ 275-34 CHARTER § 275-35
C:641
§ 275-36. Height regulations.
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV.
§ 275-37. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461]
Except as restricted under Articles XXIX and XXX, the following area and
bulk regulations shall apply:
(3) Private (noncommercial) swimming pool or other private
recreational facility, for the use and enjoyment of residents and
their guests, subject to the general provisions for such accessory
uses in Article XXXIII. [Added 7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 675]
(4) Signs, in accordance with the sign regulations in Article XXXII.
(5) Accessory uses must comply with the general provisions for
accessory uses in Article XXXIII. [Added 7-24-2006 by Ord. No.
675]
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Agricultural uses and buildings, subject to the provisions in Article
XXXIII.
(2) Conversion of single-family detached dwellings to apartments,
subject to the general provisions for conversions in Article XXXIII.
(3) Home professional office, home occupation subject to the general
provisions for home professional offices and home occupations in
Article XXXIII.
(4) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(5) Public utility and governmental uses subject to the provisions of
Article XXXIII.
(6) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouse, quadruplex and like
dwelling units).
(7) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building, or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV and all other standards and
criteria for approval of conditional uses in this chapter. [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 595]
(8) Campus mixed use development, subject to the area and bulk
regulations and design standards contained in § 275-38.1. [Added
12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744]
§ 275-35 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-37
C:642
A. Single-family detached residential dwelling units with on-lot sewage
disposal systems and on-lot water supply systems shall meet or exceed
the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface: 40%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yards: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 60 feet.
(8) Minimum individual side yard: 25 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 50 feet.
B. Single-family detached residential dwelling units with on-lot water
supply but using public sewer service shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acre.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface: 45%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yards: 35 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 45 feet.
(8) Minimum individual side yard: 20 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 35 feet.
C. Single-family detached residential dwelling units using public sewer
and water service shall meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: 1/4 acre.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface: 50%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
§ 275-37 CHARTER § 275-37
C:643
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yards: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum individual side yard: 10 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 30 feet.
D. Single-family semidetached dwelling units with on-lot sewerage
disposal and on-lot water supply systems shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
(1) All area and bulk regulations as provided in Subsection A above
shall apply for each individual dwelling unit, except that the side
yard requirements shall only apply to one side of the unit.
(2) The side yard for each semidetached dwelling unit shall be 30 feet.
E. Single-family semidetached dwelling units using public sewer shall
meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) All area and bulk regulations as provided in Subsection B above
shall apply for each individual dwelling unit, except that the side
yard requirements shall only apply to one side of the unit.
(2) The side yard for each semidetached dwelling unit shall be 35 feet.
F. Single-family semidetached dwelling units using public sewer and
water service shall meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) All area and bulk regulations as provided in Subsection C above
shall apply for each individual dwelling unit, except that the side
yard requirements shall only apply to one side of the unit.
(2) The side yard for each semidetached dwelling unit shall be 30 feet.
G. Single-family attached dwelling units shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
(1) The maximum gross density for all such units shall be four dwelling
units per acre, provided that such units are served by public sewer
and public water and the overall tract size is at least 10 acres.
(2) The design standards of § 275-38 shall be met for single-family
attached dwelling units.
H. Single-family attached dwelling units within a campus mixed use
development shall be in conformity with the area and bulk regulations
and design standards contained in § 275-38.1, Campus mixed use
development. [Added 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 744113]
I. Other uses shall meet or exceed the following standards. The area and
bulk regulations for the following conditional uses shall be as follows:
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection H as Subsection I.
§ 275-37 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-37
C:644
§ 275-38. Design standards for single-family attached dwelling
units.
(1) Agricultural uses.
(a) The area and bulk regulations of Subsection A shall apply.
(2) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 60%.
(e) Maximum building coverage area: 15%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 50 feet.
(3) For all other conditional uses, the area and bulk regulations either
shall be similar to those set forth in Subsection A or C above,
depending on which uses the proposed uses are most similar to.
A. General design standards. All single-family attached dwelling units
shall meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) All performance standards in the open space provisions in Article
XXXV shall be followed.
(2) The topography features of the site and the direction of prevailing
winds and solar orientation shall be considered inn planning,
designing, locating, orienting and constructing all residential
buildings and other structures to improve the aesthetic design and
energy efficiency of the development. The development plans shall
show and supplemental notes shall explain how these factors are
incorporated into the design.
(3) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located,
oriented and designed to create architectural interest and to
preserve areas of environmental concern and further the amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
(4) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located and
situated to promote pedestrian and visual access to open space, in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXV.
(5) Single-family attached dwellings shall be designed and constructed
in staggered groups and not in long rows parallel to street or
property lines. The arrangement of such units shall create a
§ 275-37 CHARTER § 275-38
C:645
physical and visual distinctions in the lines of the facades and the
roofs. Such distinction shall be achieved through the use of varied
floor plans for adjoining units and alternating the projections and
angles of exterior walls and roofs, exterior fencing and other
diversified space articulating techniques.
(6) All housing shall be sited so as to enhance privacy.
(7) Development near the perimeter of the property shall be designed
to be harmonious with neighboring land uses and shall be screened
from such other uses by landscaped buffer areas.
(8) All utilities shall be placed and/or installed underground.
(9) Refuse stations to serve residential and recreational areas shall be
designed with suitable screening, located so as to be convenient for
trash removal and not offensive to nearby residential areas.
B. Dimensional standards.
(1) The length of any building shall not exceed six dwelling units in any
single direction.
(2) No residential building shall be closer than 100 feet to the
perimeter property line, and no other structure shall be less than
50 feet from such line, except for signs and those structures
associated with ingress and egress, landscaping, lighting standards
and benches.
(3) A buffer planting strip shall be provided within the setback from
property lines. Such buffer planting strip shall be no less than 20
feet in width and shall contain landscaping in accordance with a
landscaping plan approved by the Township.
(4) No common parking area shall be closer than 25 feet to any singlefamily
attached residential building and shall be screened from the
building to prevent direct glare from headlights and the like.
However, common parking areas assigned to a particular dwelling
unit shall not be more than 100 feet away from such unit.
(5) No principal building shall be erected closer than 100 feet to
another principal building.
(6) A buffer planting strip shall be provided between any two principal
buildings in accordance with the approved landscaping plan.
C. Open space standards.
(1) A minimum of 30% of the tract shall be designated as, restricted to
and used for open space uses, subject to the provisions of Article
XXXV.
§ 275-38 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-38.1
C:646
§ 275-38.1. Campus mixed use development. [Added 12-23-2013 by
Ord. No. 744]
A. Conditions of eligibility.
(1) Each campus mixed use development tract shall meet or exceed the
following:
(a) Contain a minimum of 50 gross acres (excluding existing public
road right-of-way).
(b) Shall be located not more than one mile from public
transportation.
(c) Shall have two entrances with access to and from a main
arterial roadway (e.g., U.S. Route 1 - Baltimore Pike) with not
less than one signalized intersection.
(d) Shall be served by public sewer and public water.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Single-family attached dwellings (including duplexes, twins and
townhouses) within the residential section of a campus mixed used
development.
(2) Community-related business uses within the commercial section of
a campus mixed use development consisting of:
(a) Bank or other financial institutions with or without drive-up
window and/or accessory ATM facilities.
(b) Personal service shops.
(c) Health and fitness facility, including ancillary services such as
wellness, physical rehabilitation facilities and prevention
health activities.
(d) Pharmacy, with or without drive-up window.
(e) Restaurant.
(f) Retail store.
(g) General or professional office.
(h) Day-care center.
C. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Residential section. Single-family attached dwelling units within
the residential section of a campus mixed use development shall
comply with the following area and bulk regulations:
§ 275-38.1 CHARTER § 275-38.1
C:647
(a) Minimum/maximum area of residential section: Not less than
88% nor more than 98% of a campus mixed use development
tract shall consist of single-family attached units.
(b) Maximum gross density: Four dwelling units per acre of the
gross acreage within the residential section of a campus mixed
use development.
(c) Minimum lot area for a single-family attached unit:
[1] Dwelling units with front garage access: 2,100 square feet;
[2] Dwelling units with rear garage access: 1,100 square feet.
(d) Minimum depth of front yard:
[1] Dwelling units with front garage access: 23 feet from edge
of private street line;
[2] Dwelling units with rear garage access: 10 feet from edge
of private street line.
(e) Minimum depth of rear yard:
[1] Dwelling units with front garage access: 15 feet from rear
lot line;
[2] Dwelling units with rear garage access: End dwelling units
shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the edge of the private
alley line. Interior dwelling units shall be a minimum of 23
feet from the edge of the private alley line. Interior
dwelling units may be designed with recessed garages to
satisfy the required minimum rear yard in which event the
depth of the rear yard shall be measured from the
foundation wall of such dwelling unit to the edge of the
private alley line as depicted in the Alley Cross Section in
Appendix B Design Guidelines.114 Notwithstanding
§ 275-199H of Article XXXIII, decks, patios and uncovered
spaces on all lots may encroach into the required rear
yards by no more than eight feet.
(f) Minimum side yard of all end dwelling units: five feet except
for end dwelling units which face a private street, which shall
have a minimum setback of 10 feet from the private street line.
Interior attached units shall have common boundary lines with
zero side yard setbacks.
(g) Maximum number of attached units in a building: six units.
(h) Maximum length of a residential building: 160 feet.
(i) Minimum distance between buildings: 25 feet.
114. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-38.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-38.1
C:648
(j) Maximum building height: three stories or 40 feet, whichever
is greater, except as provided in Article XXXIV, § 275-211.
(k) Required parking. A minimum overall parking ratio of 4.5
parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided within the
residential section of a campus mixed use development. Each
dwelling unit shall have a minimum of three on-lot parking
spaces, which shall include garage parking spaces.
Notwithstanding the requirements of § 275-184B of Article
XXXI, for purposes of this section, an on-lot driveway parking
area having a minimum width of 18 feet and a minimum length
of 19 feet shall be deemed to constitute two on-lot parking
spaces. The on-lot parking requirement with respect to an end
dwelling unit with rear garage access may be satisfied by the
permanent, exclusive assignment of one off-lot parking space
to such end dwelling unit, so long as each assigned parking
space is not more than 60 feet from the habitable ground floor
area of the end dwelling unit to which such parking space is
assigned. End dwelling units with rear garage access and with
assigned off-lot parking spaces shall conform to the knee wall
detail depicted in Appendix B Design Guidelines.115 The
remainder of the minimum number of required parking spaces
shall be provided by overflow parking. For purposes of this
section, the term "overflow parking" shall mean permitted onstreet
parking spaces and parking spaces provided in common,
off-street parking areas conforming to the requirements of
§ 275-38.1D(3) below. Required overflow parking shall be
subject to the reserve parking provisions of § 275-189. Onstreet
parking on one side of the street shall be permitted.
(2) Commercial section. Community-related business uses within the
commercial section of a campus mixed use development shall
comply with the following area and bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum/maximum area: Not less than 2% nor more than 12%
of a campus mixed use development tract shall consist of
community-related business uses.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 30% of the gross acreage within
the commercial section but not more than 60,000 square feet.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage area: 75% of the gross acreage
contained within the commercial section.
(d) Maximum floor area within a single building: The gross floor
area of a single building shall not exceed 25,000 square feet.
(e) Minimum depth of front yard: 100 feet from a public road rightof-
way.
115. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-38.1 CHARTER § 275-38.1
C:649
(f) Minimum setback of parking from public road right-of-way: 45
feet.
(g) Minimum depth of side yard: 20 feet.
(h) Minimum depth of rear yard: 20 feet.
(i) Minimum distance between buildings: 40 feet.
(j) Minimum distance of building from edge of private street
cartway: 20 feet.
D. Design standards applicable to the residential section of a campus
mixed use development.
(1) All single-family attached dwelling units shall meet or exceed the
standards set forth in § 275-38A.
(2) No dwelling units shall be less than 22 feet in width.
(3) Common off-street parking areas. Common off-street parking areas
shall be provided in segregated areas of not more than 15 parking
spaces. All common off-street parking stalls shall be a minimum
size of 9 1/2 feet by 19 feet. Common, off-street parking areas shall
not be closer than 12 feet to the garage of any single-family
attached residential building or 15 feet to the habitable ground
floor area of any dwelling unit. Segregated common, off-street
parking areas containing 10 or fewer parking spaces shall not be
subject to the provisions and requirements of § 275-188 (screening
and landscaping requirements) of Article XXXI.
E. Design standards applicable to the commercial section of a campus
mixed use development:
(1) Parking. Community-related business uses shall provide parking in
conformity with Article XIXA, SU-1-A Mixed Use District,
§ 275-117.11.
(2) Signage. Signage for the community-related business uses shall be
governed by the provisions of Article XXXII of the Code,
§ 275-195B(3) relating to B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center
Districts.
F. Special design standards applicable to campus mixed use development
- public improvement enhancements.
(1) Common controls/subdivision of sections. The areas comprising the
residential section and the commercial section of a campus mixed
use development shall be clearly designated on the applicant's land
development plan. The private streets, private alleys, common
areas and other common amenities of a campus mixed use
development shall be owned, managed and maintained by a single
entity. The commercial section of a campus mixed use development
§ 275-38.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-38.1
C:650
may be subdivided from the residential section and the private
streets, private alleys, common areas and other common amenities
in each such section may be separately owned, managed and
maintained provided both subdivided sections are subject to a
recorded declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions
regarding private streets, private alleys, common areas and
common amenities which shall be subject to the review and
approval of Township Council.
(2) Separate ownership of individual buildings or individual pads
within the commercial section. Where the Township Council has
approved a land development plan for a campus mixed use
development meeting the requirements of § 275-38.1, an individual
building or pad shown on the approved land development plan for
the commercial section may be separately owned, leased,
purchased, sold, mortgaged and developed as a unit created in
accordance with the Uniform Planned Community Act, 68 P.S.
§ 5105 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, or
as a unit created in accordance with the Uniform Condominium
Act, 68 P.S. § 3101 et seq., as the same may be amended from time
to time, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The development plan for the entire commercial section shall
at all times remain compliant with the development standards
applicable to the commercial section of the campus mixed use
development; and
(b) The entire commercial section and all units created therein
(and all mortgagees thereof) shall be subject to the terms and
provisions of the declaration of the planned community or the
declaration of condominium, as applicable, which shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Township Council
with respect to matters relating to land use and zoning.
(3) Perimeter setback. No building or accessory structure shall be less
than 100 feet from the perimeter boundary line of a campus mixed
use development tract (except for signs and those structures
associated with ingress and egress, lighting standards, stormwater
management facilities, retaining walls, benches and the like) unless
the proposed development abuts a nonresidential, commercial use,
a perpetually preserved conservation area, parkland or open space,
in which case the Township Council may, upon request of the
applicant, decrease the perimeter setback applicable to building to
a minimum setback of 25 feet. Required rear yards may encroach
into a perimeter setback no more than 15 feet.
(4) Buffer planting strip. A buffer planting strip shall be provided
within the setback from the perimeter boundary line of a campus
mixed use development tract. The buffer planting strip shall be no
less than 20 feet in width and shall contain landscaping in
accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the Township
§ 275-38.1 CHARTER § 275-38.1
C:651
Council. No buffer planting strip shall be required where the
campus mixed use development tract abuts a nonresidential
commercial use, a perpetually preserved conservation area,
parkland or open space. Existing trees and foliage of a quality and
density satisfactory to the Township shall be credited to satisfy any
minimum buffer planting strip requirement.
(5) Open space. A minimum of 35% of the campus mixed use
development tract shall be designated as, restricted to and used for
open space uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXXV.
(6) Active recreational facilities. Notwithstanding § 275-222E(1), not
less than 1% of the required open space area shall be set aside for
active recreational facilities including, but not limited to, a
community recreation building, gazebo, pavilion for sheltered
outdoor activities, clubhouse, swimming pool, multipurpose sports
court, swings, tennis courts, bocce ball courts, and basketball
courts, as depicted on Appendix B Design Guidelines.116 The total
cost of active recreational facilities, and the total cost of public
improvement enhancements in the nature of active recreational
facilities shall be applied as a credit against the recreational fee in
lieu of active recreational facilities that would otherwise be payable
by an applicant pursuant to § 275-222E(1) and § 210-41 of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(7) Pedestrian gathering areas. Not less than 1% of the required open
space area shall be built and maintained in the form of greens,
plazas, pocket parks, and green courts, as depicted on Appendix B
Design Guidelines.117
(8) Private streets/private alleys. All streets and alleys within a campus
mixed use development shall be owned by the ownership entity or
entities designated in accordance with § 275-38.1F(1) above, shall
conform to the street and alley cross sections depicted in Appendix
B Design Guidelines and shall comply with the following
standards:118
(a) One-way boulevard streets shall have a minimum paved
cartway of 16 feet to the inside face of curb.
(b) Two-way internal streets with no on-street parking shall have a
minimum paved cartway of 24 feet to the inside face of curb.
(c) Two-way internal streets with on-street parallel parking on one
side only shall have a minimum paved cartway width of 30 feet
to the inside face of curb, including parallel parking spaces.
Parallel parking spaces shall measure a minimum of seven feet
by 22 feet.
116. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-38.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-38.1
C:652
(d) One-way internal alleys shall provide a minimum of 16 feet
paved cartway with no parking.
(e) A two-way internal alley shall provide a minimum of 18 feet
cartway with no parking.
(f) There shall be a minimum center-line curve radius ("curve
radius") of 50 feet for internal streets, provided that a two-way
main thoroughfare street shall have a minimum curve radius of
75 feet.
(g) There shall be a minimum sidewalk width of 4 1/2 feet. Curbs
shall be vertical concrete curbs with reinforced concrete at
driveway curb cuts or, in the alternative, vertical or splayed
Belgium block.
(h) Cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet and a
maximum length of 750 feet and shall serve no more than 50
single-family attached dwelling units.
(9) Roadway improvements connecting abutting parcels. Shared
driveways, service drives and accessways with appropriate
easements shall be constructed, where feasible, to provide access
to abutting parcels as a part of an overall Township traffic
improvement benefit.
(10) Internal roadway improvements. Internal vehicular circulation
connector(s) between the commercial and residential sections shall
be installed, where feasible, in order to reduce external vehicle
trips by residents of the residential sections who might otherwise
use existing public roads.
(11) Landscaping. Except as otherwise provided in § 275-38.1D(3)
above and § 275-38.1F(4) above, the provisions of Article XXXIV,
§ 275-214, with respect to landscaping shall apply to a campus
mixed use development.
(12) Public and private streetscape enhancements.
(a) Additional landscaping at least 10% above the minimum
requirements of Article XXXIV, § 275-214, shall be provided in
and along public and private streets;
(b) Two or more of the following streetscape amenities (as
depicted in Appendix B Design Guidelines119) shall be provided
along public and private streets: decorative/ornamental
lighting; street furniture (benches); unit-paver crosswalks; and
Belgium block curbs.
(13) Public trails.
119. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-38.1 CHARTER § 275-38.1
C:653
(a) An eight-foot-wide low-impact public pedestrian trail shall be
constructed in a campus mixed use development tract which
shall connect existing, contiguous Township-owned parkland to
a public street or to the commercial section.
(b) The low-impact public pedestrian trails shall be maintained in
a passable condition by either a recognized conservation
organization (e.g., Natural Lands Trust) or the entity which is
designated to own and control the private streets, private
alleys, common areas and other common amenities of the
residential section and/or the commercial section of a campus
mixed use development.
(14) Design Guidelines. The details and design specifications depicted
on Appendix B Design Guidelines120 are incorporated herein and
shall be consulted and utilized in developing the land development
plan for a campus mixed use development.
120. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-38.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-38.1
C:654
ARTICLE IX
R-5 Residence District
§ 275-39. Purpose.
The R-5 Residence District is designed primarily to make provisions for
single-family detached and semidetached residential development at low
and moderate suburban-type densities; to relate single-family residential
density to environmental health concerns by limiting single-family
development to low density when water and sewer service are to be onsite,
but allowing moderate suburban-type densities when public sewer or
public water are used; to make provision for townhouse and multifamily
development when public sewer and water are used and the size of the tract
is adequate to ensure that the development will result in substantial open
space and landscaped areas and that the development can be designed to
be compatible with the lower-density single-family character of most of the
Township; and to preserve the identity and character of existing residential
development.
§ 275-40. Use regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
A. Permitted principal uses. A building may be erected, altered or used
and land may be used or occupied, subject to the provisions of Articles
XXIX and XXX, for any of the following uses and for no other:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings (twin or duplex dwelling
units).
(3) Park or recreation areas.
(4) Open space for recreation and conservation purposes.
(5) Woodlands, silviculture, wildlife and nature preserve or other
conservation uses.
(6) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A herein, and as governed
by the general provisions for accessory uses in Article XXXIII.
(2) Private parking spaces and private garages in accordance with the
off-street parking and loading regulations in Article XXXI.
(3) Signs, in accordance with the sign regulations in Article XXXII.
§ 275-39 CHARTER § 275-40
C:655
§ 275-41. Height regulations.
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV.
§ 275-42. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461]
Except as restricted under Articles XXIX and XXX, the following area and
bulk regulations shall apply:
(4) Accessory uses must comply with the general provisions for
accessory uses in Article XXXIII, except that swimming pools, as
defined in the definitions section, are excluded.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Agricultural uses and buildings, subject to the provisions in Article
XXXIII.
(2) Conversion of single-family detached dwellings to apartments,
subject to the general provisions for conversions in Article XXXIII.
(3) Home professional offices and home occupations, subject to the
provisions for the same in Article XXXIII.
(4) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(5) Public utility and governmental uses, subject to the provisions in
Article XXXIII.
(6) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouse, quadruplex and like
dwelling units).
(7) Apartments.
(8) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV and all other standards and
criteria for approval of conditional uses in this chapter. [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 595]
A. Single-family detached residential dwelling units with on-lot sewerage
disposal and water supply systems shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface: 40%.
§ 275-40 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-42
C:656
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yards: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 60 feet.
(8) Minimum individual side yard: 25 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 50 feet.
B. Single-family detached residential dwelling units with on-lot water
supply but using public sewer service shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acre.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface: 45%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yards: 35 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 45 feet.
(8) Minimum individual side yard: 20 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 35 feet.
C. Single-family detached residential dwelling units using public sewer
and water service shall meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) Minimum lot area: 1/4 acre.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet.
(3) Minimum width at street line: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface: 50%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yards: 30 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 30 feet.
(8) Minimum individual side yard: 10 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 30 feet.
D. Single-family semidetached dwelling units with on-lot sewage disposal
and water supply systems shall meet or exceed the following standards:
§ 275-42 CHARTER § 275-42
C:657
(1) All area and bulk regulations as provided in Subsection A shall
apply for each individual dwelling unit, except that the side yard
requirements shall only apply to one side of the unit.
(2) The side yard for each semidetached dwelling unit shall be 50 feet.
E. Single-family semidetached dwelling units with on-lot water supply but
using public sewer service shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
(1) All area and bulk regulations as provided in Subsection B shall
apply for each individual dwelling unit, except that the side yard
requirements shall only apply to one side of the unit.
(2) The side yard for each semidetached dwelling unit shall be 35 feet.
F. Single-family semidetached dwelling units using public sewer and
water service shall meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) All area and bulk regulations as provided in Subsection C shall
apply for each individual dwelling unit, except that the side yard
requirements shall only apply to one side of the unit.
(2) The side yard for each semidetached dwelling unit shall be 30 feet.
G. Single-family attached dwelling units shall meet or exceed the following
standards:
(1) The maximum gross density for all such units shall be six dwelling
units per acre.
(2) All such units must be served by public sewer and public water
service.
(3) The tract shall be a minimum of 15 acres in size.
(4) The design standards of § 275-43 shall be met for all such dwelling
units.
H. Multifamily dwelling units (apartments) shall meet or exceed the
following standards:
(1) The maximum gross density for all such units shall be eight
dwelling units per acre.
(2) All such units must be served by public sewer and water service.
(3) The tract shall be a minimum of 15 acres in size.
(4) The design standards of § 275-43 shall be met for all such dwelling
units.
I. Other uses shall meet or exceed the following standards. The area and
bulk regulations for the following conditional uses shall be as follows:
§ 275-42 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-42
C:658
§ 275-43. Design standards for single-family attached and
multifamily (apartment) dwelling units.
(1) Agricultural uses.
(a) The area and bulk regulations of Subsection A shall apply.
(2) Cultural, religious and charitable uses.
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres for each principal permitted
building.
(b) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum impervious surface area: 60%.
(e) Maximum building coverage area: 15%.
(f) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 50 feet.
(3) For all other conditional uses, the area and bulk regulations shall
either be similar to those set forth in Subsections A through F
above, depending on which uses the proposed use is most similar
to.
A. General design standards.
(1) All performance standards in the open space provisions of Article
XXXV shall be followed.
(2) The topography and natural features of the site and the direction of
prevailing winds and solar orientation shall be considered in
planning, designing, locating, orienting and constructing all
residential buildings and other structures to improve the aesthetic
design and energy efficiency of the development. The development
plans shall show and supplemental notes shall explain how these
factors are incorporated into the design.
(3) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located,
oriented and designed to create architectural interest and to
preserve areas of environmental concern and further the amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
(4) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located and
situated to promote pedestrian and visual access to open space, in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXV.
(5) Single-family attached dwellings shall be designed and constructed
in staggered groups and not in long rows parallel to street or
property lines. The arrangement of such units shall create a
§ 275-42 CHARTER § 275-43
C:659
physical and visual distinction in the lines of the facades and the
roofs. Such distinctions shall be achieved through the use of varied
floor plans for adjoining units and alternating the projections and
angles of exterior walls and roofs, exterior fencing and other
diversified space articulating techniques.
(6) Multifamily (apartment) buildings shall be designed and
constructed in staggered groups and not in long rows parallel to
street or property lines. The arrangement of such buildings shall
create a visual and physical distinction in the lines of the facades
and the roofs.
(7) All housing shall be sited so as to enhance privacy.
(8) Development near the perimeter of the property shall be designed
to be harmonious with neighboring land uses and shall be screened
from such other uses by landscaped buffer areas.
(9) All utilities shall be placed and/or installed underground.
(10) Refuse stations to serve residential and recreational areas shall be
designed with suitable screening, located so as to be convenient for
trash removal and not offensive to nearby residential areas.
B. Dimensional standard's.
(1) The length of any single-family attached dwelling shall not exceed
six dwelling units in any single direction.
(2) The length of any multifamily building shall not exceed 175 feet in
any single direction.
(3) No building shall be less than 100 feet from the perimeter property
line, and no accessory structure shall be less than 50 feet from such
line, except for signs and those structures associated with ingress
and egress, lighting standards, benches and the like.
(4) A buffer planting strip shall be provided in the property line
setback area. Such buffer planting strip shall be no less than 20
feet in width and shall contain landscaping in accordance with a
landscaping plan approved by the Township.
(5) No common parking area shall be closer than 25 feet to any singlefamily
attached residential building or multifamily building and
shall be screened from any such buildings to prevent direct glare
from headlights and other lights. However, common parking areas
assigned to particular dwelling units shall not be more than 100
feet from another principal building.
(6) A buffer area shall be provided between any principal buildings, in
accordance with the approved landscaping plan.
C. Open space standards.
§ 275-43 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-43
C:660
(1) A minimum of 30% of the tract shall be designated as, restricted to
and used for open space uses, subject to the provisions in Article
XXXV.
§ 275-43 CHARTER § 275-43
C:661

ARTICLE X
PRC Planned Retirement Community District
§ 275-44. Purpose.
The PRC Planned Retirement Community District is intended to provide
for a planned, high-density, multifamily residential community designed
specifically for senior citizens. Although the community may include health
and nursing care facilities as well as facilities for residents' dining,
recreational and social activities, the character of the community is to be
compatible, both in terms of the use itself and its visual and design impact,
with the residential character of the surrounding area and the Township as
a whole.
§ 275-45. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and land may be used for any of
the following purposes and no other:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Agricultural uses and buildings.
(3) Silvaculture, wildlife and nature preserve or other conservation
uses.
(4) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 8-3-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Conditional uses permitted only after Township Council has authorized
the specific use proposed pursuant to § 275-46 and Article XXXVI.
(1) Multidwelling unit building designed for resident senior citizens
and located in a planned retirement community.
(2) A planned retirement community.
(3) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV and all other standards and
criteria for approval of conditional uses in this chapter. [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 595]
C. Accessory uses for authorized conditional uses:
§ 275-44 CHARTER § 275-45
C:663
§ 275-46. Prerequisites for authorization to develop a planned
retirement community.
The party or parties (applicant/s) proposing to use a site as a planned
retirement community must apply for and receive Township Council's
authorization to do the specific use proposed. The applicant shall have the
duty of presenting evidence and the burden of proving to Township Council
that the proposed use will comply with all of the standards and criteria
required for such authorization.
(1) The following uses are permitted as accessory uses to authorized
conditional uses (but not to the extent that the use takes on the
character of a principal or primary use).
(a) Common dining facilities for residents.
(b) Recreational and social facilities for residents.
(c) Administrative office and operational facilities for management
of the community.
(d) Health care facilities and services for residents, provided that,
with respect to nursing care beds which shall not exceed 78
beds, nonresidents may be provided with services; however,
after seven years from the initiation of such services, not more
than 50% on an average annual basis, of such nursing care
beds shall be used to provide services to nonresidents.
[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 672]
(e) Snack shop and beauty shops.
(f) Personal care units, facilities and services to assist residents
with their daily living activities, provided that there shall be no
more than 56 personal care units in a planned retirement
community; these personal care units may be used to provide
services for nonresidents of the retirement community;
however, after seven years from the initiation of such services,
not more than 50%, on average annual basis, of such personal
care units shall be used to provide services to nonresidents.
[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 672]
A. Performance standards.
(1) The architecture, landscaping and overall site layout of the
retirement community must be aesthetically and functionally
compatible with existing and/or potential (currently zoned)
surrounding residential land uses. The color, style, materials and
scale of the buildings, structures and the project itself shall not
disrupt the character of the surrounding area. Design decisions
should not be limited to marketing needs and other internal
considerations. In designing such a retirement community, the view
to the site should be as important as the view from the site.
§ 275-45 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-46
C:664
(2) The overall character of the community shall be residential. By the
plot plan and other material specifically describing the proposed
operation of this community, the applicant shall demonstrate that
the proposed accessory uses will not, in fact, be principal uses and
will not alter the residential character of the community.
B. Basic criteria. An application for conditional use authorization to
develop a planned retirement community shall not be granted unless
Township Council determines that the specific use proposed is in
harmony with the policies, purposes and Township planning upon which
this chapter is based. In determining whether or not to authorize a
particular planned retirement community, Council shall consider the
following:
(1) The relationship of the size, scope, extent and character of the
specific uses proposed to the character and type of development in
the areas surrounding the site where the specific planned
retirement community is proposed.
(2) Whether or not, in view of its specific characteristics, the proposed
community would be an appropriate use in the area or whether it
would have a detrimental effect on existing or potential uses in the
surrounding area, which analysis will involve a consideration of the
proposed community's impact on the character of the area and
shall involve a consideration of the community's aesthetic impact.
(3) The relationship of the proposed use to the uses permitted in the
surrounding area.
(4) The number, extent and scope of any nonconforming uses in the
surrounding area and the impact of the proposed community on
those uses.
(5) Whether or not the proposed community would have an adverse
effect on the public health, safety and general welfare of the
residents, existing or potential, in the surrounding area and in the
Township as a whole.
(6) The effect of the proposed community on traffic in the area and the
nature of the surrounding traffic conditions and the degree to
which the proposed design will provide safe and adequate access to
roads and not result in excessive or hazardous traffic volumes.
(7) The effect of the proposed community upon the logical, efficient
and economical extension of public services and facilities, such as
public water, sewers, police and fire protection and schools,
throughout the Township.
(8) The degree to which the proposed landscaping addresses the needs
for plantings at the site according to the criteria in Subsection C.
§ 275-46 CHARTER § 275-46
C:665
(9) The degree to which the proposed construction will be consistent
with sound engineering and the land development design and
techniques.
(10) Conformity to all relevant provisions of Chapter 210, Subdivision
and Land Development, and any other applicable ordinance, code
and regulation.
C. Plans and information. In support of an application for authorization to
develop a planned retirement community as a conditional use, the
applicant must provide to Township Council at least the following plans
and information:
(1) A site plan, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing at least
the following:
(a) Location and foundation outline ("footprint") of all buildings
and other structures.
(b) Location and layout of all parking facilities and an analysis of
projected parking needs.
(c) The internal circulation system and its ingress and egress
intersections with public roads, including the community's
projected traffic generation and flow patterns.
(d) Location, configuration and size of green and open space area.
(e) Total building coverage and total impervious surface coverage.
(2) A landscape plan and a statement of specific performance
standards which will guide the implementation of the plan in
accordance with § 275-48.
(3) An architectural analysis, prepared by a registered architect,
describing the design of the proposed buildings and major
structures, which analysis will include at least the following:
(a) A written description of the style, scale, shape, materials and
colors to be used and the positioning of the buildings and
structures as all these factors interrelate both with respect to
the site and the community itself and importantly with the
architecture and views of surrounding land uses, both existing
and potential.
(b) Elevations and general floor plans for each of the proposed
buildings.
(c) A statement describing why the overall design of the buildings
proposed to be constructed in the community are aesthetically
compatible with surrounding land uses.
§ 275-46 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-46
C:666
§ 275-47. Area and bulk regulations.
(4) A traffic and circulation plan, prepared by a civil engineer with
substantial traffic engineering experience, which describes at least
the following:
(a) The community's traffic generation and parking needs.
(b) The impact of the community's traffic on existing traffic at
proposed ingress and egress intersections with public roads.
(c) Emergency vehicle access.
(d) Proposed traffic safety improvements, on and off site, including
all traffic control devices.
D. In authorizing a planned retirement community as a conditional use,
Council may attach such conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
already required by this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this
chapter and to protect the public welfare, which conditions and
safeguards may relate to, but are not limited to, the design of the
buildings, landscaping and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen,
lighting, noise, safety and the prevention of noxious, offensive or
hazardous conditions.
A. Residential single-family dwelling units.
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre for each principal permitted building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 120 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street: 50 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area and building coverage: not more
than 40% of the area of any lot shall be covered by impervious
surfaces and not more than 20% of any lot area shall be occupied
by buildings.
(5) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum width of side yards: each lot shall have at least two side
yards having an minimum average width of 30 feet; and neither
side yard shall have a width of less than 25 feet. On each corner lot
there shall be two side yards; the side yard abutting the street shall
have a width of not less than 50 feet; and, the side yard not abutting
the street shall have a width of not less than 25 feet.
(7) Maximum height of building: 35 feet.
B. Planned retirement communities with residential dwelling units in
multiunit buildings.
(1) Minimum tract size: 25 acres.
§ 275-46 CHARTER § 275-47
C:667
§ 275-48. Additional design standards for planned retirement
communities.
(2) Maximum building height: four stories, provided that elevator
cores shall not be considered when calculating building height.
(3) Gross density: 17 dwelling units per acre. Each apartment dwelling
unit in a multiunit residential building and each residential
personal care unit shall constitute a dwelling unit for purposes of
calculating the density of a planned retirement community.
[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 672]
(4) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(5) Total impervious coverage area: 50%.
(6) No building shall be less than 100 feet from the perimeter property
line, and no accessory structure shall be less than 50 feet from such
line, except for signs and those structures associated with ingress
and egress, internal circulation and lighting standards.
(7) Antennas. Each building may contain a single master TV antenna
(preferably concealed) and no antenna shall be higher than 15 feet
above the roof the building upon which it is located, constructed in
accordance with any applicable provisions of the Township Building
Code121 or any other Township ordinance or regulation. No antenna
shall be located closer to a lot line than the height of the antenna
and no antenna shall be freestanding.
A. Public water and public sewer service is required.
B. All utility lines shall be placed underground.
C. At least 1.15 parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided,
provided that no parking shall be required for residential personal care
units.
D. Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be provided for all buildings and
private street and parking areas during all hours of darkness. Such
lighting shall: provide sufficient light for the safety of residents and
other person, and be arranged and of such character so as to protect all
dwelling units on the property from glare or direct light and all
adjoining properties or streets from any direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. No such lighting shall exceed 20 feet in height.
E. Landscaping.
(1) A landscaping plan shall be submitted at the time when all other
required plans are submitted.
(2) The landscaping plan shall be based on the following:
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes.
§ 275-47 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-48
C:668
(a) The functional and aesthetic factors which relate to the site to
the principal and accessory buildings and other structures.
(b) The desirability of concealing and/or enhancing the views to,
from and/or within the site.
(c) The desirability of screening and complementing proposed
buildings or other structures.
(d) The desirability of creating visual interest for the residents of
the planned retirement community.
(3) The landscaping plan shall reflect the following:
(a) An analysis of the site in terms of: existing views to and from
the areas which are proposed for development; existing
topography and vegetation conditions; and other existing
conditions which are relevant to the site.
(b) An analysis of proposed planting and other landscaping needs
as related to: screening buildings and sections of buildings;
screening parking areas and other areas where vehicles are
parked; screening storage areas; screening site utilities; and
other appropriate types of screening.
(c) The consideration of locations where plantings and other
landscaping is needed to: provide visual interest; define
outdoor spaces; compliment the proposed architectural style;
and achieve other functional and aesthetic goals.
(4) The preliminary and final landscaping plans shall reflect the
following detailed criteria. However, depending on the ways in
which Subsection E(1), (2), and (3) above are analyzed relative to
the particular site in question, the specific numerical requirements
may be satisfied by the applicant by the proposed installation of an
equivalent number and/or size of trees and shrubs on the site in the
locations where plants are most needed and functional (as used
here, "equivalent" means equal in terms of the total costs of the
plants and their installation); and by the grouping of trees and
shrubs, rather than the placement of them at specific intervals.
(a) Shade trees shall be provided along all streets where there are
no existing shade trees. When planted, shade trees shall be no
closer than two feet from the edge of the right-of-way line. No
less than one tree of 3 1/2 inches to four inches in caliper shall
be planted for each 50 feet of roadway length (excluding
service roads and roads through parking lots). However, it is
recommended that shade trees be grouped where appropriate
in accordance with specific site needs and objectives rather
than be spaced at regular intervals.
§ 275-48 CHARTER § 275-48
C:669
(b) The outer perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
Effective screens may be accomplished through the use of
plant materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding through the
use of earthen berms.
(c) All parking lots shall be landscaped. One shade tree of two
inches to 2 1/2 inches in caliper shall be planted for every five
parking spaces, if there are no existing shade trees. Shrubs,
ground covers and other plant materials are encouraged to be
used to complement the trees.
(d) Landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed
throughout the parking lot, except that landscaped "islands"
shall be provided at the end of each parking bay. Such islands
shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and 18 feet in length,
and shall be provided to enhance the appearance of the
parking area and to control access and movement within the
parking area.
(e) All buildings shall be landscaped in accordance with the
following criteria:
[1] A combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and
shrubs shall be used as "foundation" plantings, i.e.,
plantings to be installed in reasonable proximity to the
facades.
[2] One specimen deciduous tree four inches to five inches in
caliper shall be planted for every 25 feet of length of
building facade measured from end to end of buildings,
without regard to indentations and the like in the building,
facades and excluding enclosed walkway connectors and
elevator cores, such tree to be a minimum of 11 feet to 13
feet in height at the time of planting; and one eight-foot-toten-
foot specimen evergreen tree shall be planted for
every 50 feet of length of building facade, measured as set
forth above.
[3] For every foot in height above 45 feet of building height,
the required evergreen trees shall be installed at an
additional 1/2 foot in height, e.g., for fifty-five-foot
buildings, one thirteen-foot-to-fifteen-foot evergreen tree
shall be planted for every fifty-foot length of building
facade.
[4] Five evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted
for every 20 feet of length of building facade.
[5] Trees and shrubs shall be grouped in accordance with
specific needs and objectives.
§ 275-48 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-48
C:670
(f) Other landscaping shall provided along walkways, in
courtyards, around sitting areas, at the entrance to the site and
in other highly visible locations, especially along property lines
where planting will screen views and provide privacy.
(g) The location, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to the review and approval of
Township Council.
(5) The preliminary landscaping plan shall be drawn at a scale of at
least one inch equals 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated with the
overall site plan and shall contain the following:
(a) A delineation of existing and proposed plant materials.
(b) A delineation of other landscaping features such as berms,
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be
devoted to lawns, areas to be devoted to meadows and other
elements of the proposed improvements.
(c) Notes describing the proposed improvements and their
relationship to the criteria as stated in Subsection E(1), )(2),
(3) and (4) above.
(6) One color rendering of preliminary landscaping plan shall be
submitted for review by the Township, in addition to the number of
prints which is otherwise required. The color rendering shall
reflect total coordination with the overall site plan in terms of its
relationship to proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, walks,
walls, fencing, benches, signs, lighting and other like structures.
(7) After the Township has reviewed the preliminary landscaping plan
and submitted comments on the plan to the applicant, a final
landscaping plan shall be submitted. The final landscaping plan
shall be drawn in greater detail than the preliminary plan. It shall
be totally coordinated with the overall site plan and shall contain
the following:
(a) A final version of the plan requirements stated in Subsection
E(5) for a preliminary plan.
(b) A plant list wherein the botanical and common name of the
proposed plants are tabulated, along with the quantity, caliper,
height and other characteristics.
(c) Details for the planting and staking of trees, the planting of
shrubs and any other details which depict other related
installation.
(d) Information in the form of notes or specifications concerning
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be
devoted to lawns, areas to be devoted to meadows and the like.
§ 275-48 CHARTER § 275-48
C:671
Such information shall convey the proposals for seeding,
mulching and the like.
F. Buildings.
(1) The topography and natural features of the site and the direction of
prevailing winds and solar orientation shall be considered in
planning, designing, locating, orienting and constructing all
residential and accessory buildings and other structures to improve
the aesthetics and energy efficiency of the development.
(2) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located,
oriented and designed to create architectural interest and to
preserve amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(3) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located and
situated to promote pedestrian and visual access to open space.
(4) Multidwelling unit buildings shall be designed and constructed in
staggered groups, the arrangement of such buildings shall create a
physical distinction in the lines of the facades and roofs.
(5) Development near the perimeter of the property shall be designed
to be harmonious with neighboring land uses.
(6) No common parking area shall be closer than 25 feet to any
building.
(7) No principal building shall be erected closer than 25 feet from
another principal building.
§ 275-48 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-48
C:672
ARTICLE XI
PRD Planned Residential Development Districts
§ 275-49. Purpose.
§ 275-50. Administration.
The administration of the procedures concerning the application for and
approval of planned residential developments (PRD) shall be vested solely
in the Township Council. However, all applications for tentative and final
approval of plans for such developments first shall be referred to the
A. The provisions of this article are enacted for the following purposes:
(1) To respond to increasing urbanization and the growing demands
for housing of various types and designs.
(2) To encourage innovations in residential development and renewal
so that the growing demand for housing may be met by greater
variety in type, design and layout of dwellings and by the
conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said
dwellings.
(3) To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of open
space for conservation and active and passive recreation.
(4) To provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation
for all who are or will be residents of the Township.
(5) To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the
economics so secured may inure to the benefit of those who require
housing.
(6) To encourage sensitive land development which will respect and
conserve such natural features and resources of the land as
floodplain and flood-prone areas, important farmlands, steep and
very steep slopes, watercourses and water bodies, groundwater
and aquifer recharge areas, forested areas, terrestrial and aquatic
wildlife habitats, historic and cultural sites, visual resources and
other features of importance to the vitality of natural and cultural
resources.
(7) To provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout
of residential development to the particular site and to the
particular demand for housing existing at the time of development
in a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values
within existing residential areas and to assure that the increased
flexibility of regulations over land development established hereby
is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious and fair
administrative standards and procedures.
§ 275-49 CHARTER § 275-50
C:673
Delaware County and Middletown Township Planning Commissions for their
review and comment.
§ 275-51. Conditions of eligibility.
No application for planned residential development shall be submitted,
considered or approved unless the following conditions are met:
A. Any tract of land proposed for development shall be in one ownership or
in case of multiple ownership and/or several parcels, evidence shall be
presented of a written agreement between the parties and owners
involved that development will be in accordance with a single plan with
common authority and common responsibility.
B. All ownership interests in any tract or in any adjacent tract shall be
disclosed in the tentative and final plans.
C. The development will be served by public sewer and public water
systems, which shall be constructed and operational, and having the
assured capacity to serve the development at the time occupancy of the
structures in the development begins; and the feasibility for such
construction and operation shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Township Council at the time of the application for tentative plan
approval, except that:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings on lots of one acre or more may
be served by an on-lot water supply system.
D. The tentative and final plans shall provide a time schedule within which
the owner or owners agrees to develop said land according to the plans
submitted.
E. In order to qualify under this chapter as a planned residential
development (PRD), said development shall provide for a minimum of
70 acres of land. To achieve a sound relationship among components of
the development, all lands in the proposed development shall be
reasonably compact. If any portion of such tract is divided by an
existing street or other public way from the remainder of the tract, the
density requirements of § 275-54 shall be applied to each of the
segments of land so divided, provided that this requirement may be
modified by the Township Council on recommendation by the Planning
Commission in any case where such modification is determined to be in
the best interests of the Township.
F. The land being used to qualify under this chapter shall be located in any
area of the Township, with the following exceptions where planned
residential development shall not be permitted:
(1) Manufacturing and industrial districts.
(2) Outdoor recreation districts.
(3) The R-1A district.
§ 275-50 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-52
C:674
§ 275-52. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and land may be used or
occupied, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX, for any of the
following uses and no other:
§ 275-53. Height regulations.
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIII.
§ 275-54. Density, open space and dwelling unit composition.
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family attached dwellings.
(3) Common open space for recreation and conservation purposes,
subject to the provisions in Article XXXV.
(4) Communications antennas mounted on an existing communications
tower and communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588; amended 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
595]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in Subsection A.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Cultural, religious or charitable uses.
(2) Private club for recreation, provided that the principal activity shall
not be one which is customarily conducted as a business.
(3) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, and
communications equipment buildings.
A. The gross density shall not exceed that of the underlying zoning
district.
B. Not less than 50% of the total area of the property shall be designated
as and devoted to common open space, subject to the provisions in
Article XXXV.
§ 275-52 CHARTER § 275-54
C:675
§ 275-55. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461]
In addition to the setback requirements in § 275-56, the following shall
apply:
§ 275-56. Design standards.
In addition to the design standards in Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development, the performance standards in the open space provisions and
the standards of § 275-38, the following shall apply:
C. No less than 40% of the total number of dwelling units shall be singlefamily
detached dwellings.
D. No less than 10% of the total number of dwelling units shall be singlefamily
attached dwelling units.
E. In the case of a planned residential development (PRD) proposed to be
developed over a period of time and in stages, a variation in the density
of a stage to be developed may be permitted by the Township Council,
subject to the condition that the density and uses as defined in this
chapter and as shown on the final plan which is approved by the
Township Council shall not be changed thereafter if the entire tract is
not developed at one time and is developed in stages.
A. Where single-family detached dwelling units are proposed, the area and
bulk regulations of § 275-26B(2) related to the R-2 District shall apply.
B. Where single-family attached dwelling units are proposed, the design
standards of § 275-38 related to the R-4 District shall apply.
A. General standards.
(1) A buffer area of at least 100 feet shall be provided, in accordance
with Article XXXIV.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be installed by the developer to meet the
requirements of Appendix C of the International Fire Code, current
edition, and the Township Fire Marshal.122
B. Stormwater control.
(1) The storm drainage system for a PRD shall be designed and
constructed so as to minimize erosion and flooding, using as
necessary, drainage easements, swales, catchment basins, silt
traps and the design of cartways so as to minimize runoff.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 275-54 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-56
C:676
(2) Where existing storm sewers are deemed by the Township Council
as being accessible, the Council may require that the proposed
development connect therewith.
(3) All stormwater management design standards shall be in
accordance with the provisions for design standards and required
improvements embodied in Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development, as may be amended from time to time.
(4) Storm sewer systems for the development shall be designed,
constructed and shall operate and be readily capable of being
maintained to prevent concentration of stormwater runoff on
adjacent developed or undeveloped properties and streets and
other areas of impervious surface.
(5) The design and construction of all storm drainage facilities and
storm sewer systems shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
C. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
(1) Plans submitted for any PRD development shall conform to the
guidelines for minimizing erosion and sedimentation as set forth in
the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection prepared by
the State Conservation Commission and Bureau of Water Quality
Management and the USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service, as amended. In developing a plan for the control of erosion
and sedimentation, the developer shall meet as a minimum the
standards and specifications outlined in the aforementioned
manual, as well as the standards set forth in Appendix C of the
Erosion and Sediment Control handbook of the Delaware County
Soil and Water Conservation District and those in Chapter 210,
Subdivision and Land Development.
D. Other environmental controls.
(1) In addition to the controls presented in the above subsections
herein, all development in a PRD shall be governed by the
environmental controls set forth in Article XXXIII, § 275-207
pertaining to such matters as noise, vibration, storage, glare and
heat, fire and explosion and traffic control; and all plans,
documents and other submissions in regard to any approval sought
shall demonstrate compliance herewith to the Township Council.
E. Streets and pathways.
(1) The street system of the planned residential development shall be
designed so as to relate harmoniously with land uses within and
adjacent to the development through the establishment of a
hierarch of roadway functions which includes internal collector and
local streets; to create a separation of automobile and pedestrian
§ 275-56 CHARTER § 275-56
C:677
traffic through the coordinated design of streets, dwelling units,
common open space areas and pedestrian walkways; and to create
efficient and safe connections with the existing road system of the
municipality in order to insure proper ingress and egress to and
from the PRD and to minimize through traffic in residential areas.
(2) In order to separate automobile and pedestrian circulation and to
increase accessibility to common open space areas, pedestrian
walkways shall be provided unless the Township Council
determines that they are not necessary.
(3) Curbs and sidewalks shall be required along streets in PRDs in
accordance with Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
(4) The design and construction of streets must conform to the
standards set forth in Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development, relative to paving specifications, cartway design,
horizontal and vertical alignment, sight distances and the like.
F. Parking.
(1) All provisions in Article XXXI shall apply. However, in the case of
apartments with three or more bedrooms, 2 1/2 parking spaces for
each such unit shall be provided.
(2) Off-street parking spaces shall not be less than nine feet in width
and 18 feet in depth. However, 5% of the spaces shall not be less
than 12 feet in width and 20 feet in depth and shall be reserved for
the handicapped and so marked with an appropriate symbol.
(3) Where parking spaces are grouped in lots, aisles at least 25 feet in
width shall be provided.
(4) Where parking spaces are grouped in lots, aisles at least 25 feet in
width shall be provided.
(5) No more than 60 parking spaces shall be accommodated in any
single parking area.
(6) All off-street parking and/or loading areas shall be surfaced with an
asphaltic or portland cement pavement.
G. Lighting.
(1) All streets, off-street parking areas and areas of intensive
pedestrian use shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall
be designed and located so as to direct light away from adjacent
residences.
H. Buffer area.
(1) There shall be a buffer area between any building and the boundary
line of such a planned residential development (PRD) or the right-
§ 275-56 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-56
C:678
§ 275-57. Development in stages.
An applicant may propose to develop the PRD District project in stages and
the Township Council may approve same if the following criteria are met:
of-way line of any abutting roadway. The buffer area shall be in
accordance with Article XXXIV.
(2) No building shall be placed within 150 feet of any such line. Any
such buffer area shall be in addition to the yard area of any building
abutting any boundary or right-of-way; provided, however, that the
dimensions of the buffer are may be reduced to less than 150 feet in
any case in which the full width of such buffer is determined to be
unnecessary because of existing vegetation, topography, man-made
barriers or other natural screening, but in no case less than 100
feet.
I. Tree conservation and landscaping.
(1) Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. The protection
of trees 12 inches or more in caliper (measured at a height 4 1/2
feet above the original grade) shall be a factor in determining the
location of common open space, structures, underground utilities,
walks and paved areas. Areas in which trees are to be preserved
shall remain at original grade level and in an undisturbed
condition.
(2) Where extensive natural tree cover and vegetation does not exist
and cannot be preserved on the PRD site, landscaping shall be
regarded as an essential feature of the PRD. In these cases,
extensive landscaping shall be undertaken in order to enhance the
appearance of the PRD, aid in erosion control, provide protection
from wind and sun, screen streets and parking areas and enhance
the privacy of the dwelling units in accordance with Article XXXIV.
(3) Street trees shall be provided along all internal collector and local
streets. No less than two four-inch-caliper trees shall be provided
for each fifty-foot increment of street, wherein one tree shall be
placed on each side of said street increment.
(4) A landscaped buffer planting strip of 20 feet in width shall be
provided along all perimeter property lines, except at points of
vehicular ingress and egress and on pedestrian access ways.
(5) Screening and landscaping requirements for parking areas are
provided in Article XXXI.
A. The application for tentative approval covers the entire planned
residential development and shows the location and time of
construction for each stage in addition to other information required by
this chapter.
§ 275-56 CHARTER § 275-57
C:679
§ 275-58. Location, ownership and maintenance of common open
space.
Refer to Article XXXV, Open Space Provisions.
§ 275-59. Application for tentative approval.
The application for tentative approval shall be executed by or on behalf of
the landowner and filed with the Township Manager. If the applicant is not
the landowner, the executed consent of the landowner or evidence of the
applicant's legal authority to make such an application shall be so filed.
An initial deposit in the amount of $1,000 to be applied against expenses
associated with the processing and review of the application shall be paid
upon filing the application. Additional deposits shall be made from time
to time as requested by the Township to cover costs in reviewing and
administering the application, not to exceed actual expenses. Seventeen
copies of the application shall be submitted to the Township Manager
for various required reviews. The application for tentative approval shall
include all plans, documents, papers and submissions proving compliance
with all the standards of this article. The Township Council may require
such additional documentation as needed to aid them in review of the
application and accompanying papers.
B. At least 35% of the dwelling units in the plan given tentative approval
are included in the first stage.
C. The second and subsequent stages are completed consistent with the
tentatively approved plan and are of such size and location that they
constitute economically sound units of development. In no event shall
such stages contain less than 25% of the dwelling units receiving
tentative approval.
D. In no case shall work on the current stage area include stripping or
disturbance of woodland and forest or soils of any area set aside for
later stages.
E. All improvements within the particular stage shall be completed
contemporaneously with the completion of construction of the
dwellings of the stage.
F. Any plans and other documents required by the Township Council to
depict all of the foregoing and the limits thereof are submitted to, and
approved by, the Township Council.
A. Application for tentative approval shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(1) A statement indicating the nature of the applicant's and the
landowner's interest in the project.
(2) A written statement by the applicant setting forth the reasons why
the project would be in the public interest and would be specifically
§ 275-57 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-59
C:680
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan's goals and objectives and
its recommendations for land use, community facilities and
utilities, circulation and other matters therein recommended.
(3) A map indicating the location and size of the property and its
relationship to surrounding properties, such map to be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals 800 feet and showing all streets, roads,
municipal boundaries, subdivisions, adjoining properties and
designated open space within 2,500 feet of any part of the tract. In
the case of development of a section of the entire tract, the key map
shall show the relationship of the section to the entire tract.
(4) A plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet delineating the
topography of the tract. Such plan shall contain contours with at
least two-foot intervals; and shall accurately and conspicuously
depict slopes from 0% to 8%, 8% to 15%, 15% to 25% and greater
than 25%.
(5) A plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet accurately and
conspicuously delineating, depicting and otherwise noting in
graphic fashion the vegetation of the tract. Such plan shall depict
the location of all trees 12 inches in caliper and greater.
(6) A plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet accurately and
conspicuously delineating the drainage characteristics of the tract.
Such plan shall accurately and conspicuously depict, delineate and
otherwise note in graphic fashion all perennial and intermittent
streams and watercourses and their watersheds, as well as floodprone
and flood hazard areas.
(7) A plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet accurately and
conspicuously delineating, depicting and otherwise noting in
graphic fashion the soils of the tract. Such plan shall depict all soil
types and shall include a table identifying soil characteristics
pertinent to the proposed development and the tract.
(8) A plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet accurately and
conspicuously delineating, depicting, and otherwise noting in
graphic fashion the proposed use areas by type, size, location and
gross density.
(9) A site plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet accurately and
conspicuously delineating, depicting and otherwise noting in
graphic fashion the location, use, height, bulk and location of
streets, rights-of-way, cartways, parking areas and other
improvements.
(10) A plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet accurately
conspicuously delineating, depicting and otherwise noting in
graphic fashion common open space. Such plan shall depict the
location, function and size of common open space areas and any
existing natural and cultural features comprised within the
§ 275-59 CHARTER § 275-59
C:681
common open space. In addition, the plan shall include any
facilities or structures proposed. Accompanying the plan shall be
a statement indicating the proposed means for ownership and
maintenance of the common open space.
(11) A detailed report indicating the feasibility and capability for
operation and maintenance of water supply systems, sanitary
sewage systems, stormwater systems and other utility systems.
Such a report shall indicate the following:
(a) With regard to water supply, there shall be an objective
description of the ability of achieving a safe and efficient water
supply system. The description shall reference geologic and
hydrogeologic data relative to groundwater conditions,
realistic potential yields and quality. In addition, the
description shall indicate the demand by type of use for water
from the proposed development and its related uses and users.
(b) With regard to sanitary sewage disposal, there shall be an
objective description of the ability of achieving a safe and
efficient system for sewage disposal. The description shall
indicate all proposed measures and methods for conveying and
treating the sewerage and the sizes of all pipes and direction
and quantities of flow anticipated from the development, as
well as all connections which will be required to tie into
existing sanitary sewers.
(c) Assurance of the availability of safe and efficient public water
and public sewer facilities shall also be reported. Such
assurance shall include letters signed by an officer of the
company or authority concerned, indicating its ability and
willingness to provide such service within the timetable
proposed for the development, including a statement of
maintenance responsibilities and rates and charges for service.
(d) With regard to stormwater systems, there shall be an objective
description of the ability of achieving a safe and efficient
stormwater management system. Such report shall be in
complete conformance with Chapter 210, Subdivision and
Land Development.
(12) A detailed plan illustrating all connections to existing public
utilities, streets and rights-of-way, accompanied by documentation
as to the impact of the proposed development on said public
utilities, streets and rights-of-way.
(13) A site plan illustrating phasing, including a time schedule for all onsite
and off site improvements may be modified from time to time
with approval of the Township Council.
(14) A fully detailed soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
§ 275-59 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-59
C:682
(15) A fully detailed grading plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
accurately and conspicuously delineating proposed contours at
intervals of at least two feet.
(16) A fully detailed landscaping plan at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet wherein existing and proposed plant materials are accurately
and conspicuously differentiated, delineated, depicted or otherwise
noted in a graphic fashion and a plant list with botanical and
common names as well as notations for the quantities and sizes of
all proposed plant materials.
(17) A written report indicating the proposed methods and measures to
be undertaken for energy conservation and the effective utilization
of renewable energy resources.
(18) The documents containing covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and
structures including proposed grants and/or easements for utilities
and the like.
(19) An Environmental Impact Assessment Report in accordance with
Article XXXIV.
(20) In the case of plans which call for development in stages, a
schedule showing the time within which applications for final
approval of all parts of the project are intended to be filed and
which shall be updated annually on the anniversary of submission
for final approval.
(21) A report accompanying the application shall, insofar as possible,
indicate compliance with the provisions set forth for documentation
herein.
(22) All other requirements for a preliminary plan as set forth in
Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Seven copies of every application for tentative approval received by the
Township Manager shall be promptly forwarded to the Township
Planning Commission and one copy of each application to the Natural
Resources Conservation Service for its recommendation. The Township
Planning Commission and the Delaware County Planning Department
shall review and report upon the application to the Township Council.
One copy of the reports of the respective planning commissions shall be
furnished to the applicant upon receipt by the Township Council.
C. The applicant, the Township Council, the Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Department may
consult informally concerning the project for the proposed PRD District
prior to the filing of an application for tentative approval, provided that
no statement or representation by a member of the official review
agency or of the planning agencies be binding upon the Township.
§ 275-59 CHARTER § 275-60
C:683
§ 275-60. Public hearings.
§ 275-61. Findings.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of
a project pursuant to this article, a public hearing pursuant to the
public notice on said application shall be held by the Township Council
in the manner provided by this chapter for the enactment of an
amendment. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman of
the Township Council, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing shall be given
under oath and every party of record at a hearing shall have the right to
cross-examine adverse witnesses.
B. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Township Council. Whenever such records are requested by any party
to the proceedings, the cost of transcribing such a record shall be borne
by the party requesting it and the expenses of copies of such record
shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such copies. All exhibits
accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly preserved or, if not
accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified and the reason for the
exclusion clearly noted in the record.
C. The Township Council may continue the hearing from time to time and
may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for a report;
provided, however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings
shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the first public
hearing.
A. The Township Council may continue the hearing from time to time and
may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for a report;
provided, however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings
shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the first public
hearing.
(1) Grant tentative approval of the development plan submitted;
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval to the development plan. Failure to do so
within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative
approval of the development plan as submitted. In the event,
however, that tentative approval is granted subject to conditions,
the applicant may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the
official written communication of the Township Council, notify the
Township Council of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in
which case the Township Council shall be deemed to have denied
tentative approval of the development plan. In the event the
applicant does not, within said period, notify the Township Council
§ 275-60 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-61
C:684
of his refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the
development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
B. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial; and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest including
but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions of the following:
(1) Those respects in which the development is or is not consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Township.
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use and the
reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
development, the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and
conservation of the common open space and adequacy or
inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common open space
as related to the proposed density and type of residential
development.
(4) The proposed systems for sanitary sewers, water supply,
stormwater control and soil erosion and sedimentation control and
the manner in which said proposals adequately or inadequately
address the construction, operation and maintenance of such
systems.
(5) The physical design of the development and the manner in which
said design does or does not make adequate provision for public
services, provide adequate control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment.
(6) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be
established.
(7) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the development in the integrity of the development plan.
C. In the event that a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Township Council may set forth in the official
written communication the time within which an application for final
approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
§ 275-61 CHARTER § 275-61
C:685
§ 275-62. Status of plan after tentative approval. [Amended by
1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval
of each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the
Township Council, the time so established between the grant of
tentative approval and the application for final approval shall be not
less than three months nor more than one year, and, in the case of
development over a period of years, the time between applications for
final approval of each part of the plan shall be not less than 12 months
nor more than 18 months.
A. The official written communication provided for in § 275-61 of this
article shall be certified by the Secretary of the Township Council and
shall be filed in his/her office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the
applicant. Where tentative approval has been granted, it shall be
deemed an amendment to the Zoning Map, effective upon final
approval, and the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plot for
recording nor authorize development or the issuance of any building
permits. A development plan which has been given tentative approval
as submitted or which has been given tentative approval with
conditions which have been accepted by the applicant (and provided
that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of the conditions
of the tentative approval) shall not be modified or revoked nor
otherwise impaired by action of the Township pending an application or
applications for final approval without the consent of the applicant,
provided that an application for final approval is filed or, in the case of
development over a period of years, provided that applications are filed
within the periods of time specified in the official written
communication granting tentative approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the applicant shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Township
Council, in writing, or in the event that the applicant shall fail to file an
application or applications for final approval within the required period
of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall be
deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the
development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be
subject to those local ordinances otherwise applicable thereto, as they
may be amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the
Zoning Map and in the records of the Township Manager.
§ 275-61 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-63
C:686
§ 275-63. Application for final approval. [Amended by 1-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 461]
An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a
development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, a
section thereof. Said application shall be made to the Township Council and
within the time or times specified by the official written communication
granting tentative approval as in § 275-61 or as otherwise mutually agreed
upon between the applicant and the Township Council and set forth, in
writing, by the Township Council. If the application for final approval is
in compliance with the tentatively approved development plan, a public
hearing need not be held. The application for final approval shall consist of
a plan or plans and accompanying documents which shall show and shall
include the following information:
A. The plan. The final plan shall be prepared in accordance with Chapter
210, Subdivision and Land Development. All plans shall be drawn at a
scale not smaller than one inch equals 50 feet. They shall be clear and
legible blue-line or black-line prints and shall include at least the
following information:
(1) The development name or identifying title.
(2) The municipality in which the development is located.
(3) North point, scale and date.
(4) The name of the record owner of the tract and developer.
(5) The name and seal of the registered professional engineer,
landscape architect, land planner, architect or surveyor responsible
for the plan.
(6) Boundaries of the tract determined by accurate survey in the field
which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to
exceed one foot in 10,000.
(7) Property lines within the development.
(8) Lot areas to 1/1,000 of an acre.
(9) Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas dedicated
to or proposed to be dedicated to public use. Profiles for all streets
and for proposed sanitary and storm sewer mains, inlets and
manholes and the location of all utilities.
(10) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and tangent
bearings for each street.
(11) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot and of
each area proposed to dedicated to public use.
(12) The designation of common open space including the area
contained therein.
§ 275-63 CHARTER § 275-63
C:687
(13) Location, grades, length and width of all private driveways and all
parking facilities and type of paving and other surface to be used
therefor.
(14) Names proposed to be given to all streets.
(15) Location of all structures.
(16) Number of lots.
(17) Number of dwelling units by type and, where applicable, the
number, location and square footage of areas to be devoted to
nonresidential use.
(18) Architectural drawings, floor plans and elevations to scale of all
buildings, said drawings to bear the seal of the architect who has
prepared same.
(19) Total property area of the entire development tract and, in the case
of development in sections, the size of the section for which plans
are submitted.
(20) All permanent monuments.
(21) A final grading plan, including existing and proposed contours at
vertical intervals of at least two feet, the lines thereof to be
conspicuously distinguishable.
(22) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant natural
features, including all trees 12 inches in caliper or greater to be
retained and/or to be removed.
(23) A final soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(24) A final landscaping plan, wherein existing and proposed plant
materials are differentiated, a final plant list indicating the types,
quantities and sizes of the proposed plant materials and typical
planting details for tree planting and staking, shrub planting and
the like.
(25) A final environmental impact assessment report.
B. The documentation. The application for final approval shall also be
accompanied by:
(1) Copies of deed restrictions and/or easements, if any and other
documents relating to title, use or occupancy.
(2) Copies of permits obtained: under authority of statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the County of Delaware
regarding the provision for construction, operation and
maintenance of the proposed sanitary sewer system, water supply
system, soil erosion and sedimentation control system; and
highway occupancy system.
§ 275-63 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-63
C:688
(3) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner of the land proposed to
be developed, or has been authorized by the landowner to be the
applicant, supported by a copy of the written authority therefor.
(4) Offers of dedication and covenants and other documents governing
the reservation and maintenance of undedicated open space,
provided that all such offers of dedication and covenants shall bear
the certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency and compliance herewith.
(5) Copies of the homeowner's agreements for common open space not
to be offered for dedication to the Township.
(6) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgement of deeds and signed by the owner or owners of
the property to the effect that the development as shown on the
application for final approval is made with his or their free consent
and that it is desired to record the application and accompanying
documents upon their approval.
(7) Whenever a developer proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication and not required to be offered for dedication,
he shall submit a copy of statements cosigned by the Township
Solicitor that he has made an agreement on behalf of his heirs and
assigns with the Township. Said agreement shall be subject to the
Township Solicitor's approval and shall be recorded with the plan.
Said agreement shall establish the condition under which the
streets may later be offered for dedication and stipulate among
other things:
(a) That the street shall be in a good state of repair as certified by
the Township Engineer, or that the owner or owners of the lots
along it agree to include with the offer of dedication sufficient
money, as estimated by the Township Engineer, to restore the
street to conform with Middletown Township design standards.
(b) That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only on the
street as a whole.
(c) That the method of assessing repair costs shall be stipulated.
(d) That, where applicable, agreement to offer the street for
dedication by the owners of 60% of the lots shall be binding on
owners of the remaining lots.
(8) Such other related information as deemed necessary by the
Township Council to make their determination.
C. In the event the application for final approval has been filed, together
with all drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, performance
bonds and other documents in support thereof and as required by this
chapter and the official written communication for tentative approval,
§ 275-63 CHARTER § 275-63
C:689
the Township shall within 45 days of such filing, grant such
development plan final approval.
D. In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Township
Council shall refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45 days
from the filing of the application for final approval, so advise the
applicant in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the
reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest. In the event of such refusal, the applicant may either:
(1) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected to; or
(2) File a written request with the Township Council that it hold a
public hearing on his application for final approval. If the applicant
wishes to take either such alternate action, he may do so at any
time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval, or
within 30 additional days of receipt of notice that the development
plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event that the
applicant shall fail to take either of these alternate actions within
said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the development
plan. Any such public hearing shall be held pursuant to public
notice within 30 days after request for the hearing is made by the
applicant, and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed in this chapter for public hearings on applications for
tentative approval. Within 45 days after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Township Council shall, by official written
communication, either grant final approval to the development plan
or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the
development plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be in
the form and contain the findings required for an application for
tentative approval set forth in this article.
E. A development plan or any part thereof which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Township Council
and shall be filed by the Recorder of Deeds before any development
shall take place in accordance therewith. Pending completion, in
accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,123 of said planned
residential development or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that
has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of said
development plan or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made
except with the consent of the landowner. Upon approval of the final
plan, the applicant shall record the plan in accordance with § 275-67
herein and post financial security in accordance with § 210-11 of
Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 275-63 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-63
C:690
§ 275-64. Legal remedies.
The Township may avail itself to any and all remedies provided by law,
including but not limited to those specified in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 275-65. Bonding/security for completion of improvements.
Security shall be provided which is acceptable to the Township in an amount
to cover the costs of any improvements which may be required.
§ 275-66. Insurance and indemnity.
The Township shall require appropriate liability insurance and minimum
limits of coverage in regard to any development in a PRD. The Township
shall be a "named insured" under all such liability policies, without premium
liability therefor; said policies shall further be written to exclude the
operation of any "other insurance" clause. The Township shall also require
from the applicant a defense, indemnity and hold-harmless agreement in
favor of the Township, which shall be insured by the applicant to at least the
minimum limits required by the Township Council for liability insurance.
§ 275-67. Recording. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
The final plot plan will be recorded by the landowner in the Office for
the Recording of Deeds in and for Delaware County, Pennsylvania, within
90 days of the granting of final approval by the Township Council. The
Recorder of Deeds of the county shall not accept any plan for recording
unless such plan officially notes the approval of the Township Council and
review by the Delaware County Planning Department.
§ 275-68. Fees.
Fees for review of the final plan shall be established by resolution of the
Township Council, which fees shall not exceed costs incurred. Should any
funds remain after the final plan is processed and reviewed, they will be
returned to the applicant.
F. In the event that a development plan or a section thereof is given final
approval and thereafter the applicant shall abandon such plan or the
section thereof that has been finally approved and shall so notify the
Township Council, in writing, or in the event that the applicant shall fail
to commence and complete the development project or section thereof
in accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, after final approval has
been granted, no development or further development shall take place
on the property included in the development plan until after said
property is resubdivided and is reclassified by enactment of an
amendment to this chapter.
§ 275-63 CHARTER § 275-68
C:691

ARTICLE XII
I-1 Institutional District
§ 275-69. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to:
§ 275-70. Use regulations. [Amended 1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 498]
A building or combination of buildings may be erected or used and land may
be used or occupied, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX, as
follows:
A. Provide for certain institutional uses with suitable access in areas
where institutional uses already exist.
B. Provide for institutional uses which will be located on relatively large
parcels of land and designed to preserve substantial amounts of open
space and natural areas for both buffer and aesthetic purposes so that
the principal institutional uses will be compatible with and a benefit to
existing surrounding land uses and be appropriate neighbors for
higher-quality residential development.
C. Provide for residential uses which will benefit from the presence of
certain institutional uses.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Residential uses as permitted in the R-1 District, subject to all of
the regulations applicable to residential uses in the R-1 District,
including the cluster subdivision option, and subject to the buffer
requirements of Article XXXIV.
(2) Planned residential development (PRD), provided that there is a
minimum tract size of 70 acres and subject to the buffer
requirements of Article XXXIV.
(3) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Hospitals (excluding institutions primarily for treatment of
psychological disorders).
(2) Medical or hospital affiliated offices.
(3) Life care facilities and intermediate care facilities, provided that
there is a minimum tract area of 35 acres.
§ 275-69 CHARTER § 275-70
C:693
§ 275-71. Height regulations. [Amended 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 483;
2-10-2020 by Ord. No. 810]
The maximum height of a building or other structure(s) erected, enlarged
or used shall be 80 feet. No life care facility shall exceed five stories and
one story of ground level parking, and it shall not exceed 55 feet in height.
§ 275-72. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-28-1991 by Ord.
No. 483; 1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 498]
(4) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses which are customarily incidental to, and on the
same lot with, the principal permitted and approved conditional
uses.
(2) A parking garage, being a building or structure of two or more
stories used for the parking of motor vehicles, which shall have the
following minimum dimensional standards:
(a) Dimensional standards.
Angle of
Parking
Space
(degrees)
Width
Parking
Space
Depth
Parking
Space
Aisle
Width
(feet)
Total
Parking
Module
(feet)
60, oneway
aisle
8 feet 6
inches
18 feet 6
inches
16 53
70, oneway
aisle
8 feet 6
inches
19 feet 17 55
90, twoway
aisle
8 feet 6
inches
18 feet 24 60
(b) Columns of a combined dimension of two feet may protrude
into the module dimension.
A. Single-family dwelling units.
(1) All area and bulk regulations for residential dwelling units shall be
the same as those applicable in R-1 or PRD districts.
B. Institutional uses.
(1) The maximum density for all buildings, other than dwelling units in
a life care facility, shall be determined by a combination of the
§ 275-70 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-72
C:694
height regulations in § 275-71, the buffer areas in Subsection B(2),
and the maximum building coverage in Subsection B(3).
(2) Buffer area. A buffer area of 190 feet shall be provided along U.S.
Route 1 and PA Route 352, and a one-hundred-foot buffer shall be
provided along other roads and property lines, provided that the
setback from property lines that abut an office district shall be a
minimum of 50 feet and the setback from property lines that abut
another property in an I-1 District shall be a minimum of 65 feet.
The buffer area shall be measured from the street line, or other
property line when the tract is not bounded by a street. [Amended
2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 691; 2-10-2020 by Ord. No. 810]
(3) Maximum building coverage. Not more than 30% of any tract area
shall be occupied by buildings. [Amended 2-10-2020 by Ord. No.
810]
(4) Maximum impervious surface area. Not more than 60% of the area
of any lot shall be occupied by buildings and other impervious
surfaces.
(5) Gross density for life care facilities. Not more than 11 dwelling
units per acre; provided that the overall dwelling unit total does not
exceed 380 units in the district.
(6) Building placement.
(a) No building shall be located within the required buffer areas.
(b) No building or permanent structure shall be located less than
50 feet from any internal street line or 50 feet from any
internal side or rear property line.
(c) The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or
groups of attached buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall be not less than 30 feet. Connecting corridors may be
permitted at the discretion of the Fire Marshal.
C. Office uses. [Amended 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 684]
(1) Density regulations. The density regulations for institutional uses
shall apply to office uses. [Amended 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 483;
1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 498]
(2) Building setback and buffer area. A buffer and building setback
area of 50 feet shall be provided along U.S. Route 1. In the event
that an existing hospital building fronts U.S. Route 1, said twohundred-
foot buffer area required by Subsection B(2) shall be
maintained for the entire width of the hospital building and 100
feet on either side thereof. A one-hundred-foot building setback
and a buffer area of 25 feet (of which 15 feet shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions in Article XXXIV) shall be provided
along other property lines, except as follows:
§ 275-72 CHARTER § 275-72
C:695
§ 275-73. Special design and development requirements. [Amended
1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 483; 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 534]
The following special requirements shall apply to all institutional, office and
life care facility uses:
§ 275-74. Standards and criteria for approval of conditional uses.
(a) That the building setback from the property lines that abut a
nonresidential use shall be a minimum of 50 feet with a buffer
area of 25 feet (of which 15 feet shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIV);
(b) Where a property line abuts a residential district, containing a
preserved open space of a width not less than 100 feet from the
property line, a buffer will not be required within the I-1
District. There shall be a minimum building setback within I-1
District of 20 feet. A minimum distance of 120 feet shall be
maintained between any building in the I-1 District and the
nearest residential building in the adjoining district.
A. The required buffer areas shall be established and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIV, § 275-213.
B. Except for the buffer requirements as provided in § 275-72C, at least 30
feet of the required buffer areas shall be landscaped and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIV, § 275-214. [Amended
6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 684]
C. All development shall be in accordance with the environmental controls
of Article XXXIII, § 275-207.
D. Any two major points of ingress and egress shall be at least 500 feet
from one another.
E. All development shall be served by public water and public sewer.
F. At least 1.15 parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit in
a life-care facility and 1.15 parking spaces for each bed in an
intermediate care facility or residential personal care unit associated
with a life-care facility; provided, however, that the Township Council
may permit not more than 40% of the required parking spaces to be
designated "reserve parking" pursuant to the provisions of § 275-189
hereof. [Added 8-24-1998 by Ord. No. 587]
G. Except for the parking requirements set forth in Subsection F above,
life-care facilities shall comply with design standards for retirement
communities in Article X, § 275-48, pertaining to the planned
retirement community district.
A. All standards and criteria of Article XXXVI, § 275-236, shall apply.
§ 275-72 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-74
C:696
B. Life-care facilities shall also comply with the prerequisites for
authorization to develop a planned retirement community as set forth in
Article X, § 275-48.
C. The applicant must define and delineate the gross floor areas of all
existing buildings, maximum building coverages and maximum
impervious surfaces on all land development plans.
§ 275-74 CHARTER § 275-74
C:697

ARTICLE XIII
I-2 Institutional District
§ 275-75. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to:
§ 275-76. Use regulations. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588;
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 704]
A building or combination of buildings or tract of land may be erected or
used or occupied, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX, as
follows:
A. Provide for certain institutional uses with suitable access in areas
where institutional uses already exist.
B. Provide for institutional uses which will be located on relatively large
parcels of land and designed to preserve substantial amounts of open
space and natural areas for both buffer and aesthetic purposes so that
the principal institutional uses will be compatible with and a benefit to
existing surrounding land uses and be appropriate neighbors for higher
quality residential development.
C. Provide for residential uses which will benefit from the presence of
certain institutional uses.
D. Provide for adequate parking areas associated with adjacent regional
rail station facilities. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 704]
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Residential uses as permitted in the R-1 District, subject to all of
the regulations applicable to residential uses in the R-1 District,
including the cluster subdivision option, and subject to the buffer
requirements of Article XXXIV.
(2) Planned residential development (PRD), provided that there is a
minimum tract size of 75 acres and subject to the buffer
requirements of Article XXXIV.
(3) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Boarding and nonboarding schools.
(2) Postsecondary schools.
(3) Schools for special students.
§ 275-75 CHARTER § 275-76
C:699
§ 275-77. Height regulations.
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in the special provisions of this
chapter, Article XXXIV, which provide for exceptions to height regulations
for certain structures. The height of structures used for institutional
purposes may be increased to a maximum of 45 feet within any area that is
set back at least 300 feet from perimeter property lines and 55 feet within
any area that is set back at least 500 feet from perimeter property lines.
§ 275-78. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461]
(4) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth in
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
(5) Parking areas associated with adjacent regional rail station
facilities.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses which are customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with the principal permitted and approved conditional
uses.
A. Single-family dwelling units.
(1) All area and bulk regulations for residential dwelling units shall be
the same as those applicable in the R-1 or PRD District.
B. Institutional uses other than parking areas associated with regional rail
station facilities. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 704]
(1) The maximum density shall not exceed 3,875 square feet of gross
floor area per gross acre (i.e., acreage, including buffer areas).
(2) Buffer area. A buffer area of 200 feet shall be provided along New
Baltimore Pike, United States Route 1 and Pennsylvania Route 352,
and a one-hundred-foot buffer shall be provided along other roads
and property lines. The buffer area shall be measured from the
street line or other property line when the tract is not bounded by a
street.
(3) Maximum impervious surface area. Not more than 35% of the area
of any lot shall be occupied by buildings and other impervious
surfaces.
(4) Building placement.
(a) No building shall be located within the required buffer areas.
§ 275-76 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-78
C:700
§ 275-79. Special design and development requirements. [Amended
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 704]
The following special requirements shall apply to all institutional and office
uses; provided, however, that Subsections B, E and F shall not apply to
parking areas associated with adjacent regional rail facilities:
(b) No building or permanent structure shall be located less than
50 feet from any internal street line or 50 feet from any
internal side or rear property line.
(c) The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or
groups of attached buildings, including accessory buildings,
shall be at least as great as the average height of the two
adjoining buildings, but not less than 30 feet. Connecting
corridors may be permitted at the discretion of the Fire
Marshal.
C. Parking areas associated with adjacent regional rail facilities. [Added
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 704]
(1) Buffer area. A buffer area of 20 feet shall be provided along any
public road, except at entrance areas, and a buffer area of 20 feet
shall be provided along all other property lines or lease lines,
except in the event of the extension of an existing parking lot.
Buffer areas shall be screened andlor landscaped in accordance
with § 275-188 of Article XXXI.
(2) Maximum impervious surface area. Not more than 35% of the tract
area shall be occupied by impervious surfaces.
(3) Parking areas shall comply with the special design standards set
forth in § 275-184, except that parking spaces shall not be less than
nine feet in width and 17 feet in length.
A. Any required buffer areas shall be established and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV, § 275-213.
B. At least 30 feet of the required buffer areas shall be landscaped and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIV,
§ 275-214.
C. All development shall be in accordance with the environmental controls
of Article XXXIII, § 275-207.
D. Any two major points of ingress and egress shall be at least 500 feet
from one another.
E. All development shall be served by public water.
F. All development shall be served by public sewer or other approved
sewage disposal system approved by both the Township and the state.
§ 275-78 CHARTER § 275-80
C:701
§ 275-80. Standards and criteria for approval of conditional uses.
A. All standards and criteria of Article XXXVI, § 275-236 shall apply.
B. The applicant must define and delineate the gross floor area of: all
existing buildings, maximum building coverages, and maximum
impervious surfaces, on all land development plans.
§ 275-80 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-80
C:702
ARTICLE XIV
I-3 Institutional District
[Added 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 659]
§ 275-81. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to:
§ 275-82. Use regulations.
A building or combination of buildings may be erected, used and occupied
and land may be used as follows:
A. Provide for certain institutional uses with suitable access in areas
where institutional uses already exist or existed.
B. Provide for institutional and continuing care retirement community
uses which will be located on relatively large parcels of land and
designed to preserve substantial amounts of open space and natural
areas for both buffer and aesthetic purposes so that the principal
institutional uses will be compatible with and a benefit to existing
surrounding land uses and be appropriate neighbors for higher-quality
residential development.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Boarding and nonboarding schools, postsecondary schools or
schools for special students.
(2) Agricultural uses and buildings.
(3) Silvaculture, wildlife and natural preserve or other conservation
uses.
(4) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
(5) Open space and active and passive recreation space.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Continuing care retirement community consisting of a combination
of independent living units, personal care facility and skilled
nursing facility, provided it meets all of the criteria for a conditional
use for a continuing care retirement community as set forth in this
article, including all area and bulk regulations and all other
standards for a conditional use set forth in this article.
(2) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-81 CHARTER § 275-82
C:703
§ 275-83. Accessory uses for conditional uses.
§ 275-84. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
C. Permitted accessory uses for permitted uses.
(1) Accessory uses which are customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with the principal permitted use.
A. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses to a continuing care
retirement community:
(1) Common dining facilities for residents.
(2) Recreational and social facilities for residents.
(3) Administrative offices and operational facilities for management of
the community.
(4) Fitness center, swimming pool, physical therapy and other health
care facilities and services for residents.
(5) Snack shop and beauty shops.
(6) Community center for residents.
A. For permitted uses.
(1) Density. The maximum density shall not exceed 3,875 square feet of
gross floor area per gross acre (i.e., acreage, including buffer
areas).
(2) Buffer area. A buffer area of 200 feet shall be provided along
United States Route 1 and Pennsylvania Route 352, and a onehundred-
foot buffer shall be provided along other roads and
property lines. The buffer area shall be measured from the street
line or other property line.
(3) Height regulations. The maximum height of structures erected,
enlarged or used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in the special
provisions of this chapter, Article XXXIV, which provide for
exceptions to height regulations for certain structures. The height
of structures used for institutional purposes may be increased to a
maximum of 45 feet within any area that is set back at least 500
feet from perimeter property lines.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area. Not more than 35% of the area
of any lot shall be occupied by buildings and other impervious
surfaces.
(5) Building placement.
§ 275-82 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-84
C:704
§ 275-85. Requirements for authorization to develop a continuing
care retirement community.
The party or parties [applicant(s)] proposing to use a site as a continuing
care retirement community must apply for and receive a conditional use
from Township Council. The applicant for conditional use shall have the
burden of presenting evidence and proving to Township Council that the
proposed use will comply with all of the standards and criteria required
for conditional use under this article and Article XXXVI, §§ 275-236 and
275-237.
(a) No building shall be located within the required buffer areas.
(b) No building or permanent structure shall be located less than
50 feet from any internal road or street line, or 50 feet from
any internal side or rear property line.
(c) The distance at the closest point between any two buildings,
including accessory buildings, shall be at least as great as the
average height of the two buildings, but not less than 30 feet.
Connecting corridors may be permitted at the discretion of the
Fire Marshal.
A. Performance standards.
(1) The architecture, landscaping and overall site layout of the
continuing care retirement community must be aesthetically and
functionally compatible with existing and/or potential (currently
zoned) surrounding residential land uses. The color, style,
materials and scale of the buildings, structures and the project
itself shall not disrupt the character of the surrounding area.
Design decisions should not be limited to marketing needs and
other internal considerations. In designing such a continuing care
retirement community, the view to the site should be as important
as the view from the site.
(2) The overall character of the continuing care retirement community
shall be residential. The applicant must demonstrate that the
proposed accessory uses will not, in fact, be principal uses and will
not alter the residential character of the continuing care retirement
community.
B. Basic criteria. In determining whether or not to authorize a conditional
use for a continuing care retirement community, Council shall consider
the following in addition to standards and criteria set forth in
§ 275-236:
(1) The relationship of the size, scope, extent and character of the
specific uses proposed, to the character and type of development in
the areas surrounding the site.
§ 275-84 CHARTER § 275-85
C:705
(2) Whether or not in view of its specific characteristics, the proposed
continuing care retirement community would be an appropriate
use in the area or whether it would have a detrimental effect on
existing or potential uses in the surrounding area, which analysis
shall involve a consideration of the proposed continuing care
retirement community's impact on the character of the area.
(3) The relationship of the proposed use to the uses permitted in the
surrounding area.
(4) The number, extent and scope of any nonconforming uses in the
surrounding area and the impact of the proposed continuing care
retirement community on those uses.
(5) Whether or not the proposed continuing care retirement
community would have an adverse effect on the public health,
safety and general welfare of the residents, existing or potential, in
the surrounding area and in the Township as a whole.
(6) The effect of the proposed continuing care retirement community
on traffic in the area and the nature of the surrounding traffic
conditions and the degree to which the proposed design will
provide safe and adequate access to roads and not result in
excessive or hazardous traffic volumes.
(7) The effect of the proposed continuing care retirement community
upon the logical, efficient and economical extension of public
services and facilities, such as public water, sewers, police and fire
protection, emergency medical services and schools, throughout
the Township.
(8) The degree to which the proposed landscaping addresses the needs
for plantings at the site according to the criteria in § 275-88E.
(9) Conformity to all relevant provisions of Chapter 210, Subdivision
and Land Development, and any other applicable ordinance, code
and regulation.
C. Plans and information. In support of an application for a continuing
care retirement community as a conditional use, the applicant must
provide to Township Council, in addition to the requirements of Chapter
210, Subdivision and Land Development, and the requirements of this
article, at least the following plans and information:
(1) A site plan, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing at least
the following:
(a) Location and foundation outline ("footprint") of all buildings
and other structures.
(b) Location and layout of all parking facilities and an analysis of
projected parking needs.
§ 275-85 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-85
C:706
(c) The internal circulation system and its ingress and egress
intersections with public roads, including the projected traffic
generation and flow patterns.
(d) Location, configuration and size of green and open space area.
(e) Total building coverage and total impervious surface coverage.
(2) A landscape plan and a statement of specific performance
standards which will guide the implementation of the plan in
accordance with § 275-87.
(3) An architectural analysis, prepared by a registered architect,
describing the design of the proposed buildings and major
structures, which analysis will include at least the following:
(a) A written description of the style, scale, shape, materials and
colors to be used and the positioning of the buildings and
structures as all these factors interrelate both with respect to
the site and the continuing care retirement community itself
and importantly with the architecture and views of
surrounding land uses, both existing and potential.
(b) Elevations and general floor plans for all of the proposed
buildings.
(c) A statement describing why the overall design of the buildings
proposed to be constructed in the continuing care retirement
community are aesthetically compatible with surrounding land
uses.
(4) A traffic and circulation plan, prepared by a civil engineer with
substantial traffic engineering experience, which describes at least
the following:
(a) The continuing care retirement community's traffic generation
and parking needs.
(b) The impact of the continuing care retirement community's
traffic on existing traffic at proposed ingress and egress
intersections with public roads.
(c) Emergency vehicle access.
(d) Proposed traffic safety improvements, on and off site, including
all traffic control devices.
D. In authorizing a continuing care retirement community as a conditional
use, Council may attach such conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those already required by this article, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this
article and to protect the public welfare, which conditions and
safeguards may relate to, but are not limited to, the design of the
§ 275-85 CHARTER § 275-85
C:707
§ 275-86. Buildings.
A continuing care retirement community shall consist of a multipledwelling-
unit building or buildings containing a combination of independent
living units, personal care units and a skilled nursing facility.
§ 275-87. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 275-88. Additional design standards for a continuing care
retirement community.
buildings, the presentation or reuse of existing historical buildings
and structures, landscaping and its maintenance as a sight or sound
screen, lighting, noise, safety and the prevention of noxious, offensive
or hazardous conditions.
A. Minimum tract size: 30 acres.
B. Maximum building height: four stories provided that elevator cores
shall not be considered when calculating building height.
C. Maximum density: four dwelling units per acre. each independent living
unit and each personal care unit in a personal care facility shall
constitute a dwelling unit for purposes of calculating density. Every five
beds in a skilled nursing facility shall be considered a dwelling unit for
purposes of calculating density. Independent living units shall
constitute at least 80% of the total dwelling units and skilled nursing
beds in a continuing care retirement community.
D. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
E. Total impervious coverage: 50%.
F. No building or accessory structure shall be less than 100 feet from the
perimeter property line, except for signs and those structures
associated with ingress and egress, internal circulation and lighting
standards.
A. Public water and public sewer service is required.
B. All utility lines shall be placed underground.
C. Parking. 1.15 parking spaces for each independent dwelling unit, one
parking space for each four personal care units and one parking space
for each four beds in a skilled nursing facility.
D. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided for all buildings, private
roads and parking areas. Such lighting shall provide sufficient light for
the safety of residents and other persons; and be arranged and of such
character so as to protect all dwelling units on the property from glare
or direct light and all adjoining properties or streets from any direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind. No such lighting shall
exceed 15 feet in height.
§ 275-85 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-88
C:708
E. Landscaping.
(1) A landscaping plan shall be submitted at the time when all other
required plans are submitted. The applicant will make every effort
to preserve existing trees greater than 10 inches in caliper.
(2) The landscaping plan shall be based on the following:
(a) The functional and aesthetic factors which relate to the site to
the principal and accessory buildings and other structures.
(b) The desirability of concealing and/or enhancing the views to,
from and/or within the site.
(c) The desirability of screening and complementing proposed
buildings or other structures.
(d) The desirability of creating visual interest for the residents of
the continuing care retirement community.
(3) The landscaping plan shall reflect the following:
(a) An analysis of the site in terms of: existing views to and from
the areas which are proposed for development; existing
topography and vegetation conditions; and other existing
conditions which are relevant to the site.
(b) An analysis of proposed planting and other landscaping needs
as related to: screening buildings and sections of buildings;
screening parking areas and other areas where vehicles are
parked; screening storage areas; screening site utilities; and
other appropriate types of screening.
(c) The consideration of locations where plantings and other
landscaping is needed to: provide visual interest; define
outdoor spaces; compliment the proposed architectural style;
and achieve other functional and aesthetic goals.
(4) The preliminary and final landscaping plans shall reflect the
following detailed criteria. However, depending on the ways in
which Subsection E(1), (2), and (3) above are analyzed relative to
the particular site in question, the specific numerical requirements
may be satisfied by the applicant by the proposed installation of an
equivalent number and/or size of trees and shrubs on the site in the
locations where plants are most needed and functional (as used
here, "equivalent" means equal in terms of the total costs of the
plants and their installation); and by the grouping of trees and
shrubs, rather than the placement of them at specific intervals.
(a) Shade trees shall be provided along all streets where there are
no existing shade trees. When planted, shade trees shall be no
closer than two feet from the edge of the right-of-way line. No
less than one tree of 3 1/2 inches to four inches in caliper shall
§ 275-88 CHARTER § 275-88
C:709
be planted for each 50 feet of roadway length (excluding
service roads and roads through parking lots). However, it is
recommended that shade trees be grouped where appropriate
in accordance with specific site needs and objectives rather
than be spaced at regular intervals.
(b) The outer perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
Effective screens may be accomplished through the use of
plant materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding through the
use of earthen berms.
(c) All parking lots shall be landscaped. One shade tree of two
inches to 2 1/2 inches in caliper shall be planted for every five
parking spaces, if there are no existing shade trees. Shrubs,
ground covers and other plant materials are encouraged to be
used to complement the trees.
(d) Landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed
throughout the parking lot, except that landscaped "islands"
shall be provided at the end of each parking bay. Such "islands"
shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and 18 feet in length,
and shall be provided to enhance the appearance of the
parking area and to control access and movement within the
parking area.
(e) All buildings shall be landscaped in accordance with the
following criteria:
[1] A combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and
shrubs shall be used as "foundation" plantings, i.e.,
plantings to be installed in reasonable proximity to the
facades.
[2] One specimen deciduous tree of four inches to five inches
in caliper shall be planted for every 25 feet of length of
building facade measured from end to end of buildings,
without regard to indentations and the like in the building,
facades and excluding enclosed walkway connectors and
elevator cores, such tree to be a minimum of 11 feet to 13
feet in height at the time of planting; and one, eight-foot to
ten-foot specimen evergreen tree shall be planted for
every 50 feet of length of building facade, measured as set
forth above.
[3] Five evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted
for every 20 feet of length of building facade.
[4] Trees and shrubs shall be grouped in accordance with
specific needs and objectives.
(f) Other landscaping shall be provided along walkways, in
courtyards, around sitting areas, at the entrance to the site and
§ 275-88 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-88
C:710
in other highly visible locations, especially along property lines
where planting will screen views and provide privacy.
(g) The locations, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to the review and approval of
Township Council.
(5) The preliminary landscaping plan shall be drawn at a scale of at
least one inch equals to 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated with
the overall site plan and shall contain the following:
(a) A delineation of existing and proposed plant materials.
(b) A delineation of other landscaping features such as berms,
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be
devoted to lawns, areas to be devoted to meadows and other
elements of the proposed improvements.
(c) Notes describing the proposed improvements and their
relationship to the criteria as stated in Subsection E(1), (2), (3)
and (4) above.
(6) One color rendering of a preliminary landscaping plan shall be
submitted for review by the Township, in addition to the number of
prints which are otherwise required. The color rendering shall
reflect total coordination with the overall site plan in terms of its
relationship to proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, walks,
walls, fencing, benches, signs, lighting and other like structures.
(7) After the Township has reviewed the preliminary landscaping plan
and submitted comments on the plan to the applicant, a final
landscaping plan shall be submitted. The final landscaping plan
shall be drawn in greater detail than the preliminary plan. It shall
be totally coordinated with the overall site plan and shall contain
the following:
(a) A final version of the plan requirements stated in Subsection
E(5) for a preliminary plan.
(b) A plant list wherein the botanical and common name of the
proposed plants are tabulated, along with the quantity, caliper,
height and other characteristics.
(c) Details for the planting and staking of trees, the planting of
shrubs and any other details which depict other related
installation.
(d) Information in the form of notes or specifications concerning
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be
devoted to lawns, areas to be devoted to meadows and the like.
Such information shall convey the proposals for seeding,
mulching and the like.
§ 275-88 CHARTER § 275-88
C:711
F. Buildings.
(1) The topography and natural features of the site and the direction of
prevailing winds and solar orientation shall be considered in
planning, designing, locating, orienting and constructing all
residential and accessory buildings and other structures to improve
the aesthetics and energy efficiency of the development.
(2) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located,
oriented and designed to create architectural interest and to
preserve amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(3) Where and whenever possible existing historical buildings or
structures will be preserved and/or reused. The Township Council
will consider up to a 25% increase in the density of dwelling units in
proportion to the size and number of historical buildings that are
preserved or reused.
(4) Residential buildings and other structures shall be located and
situated to promote pedestrian and visual access to open space.
(5) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings shall be designed and constructed in
staggered groups, the arrangement of such buildings shall create a
physical distinction in the lines of the facades and roofs creating a
campus atmosphere.
(6) Development near the perimeter of the property shall be designed
to be harmonious with neighboring land uses.
(7) No common parking area shall be closer than 25 feet to any
building.
(8) No principal building shall be erected closer than 30 feet from
another principal building.
§ 275-88 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-88
C:712
ARTICLE XV
I-4 Institutional District
[Added 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 673]
§ 275-89. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to:
§ 275-90. Use regulations.
A building or combination of buildings may be erected, used and occupied
and land may be used as follows:
A. Provide for health-related institutional uses which will be located on
relatively large parcels of land.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Residential uses as permitted in the R-1 District, subject to all of
the regulations applicable to residential uses in the R-1 District.
(2) Communication antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Hospital (excluding institutions primarily for treatment of
psychological disorders) or outpatient health care and other health
care services, including but not limited to any of the following:
diagnostic services; rehabilitation services; dialysis center;
diabetes or other diseases center; nutrition center; outpatient
surgical center; wound care center; balance center; adult day care;
wellness center; home care and hospice program; durable medical
equipment facility; or other health care technologies or services of
a similar nature providing care for the health needs of persons in
the community.
(2) Personal care facility, assisted living facility, dementia/Alzheimer's
facility, nursing facility, skilled nursing facility not within a
continuing care retirement community;
(3) Office space related to hospital, extended care or medical and
health care-related uses;
(4) Supportive services for health care, including but not limited to any
of the following: day-care center; meeting or conference rooms;
nursing or other health services school; thrift shop; recreation and
or fitness facility; pharmacy; and food service; provided that any
such supportive services use is operated in connection with a
§ 275-89 CHARTER § 275-90
C:713
§ 275-91. Area and bulk regulations.
building used for one of the purposes identified in Subsection B(1),
(2) or (3) above.
(5) Communication towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
C. Permitted accessory uses for permitted uses.
(1) Accessory uses which are customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with the principal permitted uses as enumerated in
§ 275-19B.
D. Permitted accessory uses for conditional uses.
(1) Accessory uses which are customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with the conditional uses including but not limited to
guard houses and or entrance gating.
(2) A parking garage, being a building or structure of two or more
stories used for the parking of motor vehicles, in accordance with
the requirements of § 275-70C(2)(a) and (b) of Article XII.
A. For permitted uses.
(1) Area and bulk regulations of § 275-21A shall apply.
B. For conditional uses.
(1) Minimum tract size: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum width at building line: 200 feet.
(3) Maximum building height: Four stories not exceeding 55 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area: 60%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(6) Building setbacks.
(a) The front yard building setback shall be as follows:
Number of Stories
Front Yard Setback
(feet)
1 or 2 50
3 60
4 70
§ 275-90 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-91
C:714
§ 275-92. Special design and development requirements.
Number of Stories
Front Yard Setback
(feet)
Above front yard setback shall not apply to permitted signs
and those structures associated with ingress and egress,
including but not limited to guard houses and or entrance
gates.
(b) Each side yard shall be a minimum of 35 feet.
(c) Rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
(d) The distance at the closest point between any two freestanding
buildings, except accessory buildings, shall be at least 30 feet.
(7) Density. All uses shall comply with the area and bulk requirements
of this section, except that personal care, assisted living and
dementia/Alzheimer's facilities shall have no more than 35 beds per
net acre of lot area attributable to such facility.
(8) Parking. Parking for all uses shall be provided pursuant to Article
XXXI, except that parking for personal care, assisted living,
dementia/Alzheimer's, nursing or skilled nursing facilities shall be
provided at the rate of 1/2 off-street parking space for each bed,
plus one for each employee on the shift of the greatest employment.
A. Buffer area. The following buffer areas shall be required in accordance
with Article XXXIV:
(1) A buffer area along each public street of not less than 50 feet from
the edge of the right-of-way and a buffer area along each internal
street of not less than 15 feet from the right-of-way which shall be
free of all improvements except for signs, landscaping and those
structures associated with ingress and egress, including but not
limited to guard houses and/or entrance gates.
(2) A buffer area along each property line abutting a residentially
zoned district, provided that the adjacent property is not used for
nonresidential purposes pursuant to a conditional use permit, of
not less than 50 feet, which shall be landscaped and which shall
contain a planted visual barrier in accordance with the provisions
in Article XXXIV.
(3) A buffer area along each property line abutting a zoning district
other than a residentially zoned district or a residentially zoned
district used for nonresidential purposes pursuant to a conditional
use permit, of a minimum of 25 feet, which shall be landscaped and
which shall contain a planted visual barrier in accordance with the
provisions in Article XXXIV.
§ 275-91 CHARTER § 275-92
C:715

ARTICLE XVI
OR-1 Outdoor Recreation District
§ 275-93. Purpose.
The OR-1 Outdoor Recreation District is designed to provide specific
opportunities for passive outdoor recreational use in conjunction with large
properties like the Tyler Arboretum and Ridley Creek State Park. The
OR-1 District is also designed to create areas for nature study, historic
interpretation and the conservation of natural resources.
§ 275-94. Use regulations.
In OR-1 Districts, land and water areas may be used and facilities may be
erected, altered or used, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX,
and any of the following purposes:
§ 275-95. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV, which provides
exceptions to height regulations for certain structures.
§ 275-96. Area and bulk regulations.
A. Permitted principal uses. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
(1) Passive recreation uses, such as parks, nature study areas and
trails.
(2) Conservation uses, including woodlands, lakes, ponds, streams and
related resources.
(3) Agricultural uses.
(4) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
B. Accessory uses to permitted uses.
(1) Accessory use on the same tract and customarily incidental to the
above permitted uses.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Any principal uses permitted in the R-1A Residential District.
(2) Active recreational uses.
§ 275-93 CHARTER § 275-96
C:717
§ 275-97. Special design and development requirements.
§ 275-98. Plan submission, review and approval.
Each application for a permit to erect, construct or alter any building within
an OR Recreation District, or to modify a previously approved plan, shall
comply with the applicable provisions of Article XXXIV, special provisions,
relating to plan submittal and review.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Minimum tract area. The minimum tract area for OR-1 districts
shall be 10 acres.
(2) Minimum tract width at street line: 200 feet.
(3) Setbacks for service buildings. Service buildings required to
support these activities such as change buildings, food service,
chemical treatment and pump buildings, spectator stands, etc.,
shall be permitted and shall be located no closer than 200 feet from
any adjacent property line.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) The area and bulk regulations of § 275-17A shall apply to any R-1A
type uses.
(2) There shall be no minimum tract area requirement with respect to
active recreational uses in the OR-1 Districts, except that in the
case of golfing facilities, there shall be a minimum area of 50 acres
for a nine-hole regulation course or eighteen-hole par three course,
and a minimum area of 100 acres for an eighteen-hole regulation
course.
A. Food service facilities. Food service facilities shall be limited to snack
bar or counter service, except in the case of golf facilities which require
a minimum of 50 acres of land and on which dining room facilities will
be permitted. Snack bar and counter service operations shall be limited
to the hours during which the other facilities are open for use.
B. Alcoholic beverages. The sale or use of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited except as part of dining room facilities permitted under
Subsection A above and under state license.
C. Sale of sporting gear. The sale of sporting gear shall be limited to items
used directly for activities permitted under each particular application.
D. Minimum width and grade of drives. Ingress and egress drives shall be
a minimum of 20 feet in width and grades shall not exceed a maximum
of 12%. The open space on which the drives are located shall have a
width of not less than 50 feet.
§ 275-96 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-98
C:718
ARTICLE XVII
OR-2 Outdoor Recreation District
§ 275-99. Purpose.
The OR-2 Outdoor Recreation District is designed to provide specific
opportunities for active and passive outdoor recreation use in conjunction
with small-to-medium-size properties, like Lenni Park, Indian Orchards and
Gleave Baker Park. The OR-2 District is also designed to accommodate
conservation, nature study and natural resource protection.
§ 275-100. Use regulations.
In OR-2 Districts, land and water areas may be used and facilities may be
erected, altered or used, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX,
for any of the following purposes:
§ 275-101. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV which provides
exceptions to height regulations for certain structures.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) All uses permitted in the OR-1 District.
(2) Active recreational uses, such as: badminton, baseball (hard and
soft), basketball, croquet, fishing, football, golf, handball, hockey
(field or ice), horseback riding, ice skating, lacrosse, picnicking,
pitch and putt, quoits and horseshoes, seesaw, skiing, sledding,
sliding boards, soccer, swimming and diving, swimming meets
(regulation controlled), swings, tennis (all types), tetherball,
volleyball and wading.
(3) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to permitted uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same tract and customarily incidental to the
above permitted uses.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Any principal uses permitted in the R-1 Residential District.
§ 275-99 CHARTER § 275-102
C:719
§ 275-102. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 275-103. Special design and development requirements.
§ 275-104. Plan submission, review and approval.
Each application for a permit to erect, construct or alter any building within
an OR Recreation District, or to modify a previously approved plan, shall
comply with the applicable provisions in Article XXXIV, Special Provisions.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Minimum tract area. The minimum tract area for OR-2 districts
shall be one acre, except that in the case of golfing facilities, there
shall be a minimum area of 50 acres for a nine-hole regulation
course or eighteen-hole par three course, and a minimum area of
100 acres for an eighteen-hole regulation course.
(2) Minimum tract width at street line: 50 feet.
(3) Setbacks for service buildings. Service buildings required to
support these activities such as change buildings, food service,
chemical treatment and pump buildings, spectator stands, etc.,
shall be permitted and shall be located no closer than 100 feet from
any adjacent property line.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) The area and bulk regulations in § 275-21A shall apply to any R-1
type uses.
A. Food service facilities. Food service facilities shall be limited to snack
bar or counter service, except in the case of golf facilities which require
a minimum of 50 acres of land and on which dining room facilities will
be permitted. Snack bar and counter service operations shall be limited
to the hours during which the other facilities are open for use.
B. Alcoholic beverages. The sale or use of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited except as part of dining room facilities permitted under
Subsection A above and under state license.
C. Sale of sporting gear. The sale of sporting gear shall be limited to items
used directly for activities permitted under each particular application.
D. Minimum width and grade of drives. Ingress and egress drives shall be
a minimum of 20 feet in width and grades shall not exceed a maximum
of 12%. The open space on which the drives are located shall have a
width of not less than 50 feet.
§ 275-102 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-104
C:720
ARTICLE XVIII
OR-3 Outdoor and Indoor Recreation District
[Added 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 582]
§ 275-105. Purpose.
The OR-3 Outdoor and Indoor Recreation District is designed to provide
specific opportunities for active and passive outdoor and indoor
recreational use. The OR-3 District is also designed to allow appurtenant
community uses.
§ 275-106. Use regulations.
In OR-3 Districts, land and water areas may be used and facilities may be
erected, altered or used, subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX,
for any of the following purposes:
A. Uses permitted as a conditional use.
(1) Active recreational uses, such as: badminton, baseball (hard and
soft), basketball, camping, croquet, fishing, fitness exercise,
football, golf, handball, hockey (field or ice), horseback riding, ice
skating, lacrosse, picnicking, pitch and putt, quoits and horseshoes,
running or jogging, seesaw, skiing, sledding, sliding boards, soccer,
swimming and diving (recreational or instructional), swimming
meets (regulation controlled), swings, tennis (all types), tetherball,
volleyball and wading.
(2) Uses typically associated with a community center, including, but
not limited to: all-purpose recreational and community facilities,
child-care facilities, conference facilities, exercise and/or weight
rooms, gymnasium, locker rooms, a natatorium that may include
wading and physical rehabilitation pools, and physical
rehabilitation facilities.
(3) Physical therapy, rehabilitation, sports medicine treatment,
procedures related to the foregoing, and wellness and prevention
health education activities.
(4) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to the above conditional uses.
(1) Accessory uses of the same tract and customarily incidental to the
above conditional uses.
(2) Snack bar service.
§ 275-105 CHARTER § 275-106
C:721
§ 275-107. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV, which provides
exceptions to height regulations for certain structures.
§ 275-108. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 275-109. Plan submission, review and approval.
Each application for a permit to erect, construct or enlarge any building
within an OR-3 Recreation District, or to modify a previously approved plan,
shall require a conditional use application.
(3) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(4) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
(5) Accessory uses on the same tract that are normal and customary
for a community center, including activities that support a
community or community-based organization.
(6) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
A. Minimum tract area. The minimum tract area for OR-3 Districts shall be
four acres.
B. Minimum tract width at street line: 100 feet.
C. Setbacks for indoor facility buildings and service buildings. Indoor
facility buildings allowed under § 275-106 above and service buildings
required to support the activities permitted in an OR-3 District, such as
change buildings, food service, chemical treatment and pump
buildings, spectator stands, etc., shall be subject to the following
setback requirements from the property line (provided that where
several parcels are being used jointly for a community center and
related uses, the property line shall not include the interior property
lines of the parcels):
(1) Front yard: 150 feet.
(2) Side yards: an aggregate of 125 feet, with a minimum of 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 100 feet.
D. Maximum impervious surface area and building coverage. Not more
than 35% of the area of the property shall be covered by impervious
surfaces, and not more than 20% of the property shall be occupied by
buildings.
§ 275-106 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-109
C:722
ARTICLE XIX
SU-1 Special Use District
§ 275-110. Purpose.
The SU-1 Special Use District is designed primarily to make provision for
modern, nonnuisance scientific research establishments; corporate office or
headquarters-type office development; and other compatible, nonnuisance
light industrial and related uses in areas of the Township which are
particularly well suited for such uses. In promoting the general purposes
of this chapter, the intent of SU Districts is to encourage attractive, largesite,
low-lot coverage campus-type development which does not constitute a
hazard or a nuisance to adjacent areas and which seeks a highly accessible,
attractive and spacious setting with the protections or appropriate design
standards relating to lot size, yard space, building placement and
landscaping.
§ 275-111. Use regulations.
A building or combination of buildings may be erected or used and land may
be used or occupied, subject to the provisions in Articles XXIX and XXX, as
follows:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Scientific research laboratory.
(2) Light manufacturing.
(3) A dairy, together with warehouse facilities operating on the same
lot, serving the dairy operation or warehouse facilities serving offsite
retail operations.
(4) An office building.
(5) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.
(1) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, including a cafeteria located
within the main building and operated by or for the employer for
the exclusive use of its employees.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
C. Conditional uses.
§ 275-110 CHARTER § 275-111
C:723
§ 275-112. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 40 feet, except as provided in the special provisions in Article
XXXIV, which provides for exceptions to height regulations for certain
structures.
§ 275-113. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461]
(1) Uses similar in character to those set forth in Subsection A.
(2) Outdoor and indoor recreational areas and facilities and private
clubs for recreation.
(3) Conference centers and meeting and assembly facilities for
associations and organizations.
(4) Schools, including nursery, kindergarten, elementary and junior
and senior high schools.
(5) Day-care centers.
(6) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
(7) Regional rail facilities. [Added 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 720]
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Minimum tract area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum tract width at street line: 500 feet.
(3) Minimum individual lot areas: four acres.
(4) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(5) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(6) Maximum impervious surface area: 50%.
(7) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(8) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 100 feet.
(9) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 200 feet.
(10) Minimum width of each individual side yard: 100 feet.
(11) Minimum side yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 100 feet.
§ 275-111 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-113
C:724
§ 275-114. Special design and development requirements.
[Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461].
B. Conditional uses. All the provisions of Subsection A shall apply to
conditional uses except for regional rail facilities, for which the
following shall apply: [Amended 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 720]
(1) There shall be no minimum tract or lot area requirements.
(2) Setbacks for parking garages, parking lots, station buildings and
other occupied buildings shall be located no closer than 50 feet
from adjacent residential property lines.
(3) There shall be no minimum setbacks from the street line.
A. Special regulations relating to access and highway frontage. In order to
minimize traffic congestion and hazard, control street access in the
interest of public safety and encourage the appropriate development of
street or highway frontage, the following shall apply:
(1) No parking lot or area for off-street parking or for the storage or
movement of motor vehicles shall abut directly to a public street or
highway unless separated from the street or highway by a raised
curb, barrier planting strip, wall or other effective barrier against
traffic, except for necessary accessways, and each parking lot shall
have not more than two accessways to any one public street or
highway for each 500 feet of frontage. Where practicable, access to
parking areas shall be provided by a common service driveway or
minor street in order to avoid direct access on a major street or
highway. No such accessway shall be more than 35 feet in width.
(2) Accessway requirements.
(a) All necessary accessways to a public street or highway shall be
located not less than 150 feet from any intersection with any
other street.
(b) All streets and accessways shall be designed in a manner
conducive to safe exit and entrance and shall conform to the
design standards for streets in Chapter 210, Subdivision and
Land Development.
B. Buffer areas and landscaping.
(1) The following buffer areas shall be provided:
(a) A buffer of 100 feet shall be provided, of which at least 50 feet
shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions in
Article XXXIV.
(2) Buffer yards shall comply with the following standards:
§ 275-113 CHARTER § 275-114
C:725
(a) The buffer yard shall be measured from the district boundary
line or from the near street line where a street serves as the
district boundary line.
(b) The buffer yard may be part of the required front, side or rear
yards, and, in cases of conflict, the larger yard requirements
shall apply.
(c) In all buffer yards, the exterior 50 feet width shall be planted
with trees, shrubs, grasses and ground covers and shall be
maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall
grass in conformance with existing regulations; provided,
however, if such land is naturally wooded, it may continue in its
natural state.
(d) No structure, manufacturing or processing activity or storage
of materials shall be permitted in the buffer yard.
(e) Suitable screen planting shall be shown on the plan and shall
be installed by the developer in accordance with Article XXXIV.
(f) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, complete plans
showing the arrangement of all buffer yards and the
placement, species and size of all plant materials and the
placement, size, materials and types of fences to be placed in
such buffer yard shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
after which the Planning Commission shall certify to the
Building Inspector that the plans are in conformance with the
terms of this chapter.
C. Building placement.
(1) There shall be a minimum distance of 75 feet between all buildings.
(2) No building shall be closer than 75 feet from the edge of any
cartway of a dedicated public street.
D. Lighting.
(1) All parking areas shall be adequately lighted with lighting of such
quality and type and with such shielding as will not present direct
glare to any adjoining residential area. All such lighting shall be
turned off within one hour following the close of business in the
building or the recreational area.
(2) All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas
or spaces between or about buildings, other than those relating to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated.
(3) All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be directed in
such a way as not to create a nuisance, and in every district all such
lighting shall be arranged so as to protect the street or highway
and adjoining property from direct glare or hazardous interference
§ 275-114 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-114
C:726
§ 275-115. Plan submission, review and approval.
Each application for a permit to erect, construct or alter any building within
an SU-1 Special Use District or each request for an amendment to establish
such a district or to modify a previously prepared plan shall comply with the
special procedural and application requirements in Article XXXIV.
§ 275-116. Environmental controls.
All uses within the SU-1 District shall comply with all environmental
controls of Article XXXIII pertaining to noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors
and gases, heat and glare, air quality, odor, vibration, outdoor storage and
waste disposal.
§ 275-117. Sale of property before construction.
If a property in the SU-1 District is sold by the applicant or by any affiliated
member of a single corporate family of which the applicant or its parent
company is a member after approval of the plan but before proposed
construction is started or if, within 18 months of the approval, construction
is not undertaken by or for the applicant or any affiliated member of a single
corporate family of which the applicant or its parent company is a member,
said approved plan shall be null and void, unless an extension of time is
granted by the Township Council; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall prohibit the applicant from transferring title to such property at any
time to a state or local industrial development corporation.
of any kind. Any light shall be equipped with some type of glareshielding
device approved by the Township. The height of any light
must also be approved by the Township.
E. Architectural design.
(1) All buildings shall be of compatible architectural design with one
another. No prefabricated or metal buildings shall be permitted.
(2) All buildings shall be located, oriented, designed and constructed
to create architectural, interest; to further the amenities of light
and air; and to maximize energy efficiency.
F. All of the provisions in § 275-114 shall apply to permitted principal uses,
accessory uses to permitted principal uses and conditional uses, except
§ 275-114.B(1), C(1), and C(2) shall not apply to regional rail facilities.
[Added 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 720]
§ 275-114 CHARTER § 275-117
C:727

ARTICLE XIXA
SU-1-A Mixed Use District
[Added 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 725]
§ 275-117.1. Purpose.
§ 275-117.2. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions contained in § 275-8 of the Zoning Ordinance,
the following additional definitions shall apply to the SU-1A Mixed Use
District:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT OR DANCING — An establishment offering
sexually oriented live entertainment.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility with or without overnight lodging, at
which meetings, seminars, expositions, trade shows and/or conferences are
conducted. Conference facilities may also include ancillary entertainment
facilities, a fitness and health center and retail stores and services primarily
for conference center guests.
CONVENIENCE STORE WITH FUEL PUMPS — A retail store of not less
than 3,000 square feet or more than 12,000 square feet of building area
exclusive of canopy and fuel pump areas, for the sale of food and beverages,
personal care items, self-service gasoline and other similar items, which
may include ATM banking machines. A convenience store with fuel pumps
A. The provisions of this article are enacted for the following purposes:
(1) To address planning, development and redevelopment issues
affecting certain areas along Baltimore Pike within Middletown
Township.
(2) To employ planning principles and design standards that focus on
creating a variety of well-planned and designed land uses.
(3) To encourage innovative and integrated long-range development
plans that contribute to the quality of life in the community.
(4) To employ planning principles and design standards that focus on
creating a variety of well-planned and designed land uses,
streetscapes, public open spaces, and the overall built
environment.
(5) To provide greater opportunities for use of mass transit facilities.
(6) To respond to growing demands for housing and nonresidential
uses of various types and designs.
(7) To revitalize properties that have vacant, defunct or underutilized
buildings, and to transform these previously developed properties
into more complete, functional, and attractive neighborhoods.
§ 275-117.1 CHARTER § 275-117.2
C:729
shall not include the provision of automobile service or repair and shall not
allow tractor-trailer fueling.
EXISTING FRANKLIN MINT PARCELS — Those existing parcels, as defined
by separate tax parcel numbers, which contain or contained buildings or
structures operated in connection with the Franklin Mint.
HOTEL — A facility offering for compensation temporary overnight lodging
accommodations to the general public, in which such lodging
accommodations are accessed from common entrances to an interior lobby,
corridor or hallway, and which may include additional accessory use
facilities and services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, personal
services, and recreational facilities. Such establishments shall provide
guests with customary hotel services such as maid service and the
furnishing and laundering of linen. A hotel may include an accessory
conference center.
MAN-MADE STEEP AND VERY STEEP SLOPES — Topographic conditions
characterized by a change in elevation equal to or greater than 15%, as
determined and delineated by the process described in Article XXX, which
are the artifact of human land use and earthmoving activity, including,
but not limited to, the construction and/or maintenance of transportation
infrastructure; agricultural or industrial operations; mineral extraction;
building construction; stormwater and floodwater management; sewage
control; energy production; military operations; refuse deposit (landfill);
and the like. Proof of whether a slope is man-made may be provided through
comparisons of historic aerial photographs, soil borings, USGS maps,
development plans, field survey, and the review of other maps and
documentation.
MULTITENANT OFFICE BUILDING — A building containing general and/
or professional office uses but which may also contain meeting facilities,
seminar facilities and/or accessory dining, fitness and retail facilities, health
and fitness centers, cultural, religious or charitable uses, conference
centers (without either overnight lodging or ancillary entertainment uses),
governmental uses, medical laboratories, research and testing facilities and
parking structures.[Added 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 736]
NATURE TRAIL — An unpaved path through wooded areas and meadows
that is marked and maintained for walking or hiking, and which is
connected at both ends to other such paths, or sidewalks, or common open
space.
RESEARCH OR TESTING FACILITY — A facility for product investigation,
testing or development, including food products, prototype store
development.
RETAIL STORE — An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption
and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods including, but
not limited to, pharmacy, book store, florist shop, gift shop, jewelry store, or
picture framing shop, home improvement store. Retail stores may include a
supermarket component.
§ 275-117.2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-117.2
C:730
STREETSCAPE — The cartway, and the space adjacent to the cartway
that may be embellished with curbs, grass strips, sidewalks, street trees,
streetlights, and amenities such as benches, waste receptacles and the like.
SUPERMARKET — A retail establishment, typically in the range of 50,000
to 180,000 square feet of gross floor area, selling food, including alcoholic
beverage sales, prepared foods for on premises or off premises
consumption, and also selling other convenience and household goods,
clothing, electronics and other products sold in general merchandise stores,
and providing ancillary services, including but not limited to pharmacy
and banking services, and restaurants. Supermarkets shall not include
wholesale membership clubs and/or discount department stores.
TRACT — One or more contiguous or noncontiguous lots, assembled for the
purpose of unified development in accordance with the regulations of the
SU-1-A Mixed Use District.
§ 275-117.3. Use regulations.
Buildings may be erected, altered or used and land may be used or occupied
for the following uses:
A. Minimum tract size: 100 acres.
B. The following residential uses are permitted as of right within the
SU-1-A Mixed Use District: [Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 746;
9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 771]
(1) Single-family semidetached dwellings;
(2) Single-family attached dwellings;
(3) Single-family detached dwellings;
(4) Multifamily dwellings.
C. The following nonresidential uses are permitted as of right within the
SU-1-A Mixed Use District:
(1) Convenience store;
(2) Convenience store with fuel pumps;
(3) Bank or other financial institutions, with or without drive-up
window and/or accessory ATM facilities;
(4) Commercial greenhouse, nursery or garden center;
(5) Conference centers;
(6) Cultural, religious or charitable uses;
(7) General or professional offices;
(8) Governmental use;
§ 275-117.2 CHARTER § 275-117.3
C:731
(9) Health and fitness centers, including ancillary services such as
wellness, physical rehabilitation facilities and prevention health
education activities;
(10) Hotel;
(11) Medical laboratories, outpatient or training facilities or offices for
doctors and other medical personnel;
(12) Municipal uses;
(13) Pharmacy, with or without drive-up window;
(14) Research and/or testing facility;
(15) Restaurants and taverns, including those with musical
entertainment, dancing (excluding adult entertainment or
dancing), and/or outdoor service of food and/or alcohol;
(16) Restaurants, fast food;
(17) Retail stores, including discount department stores;
(18) Supermarket, with or without drive-up window(s);
(19) Parking structures;
(20) Public transit facilities;
(21) Wholesale membership club.
(22) Stand-alone assisted living, memory care facilities, skilled nursing
and/or rehabilitation centers. [Added 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
771]
(23) Day care. [Added 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 771]
(24) Communication antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 10-22-2018 by
Ord. No. 796]
(25) Indoor storage building or warehouse, to include warehousing
known as "mini storage," consisting of multiple warehouses which
are either leased or sold. [Added 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 796]
D. Permitted accessory uses within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in § 275-117.3A
and B.
E. Conditional uses.
§ 275-117.3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-117.3
C:732
§ 275-117.4. Required mix of uses; maximum permitted quantity of
residential units and hotel rooms.
§ 275-117.5. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings within a SU-1-A Mixed Use development
shall be as follows, except as provided in the special provisions in Article
XXXIV of the Zoning Ordinance which provides for exceptions to height
regulations for certain structures:
§ 275-117.6. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Communication towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 796]
A. At least three of the uses permitted in § 275-117.3 shall be constructed
on a tract.
B. At least 10% but no more than 90% of the total nonresidential gross
floor area, exclusive of hotels, shall be devoted to retail store, garden
center, supermarket or wholesale membership club uses. [Amended
9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 771]
C. At least 10% but no more than 90% of the total nonresidential gross
floor area shall be devoted to offices, research and/or testing facilities,
medical laboratories, outpatient or training facilities or offices for
doctors and other medical personnel health and fitness centers.
[Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 771]
D. No more than 15% of the total nonresidential gross floor area shall be
devoted to restaurants, taverns, and fast-food restaurants.
E. No more than 350 residential units shall be permitted, with a density
not to exceed 15 residential units per acre on the area proposed for
residential use. [Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 746]
F. No more than 150 hotel rooms shall be permitted on a tract. Such hotel
rooms may be located in a hotel and/or a conference center.
A. Single-story buildings: 35 feet.
B. Multistory residential and nonresidential buildings, other than office
buildings or hotels: 50 feet.
C. Office buildings and hotels: 60 feet.
D. No new buildings located within 100 feet of the right-of-way of
Baltimore Pike shall be more than 40 feet in height.
A. Maximum impervious surface area of the tract: 60%.
§ 275-117.3 CHARTER § 275-117.6
C:733
§ 275-117.7. Special design and development standards.
B. Maximum building coverage of the tract: 20%.
C. Setbacks:
(1) Front yard (adjacent to Baltimore Pike): 80 feet, except that all new
buildings on the existing Franklin Mint parcels shall be required to
be set back at least 100 feet from the cartway edge of Baltimore
Pike. The front yard setback requirement shall not apply to
accessory canopy structures, fuel pumps, bank drive-throughs, or
buildings occupied by a municipal or governmental use, but in no
case shall be less than 10 feet from the legal right-of-way line of
Baltimore Pike.
(2) Front yard (adjacent to Pennell Road): 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 15 feet, except that a building occupied by a municipal
or governmental use shall not be subject to this side yard
requirement.
(4) Rear yard: 100 feet, except that a building occupied by a municipal
or governmental use shall not be subject to this rear yard
requirement. [Amended 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 780]
A. General standards.
(1) All developments constructed under this article shall also be
governed by the SU-1-A Mixed Use Design Standards dated
December 23, 2011, attached as Appendix A124 to this article.
B. Special regulations relating to access and highway frontage. In order to
minimize traffic congestion and hazard, control street access in the
interest of public safety and encourage the appropriate development of
street or highway frontage, the following shall apply:
(1) No parking lot or area for off-street parking or for the storage or
movement of motor vehicles shall abut directly to a public street or
highway unless separated from the street or highway by a raised
curb, barrier planting strip, wall or other effective barrier against
traffic, except for necessary accessways, and each parking lot shall
have not more than two accessways to any one public street or
highway for each 500 feet of frontage. Where practicable, access to
parking areas shall be provided by a common service driveway or
minor public or private street in order to avoid direct access on a
major street or highway. No such accessway shall be more than 70
feet in width.
(2) Accessway requirements.
124. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-117.6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-117.7
C:734
(a) All necessary accessways to a public street or highway shall be
located not less than 150 feet from any intersection with any
other public street.
(b) All streets and accessways shall be designed in a manner
conducive to safe exit and entrance and shall conform to the
design standards for streets in Chapter 210, Subdivision and
Land Development.
C. Buffer areas and landscaping. All required buffer areas and landscaping
for developments within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District shall be a
specified in the Design Standards attached hereto as Appendix A.125
D. Building placement.
(1) There shall be a minimum distance of 18 feet between single-family
detached dwellings. The minimum distance between all other
residential buildings shall be 20 feet. [Amended 9-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 771]
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of at least 25 feet between all
nonresidential buildings and residential buildings.
(3) The minimum distance between nonresidential buildings shall be
governed by the prevailing building code.
E. Lighting.
(1) All parking areas shall be adequately lighted with lighting of such
quality and type and with such shielding as will not present direct
glare to any adjoining residential area. Unless otherwise permitted
by the Township Council, all parking lot lighting shall be
extinguished one hour after the close of business, until dawn, in
order to conserve energy and reduce glare and sky-lighting
consequences. Where all-night safety or security lighting is deemed
necessary, the lighting intensity levels shall not exceed 25% of the
levels normally, but in no case shall they be less than the minimum
levels for safety/security as prescribed by the IES.
(2) All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas
or spaces between or about buildings, other than those relating to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated.
(3) All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be directed in
such a way as not to create a nuisance, and in every district all such
lighting shall be arranged so as to protect the street or highway
and adjoining property from direct glare or hazardous interference
of any kind. Any light shall be equipped with some type of glareshielding
device approved by the Township.
125. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-117.7 CHARTER § 275-117.7
C:735
§ 275-117.8. Environmental controls.
All uses within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District shall comply with all
environmental controls of § 275-207, Subsections A through K, pertaining
to noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors and gases, heat and glare, air quality,
odor, vibration, soil erosion, sedimentation and grading control, and storage
and waste disposal. An environmental impact assessment (EIA) report
meeting the standards contained in § 275-215 of the Zoning Ordinance
shall be submitted at the time of preliminary plan submission for the
development of any new buildings within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District.
§ 275-117.9. Traffic impact.
F. Site element screening. Roof-top elements, loading/unloading areas and
trash dumpsters shall be screened from view in accordance with the
Design Standards attached hereto as Appendix A.126
A. The peak traffic generated by the proposed development shall be
accommodated in a safe and efficient manner or improvements shall be
made in order to effect the same.
B. All off-site traffic improvements shall be designed in accordance with
the principles set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Smart Transportation Guidebook dated March 2008, or
most recent edition.
C. At the time of preliminary plan submission, the applicant shall submit a
traffic impact study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer, consistent
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Policies and
Procedures for Transportation Impact Studies Related to Highway
Occupancy Permits (January 2009 or most recent version). The study
shall fully consider all modes of transportation. The study area and key
intersections to be analyzed shall be subject to the approval of
PennDOT and the Township. If the traffic impact study indicates that
the proposed development will result in an unacceptable decrease in
overall level of service under the standards set forth in the
Transportation Research Board Special Report 209, Highway Capacity
Manual (2000 or most recent version), the applicant is required to
construct improvements that will mitigate the overall LOS decrease.
Such improvements shall be in accordance with PennDOT's Smart
Transportation Guidebook and shall be subject to the approval of both
PennDOT and the Township. If the mitigations are determined by either
the Township or PennDOT to be infeasible or impractical, the applicant
shall follow PennDOT's Policies and Procedures for Transportation
Impact Studies Related to Highway Occupancy Permits and PennDOT's
Smart Transportation Guidebook to develop alternative improvements
reasonably satisfactory to PennDOT and the Township.
126. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-117.7 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-117.10
C:736
§ 275-117.10. Steep slopes.
A. The steep slope provisions contained herein are designed to encourage
the sensitive treatment of natural hillsides and their related soil and
vegetation resources in an effort to minimize adverse environmental
impacts. The following objectives serve to complement these specific
purposes and the overall purposes of the SU-1-A Mixed Use District:
(1) To conserve and protect natural steep and very steep slopes from
inappropriate development such as excessive grading, land form
alteration and extensive vegetation removal;
(2) To avoid potential hazards to property and the disruption of
ecological balance which may be caused by increased runoff,
flooding, soil erosion and sedimentation, blasting and ripping of
rock and landslide and soil failure;
(3) To encourage the use of natural steep and very steep slopes for
open space and other uses which are compatible with the
preservation of natural resources and protection of areas of
environmental concern.
B. In addition to the controls presented in the above subsections herein,
all development in areas of natural steep slopes and natural very steep
slopes within a tract shall be governed by the general provisions
governing steep slopes contained in § 275-179 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Areas of man-made steep slopes and man-made very steep slopes shall
not be subject to the general steep slope provisions contained in
§ 275-179. However, disturbance of man-made steep slopes and manmade
very steep slopes shall be subject to the limitations set forth in
Subsection D(1) through (3) below.
C. Up to 35% of the total area of the natural steep slopes and natural very
steep slopes located on a tract may be disturbed and/or used for any
purpose permitted by the SU-1-A Mixed Use District regulations, and an
additional 5% may be disturbed and/or used to create more natural/
gentle grade transitions to better blend with existing topography,
provided that:
(1) Earthmoving activities and vegetation removal will be conducted
only to the extent necessary to accommodate proposed uses and
structures and in a manner that will not cause excessive surface
water runoff, soil erosion, sedimentation and unstable soil
conditions, and wetlands deterioration;
(2) Mitigation techniques will be utilized, including but not limited to
retaining walls, tree wells, and the restoration of slopes through
measures such as the establishment of ground covers and/or low
spreading shrubs, the use of soil erosion control fabric and other
measures focused on the stabilization of slopes especially in close
proximity to wetlands;
§ 275-117.10 CHARTER § 275-117.10
C:737
§ 275-117.11. Parking.
(3) All trees 10 inches in diameter or greater at breast height which
are eliminated due to disturbance of natural and/or man-made
steep slopes and very steep slopes shall be replaced with two new
trees of at least 1 1/2 to two inches in diameter at breast height.
(4) Proposed buildings and structures will be of sound engineering
design and footings will be designed in response to the tract's
slope, soil and bedrock characteristics;
(5) The proposed disturbance furthers one or more of the purposes
stated in § 275-117.1 of this article.
(6) The proposed disturbance furthers one or more of the purposes
stated in § 275-117.10 of this article; and
(7) The disturbance of steep and very steep slopes shall comply with all
federal and state regulations.
D. The following uses and activities are prohibited on areas of natural
steep slopes and natural very steep slopes:
(1) Cut and fill other than in association with uses permitted in the
SU-1-A Mixed Use District;
(2) Soil, rock or mineral extraction and/or removal other than in
association with any uses permitted by the SU-1-A Mixed Use
District regulations;
(3) Removal of topsoil other than in association with any uses
permitted by the SU-1-A Mixed Use District.
A. Off-street parking shall comply with the minimum off-street parking
requirements contained in § 275-182 of the Zoning Ordinance, except
that:
(1) Residential uses shall require 1.5 parking spaces per residential
unit. The quantity of parking spaces required to serve each
residential building shall be no further than 150 from an entrance
to that building.
(2) Office buildings shall require one parking space for each 350
square feet of gross floor area of the building.
(3) Retail stores and warehouse membership clubs shall require one
parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, enclosed
by a roof and four walls and heated;
(4) Supermarkets shall require one parking space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area, enclosed by a roof and four walls and
heated;
§ 275-117.10 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-117.11
C:738
§ 275-117.12. Financial subdivision.
In connection with development within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District,
individual lots may be created for purposes of financing and/or
conveyancing. Such individual lots shall not be required to comply on an
individual basis with the dimensional requirements of this article, provided
that the tract complies with such requirements on an overall basis, and
further provided that the deeds conveying such separate lots contain
covenants requiring the purchasers to, at all times, operate and maintain
such lots in good order and repair and in a clean and sanitary condition; that
cross easements for parking areas and all appurtenant ways, pedestrian
access, and utilities shall be maintained between such lots; and that such
covenants shall be subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor. The
purchaser of any such lot shall so covenant and agree thereby to be bound
by such conditions as set forth herein. Where a financial subdivision is
proposed, a financial subdivision plan shall be submitted at the time of
final plan submission and shall be approved by Township Council prior to
recording.
§ 275-117.13. Signage.
(5) Convenience stores, with or without fuel pumps, shall require one
parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, enclosed
by a roof and four walls and heated;
(6) Restaurants and fast-food restaurants shall require seven parking
spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area devoted to patron use;
(7) Banks or other financial institutions shall require one parking
space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area;
(8) Hotels and conference centers shall require one space per lodging
unit.
(9) Research or testing facilities shall require one parking space for
each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
B. Surface parking spaces located on the tract shall be 9 1/2 feet wide by
19 feet long, except that 20% of the total number of required parking
spaces may be 8 1/2 feet wide by 18 feet long, provided that they are
located in a contiguous parking area.
C. Unless noted otherwise in this article, parking and loading area
provisions shall be as required as per Article XXXI of the Zoning
Ordinance.
A. All signs constructed or erected within a development within the
SU-1-A Mixed Use District shall be subject to the general requirements
contained in §§ 275-190 through 275-194 of the Zoning Ordinance and
shall be subject to the specific standards set forth herein. To the extent
that any of the general requirements contained in §§ 275-190 through
275-194 of the Zoning Ordinance may be deemed to be inconsistent
§ 275-117.11 CHARTER § 275-117.13
C:739
with the specific signage regulations contained herein, the specific
signage regulations contained herein shall control.
B. Signs advertising and identifying mixed-use developments within the
SU-1-A Mixed Use District.
(1) One freestanding sign advertising and identifying a mixed-use
development, or a major tenant within a mixed-use development
shall be permitted to be erected at each driveway intersection with
an existing street, provided that:
(a) If mounted on a background, freestanding signs shall not be
less than seven feet nor more than 30 feet in height above the
grade of the center line of the nearest public roadway. In cases
where individual letters are separately braced to the ground,
each letter shall be no more than 10 feet high measured from
grade. [Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 736]
(b) If mounted on a background, freestanding signs shall not
exceed 200 square feet in sign area (per side). In cases where
individually letters are separately braced to the ground, the
maximum total sign area shall be no more than 1,000 square
feet.
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting which is
concealed, internally illuminated, or indirect.
(d) All such signs shall be set back at least 15 feet from any street
or highway right-of-way line.
(2) Directional signs for the purpose of directing vehicular and
pedestrian traffic within the tract shall be permitted in proximity to
the entrances to buildings. The directional signs shall be for the
convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, giving
direction to specific buildings and uses within the development.
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(b) The height of any such sign above grade immediately
surrounding same shall not exceed eight feet.
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated, except by lighting which is
concealed, internally illuminated, or indirect.
(d) No such sign shall advertise any particular item, program or
product but rather shall be limited to the giving of directions to
particular buildings or uses within the development.
(e) "Entrance," "exit," "pick-up," "loading area" and similar
directional signs shall be permitted by the Township Code
Enforcement Officer if necessary for the safety and protection
of the public, provided no such sign shall exceed six square
feet in area and no such sign shall contain any advertising.
§ 275-117.13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-117.13
C:740
C. Signs advertising and identifying single-occupancy nonresidential
buildings in the SU-1-A Mixed Use District.
(1) The occupant of a single-occupancy nonresidential building shall be
permitted the exterior wall signs, provided that:
(a) Not more than five signs shall be permitted on the wall of any
one side of the building.
(b) No one wall sign shall exceed 500 square feet or have a length
of more than 50 feet, and no sign shall be closer than 10 feet to
another wall sign unless it is deemed part of the same sign.
[Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 736]
(c) The total square footage of wall signage on each building face
shall not exceed two square feet for every linear foot of
building length.
(d) No wall sign shall be illuminated except by lighting which is
concealed or indirect.
D. Signs advertising and identifying multi-tenant office buildings in the
SU-1-A Mixed Use District.
(1) Multi-tenant office buildings are permitted to have one
freestanding sign designating the name and address of the
building, and identifying the occupants of said building or
buildings, provided that:
(a) The size of such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(b) No such freestanding sign shall exceed 10 feet in height
measured from the mean grade at the base of the sign.
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed, internally illuminated or indirect.
(2) Multi-tenant office buildings are permitted to have one wall sign
designating the name and address of the building, provided that:
(a) The sign area shall not exceed two square feet for each linear
foot of building length;
(b) There shall be no more than one sign per building face;
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting which is
concealed, internally illuminated or indirect.
(3) In addition to wall signs designating the name and address of the
building, multitenant office buildings are permitted to have
additional wall signs on the exterior wall of an office building as
follows: [Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 736]
§ 275-117.13 CHARTER § 275-117.13
C:741
(a) Multitenant office buildings having at least 200,000 square
feet of gross leasable area are permitted to have three
additional wall signs of a maximum of 200 square feet per sign
on the exterior wall of the building.
(b) Multitenant office buildings having 100,000 square feet of
gross leasable area up to 200,000 square feet of gross leasable
area are permitted to have two additional wall signs of a
maximum of 200 square feet per sign on the exterior wall of the
building.
(c) Multitenant office buildings having 50,000 square feet of gross
leasable area up to 100,000 square feet of gross leasable area
are permitted to have two additional wall signs of a maximum
of 100 square feet per sign on the exterior wall of the building.
(d) Multitenant office buildings having less than 50,000 square
feet of gross leasable area are permitted to have two additional
wall signs of a maximum of 50 square feet per sign on the
exterior wall of the building.
(e) No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting which is
concealed, internally illuminated or indirect.
(4) Multi-tenant office buildings are permitted to have such directory
signs as are necessary to promote the safe and convenient
movement of traffic within the driveways and parking areas,
provided that:
(a) The size of such sign shall not exceed the product of the
number of occupants listed on such directory multiplied by 250
square inches.
(b) Such sign shall be erected perpendicular to the driveway
nearest their location.
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting which is
concealed, internally illuminated or indirect.
E. A master signage plan depicting the type, approximate location and
approximate size of each proposed sign shall be submitted at the time
of both preliminary and final plan submission. [Amended 2-11-2013
by Ord. No. 736]
§ 275-117.13 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-117.13
C:742
ARTICLE XX
SU-2 Special Use District
§ 275-118. Purpose. [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 722]
The SU-2 Special Use Overlay District is designed to make a provision for
mobile home park development when authorized by the Township Council
as a conditional use. In addition, the SU-2 Special Use Overlay District
provides for single-family attached dwellings, in a limited context, when
authorized by the Township Council as a conditional use. The district
provisions are designed to provided density, open space, lot size and related
regulations.
§ 275-119. Use regulations.
§ 275-120. Height regulations. [Amended 8-26-2002 by Ord. No.
631]
The maximum height of dwellings and other structures (other than office
buildings) shall be 35 feet. The maximum height of an office building shall
A. Buildings may be erected and used and land may be used, subject to the
provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX, for any of the following purposes
and no other:
(1) Any use permitted in the SU-1 District, pursuant to the provisions
stated in or referred to in Article XIX.
(2) Mobile home parks, when authorized by Township Council as a
conditional use. When deciding whether to authorize a mobile
home park as a conditional use, Township Council shall consider
the standards and criteria listed in Article XXXVI.
(3) Billboards, when authorized by Township Council as a conditional
use, subject to the area and bulk regulations in § 275-216.3 and the
conditional use standards and criteria in §§ 275-216.4 and 275-236.
[Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 707]
(4) Single-family attached dwellings, including duplexes, twins and
townhouses in any combination, but excluding multiplex and
quadruplex units, when authorized by the Township Council as a
conditional use subject to the area and bulk regulations and design
standards contained in § 275-121C. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 722]
B. Where the principal use of buildings or combination of buildings is
office, permitted accessory uses shall be accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to the permitted principal office use, including
cafeteria or food service facilities, copy centers, fitness centers and
newsstands for use of the occupants of the building(s). [Added
8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 631]
§ 275-118 CHARTER § 275-120
C:743
be 60 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV regarding height limit
exemptions.
§ 275-121. Area and bulk regulations.
A. All uses developed as per the SU-1 District shall conform to the area
and bulk regulations in Article XIX.
B. Mobile home parks.
(1) Minimum tract size: 10 acres, which shall not include any areas
which are within a one-hundred-year floodplain, which have slopes
in excess of 25% or which have wet soil conditions.
(2) Density. The maximum density, i.e., average number of mobile
homes per acre, for a mobile home park shall be 5 1/2 mobile
homes per acre. In calculating density, any part of the area of the
mobile home park tract which is within a one-hundred-year
floodplain, which has slopes in excess of 25%, which has wet soil
conditions or which is within a road, utility or stormwater easement
or right-of-way shall not be counted as part of the park's area.
(3) Open space. A mobile home park, which is designed to contain
more than 20 mobile homes, shall contain the following minimum
percentages of open space for use of the park residents:
Number of Mobile Homes
Minimum Percentage of Area
in Open Space
20 to 49 10%
50 to 90 15%
100+ 20%
All open space areas shall be in accordance with Article XXXV and
shall be landscaped according to a landscape plan which will be
reviewed, pursuant to Council's deliberations on the conditional
use application. No buildings shall be located in open space areas.
Areas attributable to required buffer areas and one-hundred-year
floodplains, areas with wet soils or slopes in excess of 25% and
utility, road and stormwater rights-of-way or easements shall not
be counted toward required open space.
(4) Impervious coverage. Mobile home parks shall be designed so that
total building coverage shall not exceed 30% of the net park size
and all impervious coverage shall not exceed 45% of the net park
size. "Net park size" is the total area of the park minus any area
within one-hundred-year floodplain, with wet soils or slopes in
excess of 25% or which is part of the required buffer or open space
area or which is within a utility, stormwater or road right-of-way or
easement.
§ 275-120 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-121
C:744
(5) Lot size. Each individual mobile home lot shall have a minimum of
7,500 square feet.
(6) Yards. Each mobile home lot shall have a front, rear and two side
yards. Each yard shall be at least 20 feet in width, measured from
the mobile home lot line. No accessory building shall be located in a
yard area any closer than 10 feet to perimeter lot lines.
(7) Distance between mobile homes. No mobile home shall be located
closer than 40 feet to any other mobile home or any other building.
C. Single-family attached dwelling units as permitted by § 275-119A(4).
[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 722]
(1) Minimum tract area: 25 acres.
(2) Maximum gross density: four dwelling units per gross acre in the
tract.
(3) Minimum lot area for a single family attached unit: 2,400 square
feet.
(4) Minimum depth of rear yard: 25 feet. Detached garages and paved
driveways may be located in the rear yard on lots with rear yards
which abut an alley; all other accessory buildings and structures in
the rear yard of lots which abut an alley must be located at least 10
feet from a property line. Notwithstanding § 275-199H of Article
XXXIII, decks, patios and uncovered spaces on all lots may
encroach into required rear yards no more than 12 feet.
(5) Utilities: All units must be served by public sewer and public water
service.
(6) Maximum number of attached units in a building: Buildings
containing single-family attached dwellings shall not exceed six
dwelling units.
(7) Minimum distance between buildings: 35 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(9) Perimeter setback: No building shall be less than 100 feet from the
perimeter property line, and no accessory structure shall be less
than 50 feet from such line (except for signs and those structures
associated with ingress and egress, lighting standards, stormwater
management facilities, retaining walls, benches and the like) unless
the proposed development abuts a perpetually preserved
conservation area, park land or open space, in which case the
Township Council may, upon request of the applicant, decrease the
perimeter setback applicable to building and accessory structures
to a minimum setback of 25 feet. Required rear yards may
encroach into a perimeter setback no more than 25 feet.
§ 275-121 CHARTER § 275-122
C:745
§ 275-122. Special design standards.
§ 275-122.1. Buffer areas and landscaping. [Added 8-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 631]
A. The following design standards shall apply to mobile home parks, in
addition to any other standards which are generally applicable
pursuant to other provisions of this chapter and/or Chapter 210,
Subdivision and Land Development:
(1) Each mobile home park shall be designed so that it contains a
perimeter buffer area contiguous to the mobile home park's
property boundary. The buffer area shall contain an evergreen
planting strip which will screen the park from view by pedestrians
at the mobile home park's property boundary. The width of the
buffer area and the planting strip shall vary according to the
following table based on the number of mobile homes that the park
is designed for:
Number of Mobile
Homes In Park
Minimum Width of
Perimeter Buffer
Minimum Width of
Planted Area
20 to 49 150 feet 25
55 to 99 200 feet 40
100+ 200 feet 50
(2) Utilities. All utilities, including telephone, electric and television
lines, shall be installed underground.
(3) Parking. There shall be a minimum of two surfaced off-street
parking spaces located on or contiguous to each mobile home lot.
There shall be an additional improved off-street parking space for
each two mobile homes for which the park is designed.
(4) No fuel storage container shall be larger than 275 gallons or, for
gas, a capacity of 250 pounds or be located within 30 feet of an exit
door from a mobile home.
(5) Sewer and water requirements. All mobile homes in a mobile home
park must be served by both public water and public sewer.
A. The following buffer areas shall be provided:
(1) A buffer of 100 feet shall be provided, of which at least 50 feet shall
be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIV.
B. The buffer yard shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The buffer shall be measured from the district boundary line or
from the near street line where a street serves as the district
boundary line; provided, however, that parking lot aisleways (to
include curbing, driveways and stormwater management system
components, but not parking spaces) may be located within the
§ 275-122 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-122.1
C:746
§ 275-122.2. Special design standards applicable to single-family
attached units. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 722]
buffer yard as long as the required 50 feet of landscaping area
is increased by one foot for each one foot that such aisleway
encroaches into the one-hundred-foot buffer area.
(2) The buffer yard may be part of the required front, side or rear
yards, and in cases of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall
apply.
A. A minimum of 30% of the tract shall be designated as restricted to and
used for common open space uses.
B. The common open space provisions of Article XXXV, §§ 275-217 through
275-223 shall apply to a single-family attached development in the SU-2
Special Use District.
C. The topography and natural features of the site shall be considered in
planning, designing, locating, orienting and constructing all residential
buildings and other structures to improve the aesthetic design of the
development.
D. Residential buildings and other structures shall be located and situated
to promote pedestrian and visual access to open space.
E. All utilities shall be placed and/or installed underground.
F. Refuse stations to serve recreational areas shall be designed with
suitable screening, located so as to be convenient for trash removal and
not offensive to nearby residential areas.
G. Notwithstanding the requirements of § 275-182 of Article XXXI, Off-
Street Parking and Loading, in the SU-2 Special Use District four offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit and
overflow parking shall be provided at 1.25 parking spaces per dwelling
unit, which overflow parking shall be subject to the reserve parking
provisions of § 275-189. For purposes of this section, the term "overflow
parking" shall include all permitted on-street parking spaces and all
parking spaces provided in segregated, off-street parking areas.
Segregated overflow parking areas containing 10 or fewer spaces shall
not be subject to the provisions and requirements of § 275-188,
Screening and landscaping requirements, of Article XXXI. Parking on
one side of the street shall be permitted.
H. The provisions and requirements of § 275-214D(3) and (4) in Article
XXXIV shall not apply to single-family attached dwelling units in the
SU-2 Special Use District.
I. Buffer planting. A ten-foot-wide buffer planting strip shall be provided
in the perimeter property line setback area as may be required by the
Township Council during the conditional use hearing and shall contain
§ 275-122.1 CHARTER § 275-122.2
C:747
landscaping in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the
Township, which shall be in lieu of the provisions and requirements
of §§ 275-122.1 and 275-214D(1); provided, however, that no buffer
planting strip shall be required in any part of a perimeter setback
which abuts perpetually preserved conservation area, park land or open
space.
J. The provisions of § 275-214D(2) shall apply to single-family attached
units in the SU-2 Special Use District except that shade trees and all
required landscaping may be located within the street right-of-way.
§ 275-122.2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-122.2
C:748
ARTICLE XXI
General Business District
§ 275-123. Purpose.
The B General Business District is designed to provide opportunities for
neighborhood commercial uses of the type which primarily serve the needs
of surrounding residential areas. These districts are intended to have access
to a major road and to be compatible with adjoining noncommercial uses
and districts.
§ 275-124. Use regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461;
6-24-1996 by Ord. No. 569; 6-23-1997 by Ord. No. 576]
A building may be erected, altered or used and land may be used, subject
to the provisions in Articles XXIX and XXX for any of the following purposes
and no other:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Retail store, convenience store, office or office building, post office,
bank or other financial institution. [Amended 11-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 658]
(2) Restaurant.
(3) Barber- or beauty shop.
(4) Dressmaking, millinery, tailor, shoe repair or similar custom shop
for the repair or servicing of articles sold at retail on the premises;
bakery or confectionery; provided that such uses employ not more
than five persons.
(5) Newspaper or job printing shop employing not more than five
persons.
(6) Jewelry, radio, television, refrigerator or similar appliance shop,
including service and repairs.
(7) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses. The following are permitted
only as accessory uses:
(1) Uses on the same lot which are customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
§ 275-123 CHARTER § 275-124
C:749
(4) Specifically permitted accessory uses include storage, within a
completely enclosed building or in an area not visible from an
adjoining street or residential use, which storage is customarily
incidental to the principal use of the lot.
(5) In conjunction with a convenience store, the dispensing of motor
vehicle fuels from underground tanks, which may include a canopy
structure over the motor vehicle fueling positions.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Motel, hotel or inn.
(2) Laundry, dry-cleaning, dyeing or clothes-pressing establishment,
provided that nonflammable solvents are used in the cleaning
process and that the process shall be free from obnoxious odors,
fire or explosion.
(3) Personal service or custom shop other than a use permitted in
Subsection A.
(4) Public garage; motor vehicle sales, service or repair shop (not
including a junk or wrecking yard); gasoline service station; and
motor vehicle parking lot, provided that all repair, lubrication or
car washing shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
(5) Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand where patrons are served
food and/or drinks for immediate consumption outside the building
but on the premises and fast-food restaurant with drive-through
restaurant service accessory thereto.
(6) Indoor or outdoor place of amusement other than an open-air or
drive-in theater.
(7) Business, trade or private school.
(8) Mortuary, funeral establishment and cemetery limited to the
cremation of human remains.
(9) Commercial greenhouse.
(10)Kennel, animal hospital and veterinary clinic or office.
(11) Private club for recreation.
(12) Day-care centers.
(13) Any alteration, enlargement, change or modification to any of the
conditional uses set forth under Subsection C(1) through (12)
above previously approved, including the addition of any of the
permitted uses under Subsection A hereof on the same lot as the
conditional use, shall require conditional use approval.
§ 275-124 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-124
C:750
§ 275-125. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures to be erected or
enlarged shall be 35 feet, except as provided in Article XXXIV under height
limit exemptions.
§ 275-126. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461].
§ 275-127. Special design and development requirements.
(14) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre for each principal permitted building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 100 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area: 65%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yard: 60 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 60 feet.
(8) Minimum width of each individual side yard: 25 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 60 feet.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres for each principal permitted building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area: 40%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yards: 100 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 125 feet.
(8) Minimum width of each individual side yard: 60 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street of a corner lot: 100 feet.
§ 275-124 CHARTER § 275-127
C:751
§ 275-128. Special provisions for B Business District. [Added
11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 658]
A. Access. Any lot or area used for off-street parking or for the storage or
movement of motor vehicles shall, except for the necessary accessways,
be separated from the street or highway by a raised curb, planting
strip, wall or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle
entrance or exit. The layout of any such parking lot or area shall be
designed in such a manner as to prohibit vehicles from backing out onto
the street, and the capacity and arrangement of the lot shall be
adequate for all related uses and sufficient to prevent the backup of
vehicles on a street while awaiting entry on the lot.
B. Outdoor lighting. All driveways, parking areas and vehicle maneuvering
areas shall be adequately illuminated, and all exterior or outdoor
lighting shall be arranged in such a manner so as to protect adjoining
property and traffic from any glare or hazardous interference of any
kind. All such lighting shall be equipped with glare-shielding devices
and be not more than 20 feet in height.
C. Buffering. Along each property line which directly abuts any residential
district or any use permitted in those districts, a buffer area of not less
than 100 feet in width, of which not less than 25 feet shall be
landscaped, shall be provided. Along any property line which abuts any
other use along any street line, a buffer area of not less than 25 feet in
width, of which not less than 15 feet shall be landscaped, shall be
provided. All landscaping shall be designed, installed and maintained in
accordance with Article XXXIV.
D. Rubbish. All trash and rubbish storage areas shall be screened from
public view and from view of any surrounding uses. The screening of
such storage areas shall be shown on the landscaping plan. The
proposed methods for storing and removing trash and rubbish shall be
noted on plans submitted for approval and permits.
E. Public water and public sewer. All development in the B District shall be
served by public water and public sewer.
A. In expansion of the purposes and community development objectives
contained in Article I of this chapter, and the policies and
recommendations of the Township's Comprehensive Plan, as amended,
the primary intent of this section is to provide for designated uses and
the appropriate dimensional standards which promote controlled
development and the expansion of attractive uses.
B. The following area and bulk regulations shall apply to all permitted
principal uses, if enhanced appearance options, approved by Township
Council in accordance with Subsection G, are provided.
(1) Impervious surface may be increased to 75%.
(2) Minimum depth of the front yard may be reduced to 50 feet.
§ 275-127 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-128
C:752
(3) Minimum depth of rear yard may be reduced to 50 feet.
(4) Minimum yard abutting a street on a corner lot may be reduced to
50 feet.
(5) The buffering alongside property lines may be reduced to an
aggregate of 15 feet with no side yard less than five feet.
(6) Landscaped islands in parking areas may be omitted.
C. Enhanced appearance options shall consist of three components:
improved landscaping, improved hardscaping and improved building
materials and design. In order to meet the minimum criteria of
enhanced appearance options, a plan shall provide for all of the
following, unless specified otherwise:
(1) Improved landscaping.
(a) The sizes of plants set forth in § 275-214, Landscaping
requirements, and § 275-188, for parking lot landscaping, shall
be increased by 20% in height and caliper, as applicable.
(b) The quantities of plants set forth in §§ 275-214 and 275-188
shall be increased by 20% to determine quantity requirements.
However, plants may be grouped in selected areas of the site to
achieve special functional and aesthetic objectives. In the
event that the increased quantities of plants cannot fit on the
property, the applicant may substitute larger plants or higher
grade plant species to compensate for those plants that cannot
fit on the property, subject to the approval of the Township
Landscape Consultant.
(c) At least three planting areas for shade trees shall be created
and maintained at or near the corners of the principal building.
(d) When decorative bollards are utilized in the perimeter
landscaping, they shall be wooden or black steel types.
(2) Improved hardscaping.
(a) Pedestrian pathways of at least four feet six inches in width
made of brick, concrete or approved equivalent shall be
installed and maintained along all street frontages.
(b) Pedestrian pathways of at least four feet six inches in width
made of brick, or approved equivalent shall be installed and
maintained to connect all perimeter pathways to all entry
doors of a principal building.
(c) Crosswalks made of brick, concrete or approved equivalent
shall be maintained and installed along any curb cuts at
vehicular entranceways to promote a continuation of the
§ 275-128 CHARTER § 275-128
C:753
pedestrian pathway system. Such crosswalks shall be at least
six feet in width.
(d) Decorative streetlights, with black poles and bases, shall be
provided along all street frontages and within the parking lot.
Cobra head or shoebox type lights shall not be considered as
being decorative.
(e) A decorative wall, made of brick, stone, or approved
equivalent, 24 inches in height, shall be installed and
maintained along all primary street frontage planting beds,
between the sidewalk and the parking lot, except in any area
where a lower wall is needed to achieve safe sight distance
within a clear sight triangle.
(f) Where fencing is utilized, it shall be wooden such as
shadowbox, picket or split rail or steel or wrought iron of at
least 48 inches in height. Stockade fence and chain link fence
and plastic fence shall not be used.
(g) The base of all freestanding signs shall be made of brick, stone,
or approved equivalent, and shall be at least 30 inches in
height.
(h) All trash enclosure areas shall be made of brick, stone, or
approved equivalent, except for the gates.
(3) Improved building materials and design.
(a) No principal buildings shall have a flat roof.
(b) All principal buildings shall have a vertical design proportion
defined by vertical architectural elements, such as windows,
pilasters, columns, piers, or by recesses and projections of
building walls such that no more than 12 continuous feet of
blank building wall is created.
(c) All principal buildings shall be designed to have a defined base.
The base shall be made of brick, stone, or approved equivalent,
with horizontal banding, and shall be at least 30 inches in
height around at least three sides of the building, including all
street-side elevations.
D. Landscaping and screening.
(1) General regulations. The following is required in and around offstreet
parking areas and loading areas in order to provide a visual
and acoustical buffer for adjacent properties, to provide a visual
buffer for adjacent streets, to define traffic routes and pedestrian
paths through parking areas, to control soil erosion, to slow and
filter stormwater runoff, and to moderate microclimatic effects.
§ 275-128 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-128
C:754
(a) Functions of parking-lot and loading area landscaping.
Landscaping of parking lots and loading areas shall perform
certain functions depending upon its arrangement and the type
of space occupied, as described below. Aesthetic
considerations are important to these functions. Where
screening is required, such screening needs to be opaque, and
shall be of sufficient density and height to obstruct casual
observation.
(b) Perimeter of area, abutting street. Landscaping materials so
located shall visually define the perimeter and other parking
areas, shall emphasize points of ingress and egress to and from
the street, and shall visually screen the parking or loading area
from the street so that headlights shining into or out of the
area will not affect other drivers.
(c) Perimeter of area, abutting other properties. Landscaping
materials so located shall provide a windbreak trapping trash
and dust and a visual and acoustical buffer for adjoining
properties. When parking or loading areas abut a residential
use or property zoned for such use, a dense screen of
plantings, designed to be an effective screen, shall be provided
and maintained to a minimum height of six feet from the
ground at time of planting.
(d) Landscaping within the interior of the parking areas.
Landscaping located within parking areas shall be designed to
promote pedestrian safety by defining walkways, to enhance
driver safety by defining traffic lanes and discouraging crosslot
taxiing, to act as a windbreak trapping trash and dust, to
provide shade, to reduce stormwater runoff, and to enhance
the appearance of the parking area. Interior landscaping shall
be designed to preserve sight distances and not obstruct the
vision of motorists or pedestrians, and shall in no way create a
hazard to safety.
(2) Applicability and standards:
(a) Perimeter landscaping. Perimeter landscaping along abutting
properties and public or private streets shall be required for all
off-street parking areas with more than five parking spaces,
and for all loading areas regardless of size.
(b) Interior landscaping. Interior landscaping shall be required for
all off-street parking areas with more than 15 parking spaces.
(c) Sight distance. No landscape elements or other objects may
obstruct vision above the height of two feet and below 10 feet
measured from the center line grade of the driveway and an
intersecting street. A clear sight triangle at the intersection of
the driveway and the street shall be determined in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's
§ 275-128 CHARTER § 275-128
C:755
Publication No. 201 (current issue), entitled "Engineering and
Traffic Studies."
E. Maintenance provisions. The owner of the facility shall be responsible
for the continual maintenance of all enhanced appearance options in an
attractive and healthy condition. Dead and pruned plant material and
debris shall be routinely removed and replaced or within 30 days of a
directive to do so issued by the Township Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be prepared and sealed by a
landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The landscape plan shall be incorporated as a part of the plan
submitted with the subdivision or land development plan. The
landscape plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the proposed
subdivision or land development plan. The landscape plan shall show all
existing individual specimen trees, tree masses, shrubs, water features
and other natural elements of the site which are to be preserved or
removed, and all trees, shrubs, ground covers, lawn area, walls and
fences, pedestrian pathways, crosswalks and other enhanced
appearance options, as per this section, which are to be installed in
conjunction with the development of the land, including a continuous
pedestrian pathway and crosswalk along the street frontage, and a
continuous pedestrian pathway made of pavers connecting the
perimeter sidewalk to the principal use building. A legend shall be
provided to the plan which contains the botanical and common name of
each species of tree and shrub to be installed, and the quantity and size
of each species of tree and shrub to be provided. The landscape plan
shall also be accompanied by detail sheets depicting all details for
landscape and hardscape features.
G. Approval of Township Council. The details of the enhanced appearance
options shall be subject to approval by the Township Council as part of
the subdivision and/or land development plan. Upon request of the
applicant, the Township Council may permit variations from the
standards set forth herein if the Township Council determines that the
proposed variations will further improve the appearance of the
development.
§ 275-128 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-128
C:756
ARTICLE XXII
B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center District
§ 275-129. Purpose.
The B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center District is designed to provide
opportunities for shopping in locations where there are groups of stores
designed in a unified manner and accessible from a major road or roads.
The Shopping Center Districts are also designed to ensure compatibility
with adjoining uses and districts.
§ 275-130. Use regulations.
A building or combination of buildings may be erected or used and land may
be used or occupied, subject to the provisions in Articles XXIX and XXX, as
follows:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) A planned neighborhood or located shopping center including, as
an integral part of such center, any combination of the following
uses:
(a) Retail store, personal service or custom shop or restaurant.
(b) Any use permitted in § 275-124A related to the B General
Business District.
(2) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.
(1) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, including storage within a
completely enclosed building in conjunction with a permitted use
and living accommodations for a watchman or similar employee.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
(4) Any accessory use as provided in § 275-124B.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
§ 275-129 CHARTER § 275-131
C:757
§ 275-131. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be 35 feet, except as provided in the special provisions of Article
XXXIV, which provides for exceptions to height regulations for certain
structures.
§ 275-132. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord.
No. 461].
§ 275-133. Special design and development requirements.
In B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center Districts, the special requirements
of § 275-127 related to the B Districts and the following additional
requirements shall apply:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Minimum lot area: three acres for each principal permitted
building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 300 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 300 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area: 60%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(6) Minimum setbacks: 100 feet.
A. Required enclosure. Each permitted business use or service, including
sales, exhibitions for sale, or service repair or processing activities,
shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
B. Building placement.
(1) Distance between buildings. The distance at the closest point
between buildings or groups of buildings on a lot shall be at least as
great as the average height of the two adjacent buildings and not
less than 20 feet in width, plus walkways.
(2) No building or permanent structure other than a permitted sign or
traffic control device shall be erected within 70 feet of a street line
or within 50 feet of any other property line.
C. Off-street parking and circulation.
(1) All parking requirements shall be in accordance with Article XXXI.
(2) All required parking shall be available for use at the time of
occupancy of any building.
§ 275-131 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-133
C:758
§ 275-134. Plan submission, review and approval.
Each application for a permit to erect, construct or alter any building
within a B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center District, or each request for an
amendment to establish such a district or to modify a previously approved
plan shall comply with the special procedural and application requirements
in Article XXXIV.
(3) All traffic lanes, parking, loading and unloading areas and traffic
direction shall be marked and shall be maintained as required in
Article XXXI and all such areas shall be paved and maintained with
an approved surface.
D. Sanitary sewage, water facilities and other facilities. No application for
a use in the district shall be considered unless such use can and will be
served, prior to occupancy, by a public sewage and public water system
owned. All utilities, including water, electricity, gas, telephone, etc.,
shall be carried underground by approved standards of construction.
E. Buffer area. A buffer area as set forth in § 275-127C shall be provided in
accordance with Article XXXIV.
§ 275-133 CHARTER § 275-134
C:759

ARTICLE XXIII
B-2 Major Shopping Center District
§ 275-135. Purpose.
The B-2 Major Shopping Center District is designed to provide opportunities
for regional shopping in locations served by two or more major highways.
The Major Shopping Center District is also designed to create a unified
design for the site and its buildings and to ensure compatibility with
adjoining uses and districts.
§ 275-136. Use regulations.
A building or combination of buildings on a tract may be erected or used
and a tract or premises may be used or occupied, subject to the provisions
in Articles XXIX and XXX, for any of the following purposes:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) A planned regional shopping center.
(2) Any use permitted in a B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center District
as set forth in Article XXII, provided that such business uses are
clustered within a building such as a mall containing several
individual places of business.
(3) A car care service center having as its primary purpose the sale and
installation of automobile tires, batteries and accessories, provided
that any such use shall not include the retail sale of gasoline and
shall not be located so as to interfere with the compact
arrangement or servicing of retail store use.
(4) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
(5) Single-family detached dwelling. Existing nonconforming
residential uses and residential lots and structures located within
the B-2 Zoning District are permitted uses and shall comply with
the height, area and bulk provisions of the R-3 Zoning District, as
set forth in §§ 275-32 and 275-33A(3). [Added 2-22-2016 by Ord.
No. 766]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.
(1) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, including storage within a
completely enclosed building in conjunction with a permitted use;
and having accommodations for a watchman or similar employee.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
§ 275-135 CHARTER § 275-136
C:761
§ 275-137. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged
or used shall be 55 feet, except as provided in the special provisions in
Article XXXIV, which provide for exceptions to height regulations for certain
structures.
§ 275-138. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 275-139. Special design and development requirements.
In B-2 Districts, the special requirements of § 275-133 pertaining to the B-1
Districts shall apply, except for those sections relating to buffer areas and
parking. In addition, the following requirements shall apply:
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
(4) Any accessory use as provided in § 275-130B.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Uses of the same general character as any permitted uses
hereinbefore specifically permitted.
(2) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
(3) Billboards, subject to the area and bulk regulations in § 275-216.3,
and the conditional use standards and criteria in §§ 275-216.4 and
275-236. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 707]
A. Permitted principal uses and conditional uses.
(1) Minimum tract area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum tract width at street line: 500 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious surface area: 60%.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(5) Minimum setback: 200 feet.
A. Ownership. No lot or parcel of ground located in B-2 Districts shall be
used for any of the uses provided herein unless said lot or parcel shall
be held in one ownership, except as may otherwise be authorized as a
conditional use.
B. Building placement. No building or permanent structure, other than a
permitted sign or traffic control device, shall be erected within 200 feet
of a street line or within 100 feet of any other property line.
§ 275-136 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-139
C:762
§ 275-140. Plan submission, review and approval.
Each application for a permit to erect, construct or alter any building within
a B-2 Major Shopping Center District or each request for an amendment
to establish such a district or to modify a previously prepared plan shall
comply with the special procedural and application requirements in Article
XXXIV.
C. Buffer area. Along each property line which directly abuts any
residential district, a buffer area not less than 100 feet shall be
provided, of which at least 50 feet shall be landscaped. Along any street
line, a landscaped area not less than 30 feet in width shall be provided.
Buffer areas and landscaped areas shall be in accordance with Article
XXIV.
D. Parking. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be in accordance
with Article XXXI.
§ 275-139 CHARTER § 275-140
C:763

ARTICLE XXIIIA
MCO Mall Conversion Overlay District
[Added 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 760]
§ 275-140.1. Purpose.
§ 275-140.2. Applicability of Article XXIII.
An application for a mall conversion shall be governed by the provisions of
the Mall Conversion Overlay District regulations and shall supersede and
replace the provisions of Article XXIII, §§ 275-135 through 275-140 for all
purposes.
§ 275-140.3. Use regulations.
Buildings may be erected, altered or used and land may be used or occupied
for any combination of the following uses:
A. The provisions of this article are enacted for the following purposes:
(1) To allow for the revitalization of existing planned regional shopping
centers located in the B-2 Major Shopping Center District by
permitting the elimination of clustered business uses within a mall
and replacement by retail stores, restaurants, offices and the like
with direct access from unenclosed space and by the addition of an
apartment style-residential use.
(2) To revitalize properties that have vacant, defunct or underutilized
buildings, and to transform such previously developed properties
into a more functional and attractive mixed commercial and
residential community.
(3) To address planning, development and redevelopment issues
affecting certain areas along Baltimore Pike within Middletown
Township.
A. The following nonresidential uses are permitted as of right within the
Mall Conversion Overlay District:
(1) Retail stores, including without limitation department stores,
hardware stores, lawn and garden stores;
(2) Personal service or custom shops;
(3) Banks or other financial institutions, with or without drive-up
window and/or accessory ATM facilities;
(4) Post offices;
(5) Pharmacies, with or without drive-up windows;
(6) Restaurants and taverns, with or without outdoor service of food
and/or alcohol, with and/or without electronic entertainment
§ 275-140.1 CHARTER § 275-140.3
C:765
centers, mechanical games and other recreational uses, drivethrough
service(s), musical entertainment and dancing (but
excluding adult entertainment or dancing as defined in
§ 275-117.2), provided that all musical entertainment and dancing
activities shall be indoors except for such special outdoor events as
are approved by Township Council;
(7) Restaurants, fast food; with or without drive-through service(s);
(8) Movie theaters;
(9) General or professional offices;
(10) Supermarkets;
(11) Health and fitness centers, including ancillary services such as
wellness, physical rehabilitation facilities and prevention health
education activities;
(12) Motor vehicle service centers (excluding motor vehicle sales and
junk or wrecking yards);
(13) Convenience stores with retail gasoline sales;
(14) Medical offices (with inpatient and outpatient surgery facilities);
(15) Hotels;
(16) Municipal uses;
(17) Recreational uses, with or without service of food and/or alcohol,
including bowling alleys and electronic entertainment facilities;
(18) The retail sale of pets, pet grooming, veterinary (and boarding
associated with veterinary care), and other pet services and related
products. [Added 10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 797127]
(19) Uses substantially similar to the uses described in § 275-140.3A(l)
through (18) above as approved by Township Council. [Amended
10-22-2018 by Ord. No. 797]
B. The following residential uses are permitted as of right within the Mall
Conversion Overlay District:
(1) Multifamily dwellings together with multitiered, structured
parking.
C. Permitted accessory uses within the Mall Conversion Overlay District:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in § 275-140.3A
and B.
127. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(18) as Subsection
A(19).
§ 275-140.3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-140.3
C:766
§ 275-140.4. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings within the Mall Conversion Overlay
District shall be as follows, except as provided in the special provisions in
Article XXXIV of the Zoning Ordinance which provides for exceptions to
height regulations for certain structures:
§ 275-140.5. Area and bulk regulations.
(2) Signage;
(3) Parking, whether structured parking or surface parking;
(4) Storage structures for or in connection with the storage of
equipment and/or materials used for the maintenance of the
multifamily residential buildings and/or mall buildings in general.
A. All buildings: 70 feet.
A. Minimum tract size: 75 acres.
B. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 85%.
C. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
D. For purposes of calculating impervious surface coverage and building
coverage in the Mall Conversion Overlay District, the term "lot area"
shall include driveway, drainage and permanent utility easement areas.
E. Setbacks.
(1) Front yard (adjacent to Baltimore Pike): 50 feet for both
multifamily residential and nonresidential uses, except that the
front yard setback requirement shall not apply to existing and
proposed, new parking areas.
(2) Front yard (adjacent to Middletown Road, Oriole Avenue, or other
Township road): 70 feet for nonresidential uses and 40 feet for
multifamily residential uses, except that the front yard setback
requirement shall not apply to existing and proposed, new parking
areas.
(3) Side yard: 30 feet.
(4) Rear yard: 30 feet.
F. Parking area setback for new parking space areas.
(1) From right-of-way: 15 feet.
(2) From adjacent residential use: 25 feet.
G. Multifamily dwelling.
(1) Maximum gross density: 400 multifamily dwelling units.
§ 275-140.3 CHARTER § 275-140.5
C:767
§ 275-140.6. Development standards.
(2) Maximum building length: uninterrupted plane of not more than
225 feet for each new building.
(3) Multifamily residential buildings shall be located and situated to
promote pedestrian access to commercial and other nearby uses.
H. Existing nonconformities. Subject to Township Council's approval, area
and bulk, parking, landscaping and buffering nonconformities existing
immediately prior to the implementation of a mall conversion, whether
disturbed or undisturbed during the construction and implementation
of a mall conversion, may remain and/or be reconstructed, such as, but
not by way of limitation, parking space dimensions and parking within
required setbacks.
A. General standards.
(1) The requirements of §§ 275-217 through 275-223, inclusive,
275-198C, 275-199A, C and E shall not apply to the Mall
Conversion Overlay District.
(2) Refuse stations shall be designed with suitable screening and shall
be located so as to be convenient for trash removal and so as to not
be offensive to residents and patrons.
B. Buffer areas and landscaping.
(1) The requirements of §§ 275-213, 275-214B, C and D shall not apply
to the Mall Conversion Overlay District; however, any land
development application filed pursuant to the Mall Conversion
Overlay District regulations shall include a landscape plan
demonstrating compliance with the landscape requirements set
forth herein.
(2) Along each property line which directly abuts any residential
district or residential use excluding road frontage, a buffer area of
not less than 25 feet shall be provided, of which at least 10 feet
shall be landscaped. Landscaping within a residential buffer area in
a Mall Conversion Overlay District shall consist of evergreen trees
of six feet to eight feet in height at the time of planting and shall be
planted at twelve-foot centers. Subject to Township Council's
approval, an applicant may be given credit for existing evergreen
or deciduous trees in a residential buffer area.
(3) Landscaping along Baltimore Pike, Middletown Road and Oriole
Avenue rights-of-way shall consist of six shrubs for every 100 lineal
feet of road frontage, and one street tree no less than 3 1/2 inches
in caliper for every 100 lineal feet of road frontage. Subject to
Township Council's approval, street trees and shrubs may be
grouped to achieve a stated design objective.
§ 275-140.5 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-140.6
C:768
(4) All new buildings constructed in connection with a mall conversion
shall be landscaped in accordance with the following criteria:
(a) A combination of trees and shrubs shall be used as foundation
plantings, i.e., plantings to be installed in reasonably close
proximity to the facades.
(b) One deciduous tree of 3 1/2 inches to four inches in caliper (or
equivalent vegetation acceptable to Township Council) shall be
planted for every fifty-foot length of building facade measured
from end to end of buildings, without regard to indentations
and the like in the buildings or facades, and excluding any
enclosed walkway connectors and elevator cores; however, in
order to achieve a particular design objective a six-foot to
eight-foot evergreen tree may be planted in lieu of deciduous,
when approved by Township Council.
(c) Five evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted for
every 40 feet of length of building facade.
(5) Other landscaping, including trees, shrubs or ground covers shall
be provided along walkways, in courtyards, around sitting areas, at
the entrance to the site and in other highly visible locations,
especially on the outer side of any internal access roads which are
visible from a public street which may adjoin a tract, at the
entrance to buildings and around structures used for service,
storage or maintenance purposes.
(6) The intent of the landscaping requirements is to afford the designer
latitude in spacing and location of planting in order to achieve site
layout and landscaping objectives. Where site features, such as but
not limited to, sidewalks, patios and drive-through aisles do not
provide sufficient space for plantings, alternate planting locations
in the general vicinity may be deemed acceptable to the Township
Council.
(7) The location, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Township Council.
(8) Parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with
§ 275-140.7D(1).
C. Lighting.
(1) All parking areas shall be adequately lighted with lighting of such
quality and type and with such shielding as will not present direct
glare to any adjoining residential area. All parking lot street lights
shall not exceed 50 feet in height (excluding building-mounted
lighting) with full cutoff lighting which shall not exceed 0.5
footcandle at the property line. Unless otherwise permitted by the
Township Council, all parking lot lighting shall be extinguished one
§ 275-140.6 CHARTER § 275-140.6
C:769
§ 275-140.7. Off-street parking and loading.
hour after the close of business, until dawn, in order to conserve
energy and reduce glare and sky-lighting consequences. Where allnight
safety or security lighting is deemed necessary, the lighting
intensity levels shall meet the minimum levels for safety and
security as prescribed by the Illumination Engineering Society
("IES").
(2) All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas
or spaces between or about buildings, other than those relating to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated.
(3) All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be directed in
such a way as not to create a nuisance, and in every district all such
lighting shall be arranged so as to protect the street or highway
and adjoining property from direct glare or hazardous interference
of any kind.
A. The requirements of §§ 275-183F, 275-184B, 275-186G and 275-188
shall not apply to the Mall Conversion Overlay District.
B. Off-street parking shall comply with the minimum off-street parking
requirements set forth below:
(1) The multifamily residential use shall require 1 1/2 parking spaces
per multifamily dwelling unit. The parking spaces required to serve
each multifamily building shall be contained within a structured
parking facility connected or attached to each multifamily building.
(2) All other uses (excluding multifamily residential use) shall require
four parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
measured from the outside perimeter wall of each such building.
C. Parking area design standards. All newly constructed parking areas, in
the Mall Conversion Overlay District, shall comply with the following:
(1) Parking spaces for commercial uses located on the tract shall be
9 1/2 feet wide by 19 feet long, except that 30% of the total number
of new parking spaces may be nine feet wide by 18 feet long,
provided that they are located in a contiguous parking area.
(2) Parking spaces for multifamily residential uses on the tract shall be
nine feet wide by 18 feet long, and parking areas for multifamily
residential uses shall provide internal drive aisles having a
minimum width of 24 feet.
D. Parking area landscaping design standards. Landscaping shall conform
to the following provisions:
(1) Landscaping within any new parking area (excluding structured
parking garages) which provides more than five parking spaces
shall be subject to the following provisions:
§ 275-140.6 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-140.7
C:770
§ 275-140.8. Signage.
(a) Off-street parking areas and parking lots shall be landscaped to
reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise and the glare of
automobile lights; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide; to
provide shade; to ameliorate stormwater drainage problems;
to replenish the groundwater table; and to provide for a more
attractive setting.
(b) Each parking lot shall have one shade tree of three inches to
3 1/2 inches in caliper for every 15 parking spaces. Shrubs,
ground covers and other plant materials are encouraged to be
used to complement the trees but shall not be the sole
contribution to the landscaping.
(c) The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the parking lot; except where there are
20 or more parking spaces, in which case, the following shall
apply:
[1] Landscaped islands shall be provided at the end of each
parking bay which contains 20 or more parking spaces.
Such islands shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and
18 feet in length. Such islands shall be provided to
enhance the appearance of the parking area and to control
access and movement within the parking area.
[2] Where approved by Township Council, the end of a parking
bay may be paved so long as the area provides for gore
striping such that adequate maneuverability of vehicles is
possible without impacting parked vehicles.
(d) All planting islands and planting beds within a parking lot shall
be surfaced with ground covers and/or dwarf shrubs and shall
not be grassed. Stone or hardwood mulch may be used in
conjunction with shrubs and ground covers.
(e) The type, location, arrangement and dispersal of planting
areas and plant materials shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township Council.
A. Subject to § 275-140.8B below, all signs constructed or erected within a
Mall Conversion Overlay District shall be subject to the general
requirements contained in §§ 275-190 through 275-195 of the Zoning
Ordinance applicable to B-2 Major Shopping Center Districts and the
specific standards set forth therein, except that:
(1) Notwithstanding § 275-192A(2), LED-type, electronically controlled
signage which periodically changes its message and colors shall be
permitted;
§ 275-140.7 CHARTER § 275-140.8
C:771
(2) Notwithstanding §§ 275-191A(1), 275-192A(3), (5), (7) and (11),
275-192F(1), (3) and (4), the signage referenced in the concept
signage program set forth in the design guidelines approved by
Council shall be permitted;
(3) Notwithstanding § 275-192A(8), the requirement that all signage
shall be backlit shall not apply;
(4) Notwithstanding §§ 275-192B(6) and (7), all tenant advertising
signage shall be turned off within 1/2 hour after the close of
business, but signage identifying the center may remain
continuously illuminated;
(5) Notwithstanding § 275-195G(1), the maximum size of an electrical
changeable copy display sign or manual changeable copy display
sign in the Mall Conversion Overlay District shall be 75 square feet,
if such sign is displayed on a pylon or other freestanding sign, and
the maximum size of a multipurpose visual display sign, if such sign
is mounted on the exterior wall of any building, shall be 450 square
feet, provided that any such wall-mounted multipurpose visual
display sign may not be affixed to a building wall which faces a
public street; [Amended 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 783]
(6) Notwithstanding § 275-195B(4)(c), each occupant of a commercial
building shall be permitted signage on the exterior of the building
occupied by such occupant, provided that the total square footage
of such occupant's signage shall not exceed the lesser of 2,000
square feet or 3% of the gross floor area of the space occupied by
such occupant, or 100 square feet in the case of an occupied space
which is less than 3,333 square feet; [Added 8-28-2017 by Ord.
No. 783; amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 807]
(7) Notwithstanding § 275-195G(2), a property in the Mall Conversion
Overlay District containing 25 acres or more shall be permitted to
install one pylon or other freestanding electrical changeable copy
display sign or manual changeable copy display sign along the road
frontage of such property (or one such sign along each principal
road frontage if such property fronts on more than one principal
road) and one multipurpose visual display exterior wall-mounted
sign; [Added 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 783]
(8) Notwithstanding § 275-195B(4)(a)[2], the maximum size of a
freestanding or pylon sign in the Mall Conversion Overlay District
shall not exceed 700 feet; [Added 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 783]
(9) Notwithstanding § 275-195B(4)(d), each occupant of a
multioccupancy building, whose occupied space has multiple
building facades, shall be permitted one or more signs on each
exterior wall of such building, subject to the following limitations:
[Added 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 783]
(a) No single sign shall exceed 400 square feet; and
§ 275-140.8 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-140.8
C:772
§ 275-140.9. Design guidelines.
Development in a Mall Conversion Overlay District shall comply with design
guidelines which shall be subject to Township Council's approval in
conjunction with the approval of any land development application filed
pursuant to the Mall Conversion Overlay District regulations.
§ 275-140.10. Environmental controls.
§ 275-140.11. Stormwater management.
Stormwater management in a mall conversion shall be subject to the
requirements of the Stormwater Management Ordinance.128
(b) The total area of such occupant's signage shall not exceed the
maximum square footage of signage permitted for the
occupied space; and
(10) Notwithstanding § 275-195G(4)(c), all permitted changeable signs
with an electrical changeable copy display constructed in the Mall
Overlay District shall maintain a static display time of not less than
seven seconds. [Added 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 783]
B. Signage in a Mall Conversion Overlay District pertaining to a
multifamily residential building shall be subject to the following:
(1) Each multifamily residential building may have up to four building
identification signs affixed to the facade of the building, provided
that the aggregate area of such signs shall not exceed 150 square
feet; [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 807]
(2) One ground-mounted monument sign shall be permitted which
shall not exceed a height of 10 feet above the grade at the base of
such monument sign, and each face of such monument sign shall
not exceed a total area of 50 square feet.
A. All uses within the Mall Conversion Overlay District shall comply with
all environmental controls of § 275-207, Subsections A through K,
pertaining to noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors and gases, heat and
glare, air quality, odor, vibration, soil erosion, sedimentation and
grading control, and storage and waste disposal.
B. The requirement for an environmental impact assessment (EIA) report
meeting the standards contained in § 275-215 of the Zoning Ordinance
and § 275-207, Subsections L and M pertaining to slope and traffic
controls, shall not apply to a mall conversion in the Mall Conversion
Overlay District.
128. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 198, Stormwater Management.
§ 275-140.8 CHARTER § 275-140.12
C:773
§ 275-140.12. Pad lots.
Individual fee simple pad lots may be created for purposes of financing and/
or conveyancing in connection with development of a tract within the Mall
Conversion Overlay District. Such individual pad lots shall not be required
to comply on an individual basis with the dimensional requirements of
this article, provided that the tract complies with such requirements on
an overall basis, and provided further that a declaration of covenants,
easements and restrictions is recorded that contains provisions that require
each owner of a pad lot to, at all times, operate and maintain such owner's
pad lot in good order and repair and in a clean and sanitary condition; that
establishes cross easements for the benefit of each pad lot for parking areas
and all appurtenant ways, vehicular and pedestrian access and utilities; and
which is subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor. The owner of any
such pad lot shall covenant and agree to be bound by all of the conditions as
set in the declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions embodying
the terms and conditions of this section. Where pad lots are proposed, a
subdivision plan shall be submitted at the time of final plan submission and
shall be approved by Township Council prior to recording.
§ 275-140.12 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-140.12
C:774
ARTICLE XXIV
PBC Planned Business Center District
§ 275-141. Purpose.
The Planned Business Center District is designed primarily to provide for
large-tract development along major highways and to encourage the
preservation of open space within such development through a substantial
front yard setback and low-density development with limited access to the
highway. Further, it is the purpose and intent to encourage nonretail type
use of a nature where large single users can be held responsible for the
overall development.
§ 275-142. Use regulations.
A building on a lot may be erected or used, subject to Articles XXIX and
XXX, for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 275-143. Area and bulk regulations.
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) General and professional offices.
(2) Automobile agency franchised by a recognized automobile
manufacturer, provided that used automobile sales and service is
limited to accessory use to automobile sales and further providing
that automobile auctions, gas stations and car wash operations are
excluded.
(3) Indoor and outdoor recreation.
(4) Research laboratory.
(5) Schools, public or private.
(6) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to principal permitted uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A above.
C. Conditional uses. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
(1) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV.
§ 275-141 CHARTER § 275-143
C:775
§ 275-144. Height regulations. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No.
588]
The maximum height of buildings and other structures shall be 45 feet,
except as provided in the special provisions in Article XXXIV, which provide
for exceptions to height regulations for certain structures.
§ 275-145. Special design and development requirements.
[Amended 6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 466]
A. Each building shall comply with the lot area, lot width, building area
and bulk regulations as hereinafter set forth.
(1) Minimum lot size: five acres.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 200 feet.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(5) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 65%.
(6) Minimum front yard building setback from edge of right-of-way:
200 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard building setback: 100 feet.
(8) Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
(9) Minimum landscaped area: 35%.
A. Streets, drives and access.
(1) There shall be no more than a single point of ingress and egress
along U.S. Route 1, which shall be 40 feet in width for a distance of
150 feet from the right-of-way of Route 1. The access road shall be
curbed with a planted divider 10 feet in width and shall be planted
on each side of the road with trees of caliper and on-centers as
approved by the Township Council.
(2) All other drives and access roads which are two-way thoroughfares
shall be a minimum of 24 feet and shall be paved and curbed in
accordance with Township standards. All one-way drives shall be a
minimum of 14 feet in width.
(3) If the development is to be in stages, at each successive stage
access shall be shown to all subsequent stages.
B. Parking.
(1) One space for vehicle parking shall be provided for every 350
square feet of gross floor area of any office building and all other
§ 275-143 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-145
C:776
parking shall be provided according to the ratios set forth in this
chapter.
(2) Each building shall have its own parking area apart from the
parking areas serving other buildings in the district.
(3) If the lot is used for a building for an automobile agency or
automobile agencies under Article XXIV, then such portion of the
lot that is used for inventory of automobiles may provide parking
for inventory only with aisles 20 feet in width. Parking spaces for
inventory shall not be more than 10 in a row without a planted
island break.
C. Lighting.
(1) All lighting shall be positioned and shielded to prevent glare.
(2) Major lighting shall be extinguished 1/2 hour after closing, except
for lighting necessary for pedestrian safety or security.
D. Architectural design.
(1) All buildings shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be
compatible with one another and representative of a united
architectural character.
(2) All buildings shall be spaced at a minimum of 75 feet from one
another.
(3) All mechanical equipment and disposal facilities for trash, rubbish
and other debris shall be enclosed in a building or completely
screened from view by plantings or fencing.
(4) All utilities shall be placed underground.
E. Landscaping.
(1) A landscaped area shall be provided within the two-hundred-foot
front yard building setback area in accordance with a landscaping
plan approved by the Township Council in accordance with Article
XXXIV.
(2) Landscaped areas shall be provided along side yards and rear
yards. The rear yard planting area shall be at least 50 feet in width.
Side yard planting areas shall be at least 30 feet in width, except in
areas used for access drives if approved by Township Council.
(3) Parking areas and islands within parking areas shall be landscaped
with trees, shrubs and ground covers, and the location and
landscaping of such islands shall be as approved by Township
Council.
(4) Landscaping shall be provided around and between buildings,
along walks and in areas of high visibility at entrances and exits, in
§ 275-145 CHARTER § 275-145
C:777
traffic medians, in courtyards and other areas in accordance with a
landscaping plan approved by Township Council.
(5) All fencing shall be approved by the Township Engineer and shall
blend harmoniously into the overall development. All chain link
fences for security shall be vinyl clad and shall not exceed eight
feet in height.
(6) In an auto agency, storage area for vehicles which are wrecked,
impounded or under major repair as opposed to normal
maintenance service shall be indoors wherever possible. If indoor
storage is not sufficient, the outdoor storage area shall be out of
view of the neighboring properties and shall be bermed and
planted in accordance with the direction of Township Council.
F. Signs. Signs advertising or identifying businesses and permitted uses in
a Planned Business Center shall be, as allowed by conditional use, by
Township Council, subject to the standards as set forth in this chapter
as relating to special exceptions granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
In addition, the following standards shall apply:
(1) No more than two freestanding signs may be erected to service all
uses within the center. Such signs shall not exceed in the aggregate
140 square feet in total area and shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
(2) Fascia signs shall be permitted but shall not exceed 150 square feet
on any one side of a building and 125 square feet on any other one
side of a building. Total fascia signage shall not exceed 275 square
feet.
(3) All signs shall be in accordance with other applicable regulations
for signs, but in no event shall any sign other than freestanding
signs as provided in Subsection F1 above be erected within 200
feet of the right-of-way of the main highway abutting the Planned
Business Center District.
(4) Directional and minor informational signs shall be as approved by
Township Council.
G. Ownership and development.
(1) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract and shall be under unified control. If
ownership of the entire tract is held by more than one person or
entity, the application shall identify and be filed on behalf of all of
said owners. Approval of the plan shall be conditioned upon
agreement by the applicant or applicants that the tract shall be
developed under single direction in accordance with the approved
plan. No site preparation or construction shall be permitted other
than in accordance with the approved plan. If ownership of all or
any portion of the tract changes subsequent to approval of the plan,
§ 275-145 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-145
C:778
no site preparation or construction by such new owner or owners
shall be permitted unless and until such new owner or owners shall
review the terms and obligations of the approved plan and agree
in writing to be bound thereby with respect to development of the
tract.
(2) Development stages and permits. The development of a tract
carried out in either a single phase or in stages shall be executed in
accordance with a development agreement. The owner, developer
and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all details
regarding compliance with this chapter to assure the binding
nature thereof on the overall tract and its development, which
agreement shall be recorded with the final development plan.
H. Utilities.
(1) All uses shall be served by public water and public sewer wherever
possible. In the event that it is not feasible for a Planned Business
Center District to utilize public sewer, on-site sewage disposal may
be allowed only upon certification of the Sewage Enforcement
Officer that a proposed on-site sewage disposal system will function
properly for the original or any subsequent user.
I. Review, plan requirements and performance standards.
(1) All applicable sections of Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development, and Article XXXIV shall apply.
(2) Development pursuant to this article shall be considered to be a
land development and shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter
210, Subdivision and Land Development, as amended. Proposed
amendments to an approved plan shall be acted upon in the same
manner as the original plan.
(3) Whenever the development is by stages, plans for each successive
stage shall require preliminary and final plan review pursuant to
Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development, as amended, and
shall comply with the original plan and developer's agreement.
(4) Completion and maintenance of improvements:
(a) All improvements within a particular stage shall be completed
contemporaneously with the completion of the construction of
the buildings in such stage, together with all site
improvements in the said stage.
(b) Provisions for the completion and maintenance of all private
streets, parking lots, sidewalks, curbs, street trees, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers and all other improvements pursuant
to the approved plan in forms satisfactory to the Township shall
be a condition precedent to approval by the Township.
§ 275-145 CHARTER § 275-145
C:779
(5) To ensure that the development will continue in a unified and
harmonious manner, the applicant will submit to the Township
Council for approval plan or plans at all stages and phases to
ensure the compatibility of the character of buildings, signs,
lighting and other site structures and improvements.
§ 275-145 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-145
C:780
ARTICLE XXV
O Office District
§ 275-146. Purpose.
The O Office District is designed to provide opportunity for office use
and to regulate office development to promote effective site design and
compatibility with adjoining properties and uses. The district is also
designed to provide for varying design regulations relative to the size of the
tract proposed for development.
§ 275-147. Use regulations.
A. Permitted principal uses. A building may be erected, altered or used
and land may be used, subject to the provisions in Articles XXIX and
XXX, for any of the following purposes and no others:
(1) Offices of business, professional or financial organizations.
(2) Offices of individuals and of such organizations as labor unions,
civic, social, fraternal and other nonprofit groups.
(3) Schools, including nursery, kindergarten, elementary, junior and
senior high schools.
(4) Day-care centers.
(5) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) An office for professional occupations in Subsection A.
(2) Private club for recreation.
(3) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
§ 275-146 CHARTER § 275-148
C:781
§ 275-148. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings or other structures erected, enlarged or
used shall be two stories and shall not exceed 35 feet, except as provided
in Article XXXIV, Special Provisions, which provide for exceptions to height
regulations for certain structures.
§ 275-149. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 275-150. Special design and development requirements.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres for each principal permitted building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 100 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 40%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(6) Minimum depth of each front and rear yard: 75 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 125 feet.
(8) Minimum width of each individual side yard: 50 feet.
(9) Minimum side yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 75 feet.
A. Buffer area.
(1) A buffer area of 25 feet shall be provided, of which at least 15 feet
shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions in Article
XXXIV, except as provided below.
(2) When any use in the O Office District abuts an area zoned
residential, a buffer of 100 feet shall be provided, or which at least
25 feet shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions in
Article XXXIV.
B. Water and sewers. The tract must be served with public water and a
public sanitary sewer system.
C. Illumination.
(1) All driveways, parking areas and vehicle maneuvering areas shall
be adequately illuminated.
(2) All exterior lighting shall be directed in such a way so as not to
create a nuisance to the adjoining properties or roadways.
(3) All exterior lighting shall be arranged in such a manner so as to
protect the street or highway and adjoining properties from any
§ 275-148 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-150
C:782
direct or indirect glare or interference of any kind. All such lighting
shall be equipped with glare shielding devices and be at a height
maximum approved by the Township.
D. Parking.
(1) No parking area shall abut a street or highway, unless separated
from said street or highway by a raised curb and a buffer planting
strip of the minimum width, except for necessary accessways.
E. Clear sight triangle. A clear sight triangle consistent with good safety
practices, but a minimum of 50 feet, shall be maintained at all street
intersections and at all points where private vehicular driveways and
accessways intersect public streets.
F. Ingress and egress.
(1) There shall be no more than two access points to any street or
highway for each 400 feet or less of frontage. No two access points
shall be closer than 200 feet from each line, center line to center
line.
(2) All accessways, driveways and maneuvering lanes shall be
designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress and egress and
shall not be less than 100 feet from the intersection of any street or
highway right-of-way lines.
G. Distance between buildings. On any lot containing more than one
building, there shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet between
buildings measured from the nearest point of any other building.
H. All development shall be in accordance with the environmental controls
in Article XXXIII.
I. All refuse storage areas shall be maintained indoors.
J. All development shall be served by public water and public sewer.
§ 275-150 CHARTER § 275-150
C:783

ARTICLE XXVI
OC-2 Office Campus 2 District
[Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 442]
§ 275-151. Purpose.
§ 275-152. Use regulations.
§ 275-153. Height regulations.
§ 275-154. Area and bulk regulations.
A. The Office Campus 2 District is designed to provide for office use for
relatively large tracts of land where individual units in separate
ownership are contemplated. The district is designed to provide
regulations and controls relative to size, number of units, height
regulations, density and form of development.
A. A building may be erected, altered or used and land may be used,
subject to the provisions of Articles XXIX and XXX, for any of the
following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted principal uses.
(a) General and professional offices.
(b) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public
utility transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the
regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
(2) Conditional uses. Communications towers, subject to the standards
for communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
A. The maximum height of a building or other structure erected, enlarged
or used shall be two floors above grade, except as provided for
exceptions to height regulations for certain structures.
A. Minimum tract area. In order to qualify for Office Campus 2
development, a tract of land shall contain a minimum of 7.5 acres.
B. Lot area coverage.
(1) The footprint of each unit in an Office Campus 2 development shall
be a maximum of 1,250 feet.
(2) The maximum number of footprints per gross acre shall not exceed
3.5.
§ 275-151 CHARTER § 275-154
C:785
§ 275-155. Special design and development requirements.
(3) In clustering units, there shall be no more than six units attached to
each other. Up to nine units may be attached to each other when
approved as a conditional use due to unique topography or other
similar circumstances.
(4) The distance between clusters of units shall be at least 50 feet.
(5) In determining the gross acreage of a tract, the square footage of
all existing easements and rights-of-way encumbering the land
excluding proposed development shall be subtracted from the total
square footage.
(6) No more than 10% of the total lot area shall be occupied by the
buildings.
(7) No more than 50% of the total area of the tract to be developed
shall be occupied by building(s), parking driveways, sidewalks and
other impervious surfaces.
(8) No more than 4,500 square feet of space for office use per gross
acre shall be permitted.
C. Building setback. No building shall be situated closer than 100 feet
from any existing public street or any property line contiguous with
residential zoning. If the property line is contiguous with nonresidential
zoning, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet. No building shall be
situated closer than 35 feet from any internal street to be built, whether
dedicated or not.
A. Buffer area. The following buffer areas shall be required in accordance
with Article XXXIV:
(1) A buffer area along each existing public street of not less than 100
feet from the edge of the public right-of-way and a buffer area along
each internal street, public or private, of not less than 35 feet,
which shall be free of all improvements, exclusive of parking lots,
which shall be no closer than 20 feet from the paved edge of a
roadway.
(2) A buffer dividing each parking area from each other parking areas
of a minimum of 15 feet in width, landscaped, except for points of
ingress and egress from one parking area to another parking area.
(3) A buffer area along each property line abutting a residentially
zoned district of not less than 100 feet, which shall be landscaped
and which shall contain a planted visual barrier in accordance with
the provisions in Article XXXIV.
(4) A buffer area along each property line abutting a zoning district
other than a residentially zoned district of a minimum of 50 feet,
§ 275-154 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-155
C:786
which shall be landscaped and which shall contain a planted visual
barrier in accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIV.
B. Streets. All streets, entrance drives and internal roads shall conform in
all respects to Township standards and may be held in private
ownership or may be dedicated to the Township, at the option of the
Township, and shall be not less than 30 feet in paved width.
C. Walkways. Each building shall have a minimum four-foot walkway
around its entire perimeter unless the Township Council directs
otherwise; and on at least one side of any walkway there shall be a sixfoot
planted area.
D. Parking. [Amended 8-24-1998 by Ord. No. 587]
(1) One space for vehicle parking shall be provided for each 200
square feet of gross floor area of the building. The Township
Council may permit not more than 40% of the required parking
spaces to be designated "reserve parking" pursuant to the
provisions of 275-189 hereof.
(2) Driveways and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be not less than 26
feet in width.
(3) Each cluster within an Office Campus 2 development shall have its
own parking area separate and apart from the parking areas
serving other buildings in the Office Campus 2 development. Each
parking place for each unit shall be within 150 feet of said cluster.
(4) There shall be a planted area equal in dimension to at least one
parking space in each row of parking in intervals of 15 parking
spaces or the equivalent area grouped together at the end of each
row. If grouped, there shall be no more than 30 parking spaces in a
row. Planted areas equal in dimension to one parking space shall
contain at least one shade tree of three inches to 3 1/2 inches in
caliper and shrubs and ground cover acceptable to the Township
Council. Planted areas which are grouped together shall contain
the amount of shade trees, shrubs and ground cover as would be
equal to the sum of individual planted areas.
E. Lighting. All parking areas shall be adequately lighted with lighting of
such quality and type and with such shielding as will not present direct
glare. Major lighting shall be extinguished at 12:00 midnight, except
that lighting necessary for pedestrian safety.
F. Signs. Signs advertising and identifying units shall be permitted as
follows:
(1) Each Office Campus 2 development shall be permitted the
following types of signs:
(a) One sign at the entrance of the development designating the
name and address of the development, provided that the sign
§ 275-155 CHARTER § 275-155
C:787
shall not exceed 50 square feet in size. Such sign shall not be
more than six feet above grade unless allowed by the Township
for specified safety reasons.
(b) One freestanding sign at the entrance to each parking area
driveway indicating court (cluster) names, the maximum size
of the sign to be 12 square feet, exclusive of a decorative
frame, and elevated to a maximum of seven feet above grade.
(c) One sign attached to the wall of each unit above the entrance
setting forth the occupant of such unit. Such sign shall not
exceed five square feet. The sign for each unit shall be uniform
in color and size with the sign in every other unit within the
Office Campus 2.
(d) One sign for each court or cluster identifying the court or
cluster, the maximum size of which may not exceed 12 square
feet. This sign shall be an integral part of the building, such as
part of a window design.
(2) All signs permitted under Subsection F(1) above are also subject to
the following restrictions:
(a) No sign shall contain anything except numbers, words or
letters of the alphabet.
(b) No sign shall be illuminated except by lighting, concealed or
indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(c) All real estate or lease signs shall be posted within five feet of
the unit subject to lease or sale.
G. Architectural design.
(1) Where plans for an Office Campus 2 development provide for two
or more buildings, such buildings shall be of compatible
architectural design, one to the other.
(2) All mechanical equipment and trash, garbage, rubbish and debris
disposal facilities not enclosed in a structure shall be fully and
completely screened from view in a manner compatible with the
architectural and landscaping style of the remainder of the tract.
There shall be a central trash point for each cluster.
(3) All utilities shall be placed underground.
H. Ownership and development.
(1) A tract of land to be developed as an Office Campus 2 development
shall be in one ownership or be the subject of a single application
filed jointly by the owners of the entire tract.
(2) The entire tract of 7.5 acres or more shall be developed as a single
project under a single development plan with a single application.
§ 275-155 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-155
C:788
(3) The submission of a subdivision or land development plan shall also
include a proposed condominium agreement.
I. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to this district.
J. A landscaping plan in accordance with § 275-214 shall be submitted
with the final plans.
§ 275-155 CHARTER § 275-155
C:789

ARTICLE XXVII
OC Office Campus Overlay District
§ 275-156. Purpose. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 441]
The OC Office Campus District is designed to promote office campus use
for relatively large tracts of land along Baltimore Pike/U.S. Route 1 as an
overlay to the SU-1 District or as a freestanding district where designated
on the Zoning Map. The district is designed to provide regulations and
controls relative to size, frontage and form of development.
§ 275-157. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used and land may be used, subject to
the provisions in Articles XXIX and XXX, for any of the following purposes
and no other:
§ 275-158. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged
or used shall be 45 feet or three stories, without a mezzanine, except
as provided in the special provisions of this chapter, which provide for
exceptions to height regulations for certain structures. (See Article XXXIV.)
§ 275-159. Area and bulk regulations.
A. Permitted principal uses:
(1) General and professional offices.
(2) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings, subject to the regulations
set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses:
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in Subsection A above and as governed by
the general provisions in Article XXXIII.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
§ 275-156 CHARTER § 275-159
C:791
§ 275-160. Special design and development requirements.
[Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 441]
A. Minimum tract area. In order to qualify for campus development, a
tract of land shall contain a minimum of 7 1/2 acres.
B. Minimum tract frontage. In order to qualify for campus development, a
tract of land shall have a minimum of 500 feet of frontage along U.S.
Route 1 (Baltimore Pike).
C. Lot area coverage.
(1) Each building in an office campus development shall be
constructed on a parcel of land which shall have a minimum area of
2 1/2 acres.
(2) In determining the size of a tract, the square footage of all
easements and rights-of-way encumbering the land shall be
subtracted from the gross square footage.
(3) No more than 10% of total lot area of any 2 1/2 acre lot shall be
occupied by the buildings.
(4) No more than 60% of the total area of the tract to be developed for
office campus use shall be occupied by building(s), parking,
driveways, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces.
D. Building setback. No building shall be situated closer than 100 feet
from any property line or any street and 35 feet from any internal street
in the tract to be developed.
A. Buffer area. The following buffer areas shall be required in accordance
with Article XXXIV:
(1) A buffer area along each public street of not less than 50 feet from
the edge of the right-of-way and a buffer area along each internal
street of not less than 15 feet from the right-of-way which shall be
free of all improvements with the exception of a single freestanding
sign as permitted below.
(2) A buffer dividing each parking area from other parking areas of a
minimum of 15 feet in width, landscaped, except for points of
ingress and egress from one parking area to another parking area.
(3) A buffer area along each property line abutting a residentially
zoned district of not less than 100 feet, which shall be landscaped
and which shall contain a planted visual barrier in accordance with
the provisions in Article XXXIV.
(4) A buffer area along each property line abutting a zoning district
other than a residentially zoned district of a minimum of 50 feet,
which shall be landscaped and which shall contain a planted visual
barrier in accordance with the provisions in Article XXXIV.
§ 275-159 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-160
C:792
(5) A buffer of 200 feet from the right-of-way line of U.S. Route 1.
B. Access. There shall be no more than one single point of ingress and
egress for each 500 feet of frontage.
C. Streets. All streets shall conform in all respects to Township standards
and shall be held in private ownership and shall be not less than 25 feet
in paved width with a right-of-way line of five feet on either side of the
paved cartway.
D. Walkways. Each building shall have a minimum four-foot walkway
around its entire perimeter; and on at least one side of such walkway,
there shall be a six-foot planted area.
E. Parking.
(1) One space for vehicle parking shall be provided for each 350
square of gross floor area of the building.
(2) Driveways and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be not less than 25
feet in width.
(3) Each building within an office campus development shall have its
own parking area separate and apart from the parking areas
serving other buildings in the office campus development.
(4) There shall be a planted area equal in dimension to at least one
parking space in each row of parking in intervals of 15 parking
spaces or the equivalent area grouped together at the end of each
row. Planted areas equal in dimension to one parking space shall
contain at least one shade tree of three inches to 3 1/2 inches in
caliper, and shrubs and ground cover acceptable to Township
Council. Planted areas which are grouped together shall contain
the amount of shade trees, shrubs and ground cover as would be
equal to the sum of individual planted areas.
F. Lighting. All parking areas shall be adequately lighted with lighting of
such quality and type with such shielding as will not present direct
glare, major lighting shall be extinguished at midnight except that
lighting necessary for pedestrian safety.
G. Signs. Signs advertising and identifying businesses and permitted uses
in Office Campus Districts.
(1) Each office campus development shall be permitted the following
types of signs:
(a) One sign at the entrance of the development designating the
name and address of the development, provided that the sign
not exceed 50 square feet in size. Such sign shall be not more
than six feet above grade unless allowed by Township Council
for specified safety reasons.
§ 275-160 CHARTER § 275-160
C:793
(b) One sign attached to the wall of the building in the vicinity of
the entrance setting forth the name of the building and listing
of tenants therein. Said sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
(c) One freestanding sign in the vicinity of the building, to identify
only the building, not to exceed six square feet.
(2) All signs permitted under Subsection B(1) above are also subject to
the following restrictions:
(a) No sign shall contain anything except numbers, words or
letters of the alphabet.
(b) No sign shall be illuminated except by lighting, concealed or
indirect, attached to the sign itself.
H. Distance between buildings. There shall be a distance between
buildings of a minimum of 75 feet.
I. Architectural design.
(1) Where plans for an office campus development provide for two or
more buildings, such buildings shall be of compatible architectural
design, one to the other.
(2) All mechanical equipment and trash, garbage, rubbish and debris
disposal facilities not enclosed in a structure shall be fully and
completely screened from view in a manner compatible with the
architectural and landscaping style of the remainder of the tract.
(3) All utilities shall be placed underground.
J. Ownership and development.
(1) A tract of land developed as an office campus development shall be
in one ownership or be the subject of a single application filed
jointly by the owners of the entire tract.
(2) The entire tract of 7 1/2 acres or more shall be developed as a
single project under a single development plan with a single
application.
K. Plan review requirements. Where a tract of land to be developed as an
office campus development does not involve subdivision of land
development, Article XXXIV, concerning special procedural and
application requirements, shall apply.
§ 275-160 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-160
C:794
ARTICLE XXVIII
M Manufacturing and Industrial District
§ 275-161. Purpose.
The M Manufacturing and Industrial District is designed primarily to meet
the special requirements of the Township's older, established industrial
areas and to provide standards for the possible extension of general
industrial development on the same lot or tract. The district regulations are
intended to provide for a broad range of industrial and related activities
which are responsive to the demands of modern industrial development.
The regulations are also intended to safeguard adjoining properties and to
avoid environmental disturbances.
§ 275-162. Use regulations.
A building or combination of buildings on a lot or within an industrial
district may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be used,
subject to the provisions in Articles XXIX and XXX, for any of the following
purposes:
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental laboratory
or similar establishment for research or product development,
provided that no processing shall be permitted except insofar as
such processing is incidental to a research, experimental or testing
process.
(2) Office building or office.
(3) Manufacture and assembly of small home, commercial and
industrial electrical appliances, supplies and equipment (not
including electrical machinery); electrical or electronic
instruments and devices, such as precision instruments and
measuring and control devices; medical, dental, drafting and
similar scientific and professional instruments; optical goods and
equipment; clocks and watches; and jewelry, cameras and
photographic equipment.
(4) Manufacture and packaging of products from previously prepared
and manufactured materials, such as canvas, cloth, glass, fur,
feathers, felt, leather, paper, wood and plastics, including clothing
and other textile products.
(5) Printing, publishing, book binding or similar establishments.
(6) Processing of dairy and confectionery products.
(7) Light metal processes, including metal finishing, grinding,
polishing and heat treatment, metal cutting and extrusion of small
products (such as costume jewelry and pins); assembly and
§ 275-161 CHARTER § 275-162
C:795
manufacture of radio and television receivers; manufacture of light
machinery (such as business machines).
(8) Indoor storage building or warehouse, to include warehousing
known as "mini storage," consisting of multiple warehouses which
are either leased or sold; bottling establishment.
(9) Governmental or public utility use or building.
(10) An industrial park designed to accommodate or comprise a group
of any of the industrial uses permitted in this district.
(11) Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure and
communications equipment buildings. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 588]
B. Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.
(1) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, which use may include living
quarters for watchmen and a restaurant or cafeteria facility for
employees and occupants of a permitted use.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXXI.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XXXII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Any use permitted in the B Business District, except for a
restaurant, personal service shop, motel, place of amusement,
dwelling or similar use.
(2) Distributing or trucking establishment.
(3) Food products processing.
(4) Chemical processes not involving noxious odors or danger from fire
or explosion; compounding of perfumes and pharmaceutical
products.
(5) Quarrying, provided that the minimum tract area is 10 acres.
(6) Any use of the same general character as any use permitted in this
district above, not to include use normally considered as "heavy
industry," including, but not limited to, such uses as abattoir,
distillation of bones, coal or wood; the manufacture of fertilizer,
fireworks, explosives, iron or steel, linoleum, paint or rubber;
petroleum refining; leather tanning, or any use substantially
similar thereto.
(7) Communications towers, subject to the standards for
communications towers as conditional uses set forth at
§ 275-162 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-162
C:796
§ 275-163. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected, enlarged
or used shall be 55 feet, except as provided in the Article XXXIV, Special
Provisions, which provides for exceptions to height regulations for certain
structures.
§ 275-164. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 275-165. Special design and development requirements.
§ 275-216.1, and communications equipment buildings, subject to
the regulations set forth in § 275-216 of Article XXXIV. [Added
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
(8) Regional rail facilities. [Added 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 720]
A. Permitted principal uses and conditional uses, except for
§ 275-162C(5).
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres for each principal permitted building.
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width at street line: 150 feet.
(4) Maximum impervious surface area: 60%.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(6) Minimum depth of front and rear yard: 90 feet.
(7) Minimum aggregate width of side yards: 160 feet.
(8) Minimum width of each individual side yard: 75 feet.
(9) Minimum yard abutting the street on a corner lot: 90 feet.
B. Other uses. For certain conditional uses, the area and bulk regulations
shall be as follows: [Added 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 720]
(1) Regional rail facilities.
(a) There shall be no minimum tract or lot area requirements.
(b) Setbacks for parking garages, parking lots, station buildings
and other occupied buildings shall be located no closer than 50
feet from adjacent residential property lines.
(c) There shall be no minimum setbacks from the street line.
A. Environmental controls. Each permitted use shall comply with the
environmental controls contained in Article XXXIII which relate to the
characteristics and conduct of a use relative to various air, water and
land disturbances.
§ 275-162 CHARTER § 275-165
C:797
§ 275-166. Plan submission, review and approval.
Each application for a permit to erect, construct or alter any building within
a M Manufacturing District or to modify a previously approved plan shall
comply with the applicable provisions of Article XXXIV relating to plan
submittal and review.
B. Buffer area and landscaping. All uses in the M Districts shall provide
and maintain landscaped grounds and make any other suitable
screening provision which is necessary to adequately safeguard the
character of adjacent districts. Along each property line which directly
abuts a residential district, a buffer area not less than 100 feet in width
shall be provided, of which at least 30 feet shall be landscaped with
trees and shrubs. All buffer areas and landscaping shall be in
accordance with Article XXXIV.
C. Distance between buildings. The distance at the closest point between
buildings or groups of buildings on a lot shall be at least 50 feet.
§ 275-165 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-166
C:798
ARTICLE XXIX
Floodplain Conservation District
Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Township Council of the Township of Middletown
hereby ordains as follows:
§ 275-167. Findings.
§ 275-168. Statement of intent.
A. Flooding can result in loss of property and life, damage to structures,
injury to people, disruption of public and private activities and services,
burdensome public expenditures for flood protection and relief and the
loss of public and private revenues. Much of the harm caused by
flooding occurs because of:
(1) The cumulative effect of obstructions, land uses and activities in
the natural floodplain which cause increased flood heights and
velocity; and
(2) The development of uses vulnerable to floods in areas subject to
flooding.
A. In addition to the general goals and objectives of this chapter, it is the
purpose of this article to eliminate or minimize the harmful effects of
flooding.
B. This article is also intended to meet the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance program and to comply with the Pennsylvania
Floodplain Management Act, as amended, the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development
promulgated pursuant to the Act. However, in several respects, the
provisions of this article are intended to exceed minimal statutory
requirements.
C. To reduce the threat of flooding, the provisions of this article are
designed to:
(1) Minimize the public and private financial burdens caused by floods;
(2) Prevent the construction of buildings and other structures in areas
unfit for such uses because of flooding;
(3) Discourage the creation of lots where the lot area is subject to
flooding;
§ 275-167 CHARTER § 275-168
C:799
(4) Require that any new lot which is created with part of its area
subject to flooding be configured so that it will provide a safe
building site with adequate access;
(5) Require that prospective purchasers and/or lessees be given prior
notice that the property being sold or leased is located within an
area subject to flooding and/or that the existing use is permitted
only as a conditional use or variance subject to conditions of this
chapter;
(6) Permit only those uses in areas subject to flooding which are
compatible with sound conservation practices and the preservation
of desirable natural conditions which promote the maintenance of
water flow rates throughout the year;
(7) Prevent downstream damage from increased flood volumes and
rates of flow while permitting uses of the floodplain which are
compatible with the preservation of natural conditions necessary to
preserve stormwater conveyance functions of the floodplain;
(8) Control development which, alone or in combination with other
development, could create or contribute to flood damage and
disruption;
(9) Permit certain uses which are appropriate for areas subject to
flooding and which will not impede the flow of flood waters or
otherwise create situations harmful to life or property either above
or below their locations;
(10) Limit reconstruction of damaged or destroyed structures located in
areas subject to flooding;
(11) Limit the expansion of structures and uses located in areas subject
to flooding;
(12) Require that all uses in areas subject to flooding be appropriately
protected against flood damage;
(13) Preserve the ability of floodplain areas to store and absorb
stormwater runoff and protect their stormwater carrying capacity
to stabilize the rate of stormwater discharge;
(14) Prevent increases in flood volume and upstream flood elevations
which result from placing impervious surfaces and obstructions in
floodplains and drainage channels;
(15) Preserve areas for stormwater-carried sediment to be deposited;
(16) Protect the integrity of stream banks and their immediately
surrounding area from erosion and degradation;
(17) Conserve trees and other vegetation which help to prevent stream
bank erosion and protect stream waters from sedimentation;
§ 275-168 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-168
C:800
§ 275-169. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 275-170. Floodplain Conservation District Map. [Amended
10-25-1993 by Ord. No. 527]
(18) Protect drainage courses necessary to carry abnormal stormwater
volumes in periods of heavy precipitation;
(19) Prevent pollution of surface and subsurface water supplies and
promote groundwater recharge.
(20) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
A. This article shall not create liability on the part of Middletown Township
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
B. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
appropriate for regulatory purposes. These regulations are based upon
available data. Areas subject to flooding by storms larger than the fivehundred-
year storm are not regulated. Even the five-hundred-year
floodplain may be larger than existing data reveals. Also, floodplains
may change location or increase in size, and flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. Areas outside the Floodplain
Conservation District or land uses permitted within the District may be
subject to flooding or flood damage.
A. The Floodplain Conservation District Map129 is incorporated into this
chapter and shall be an overlay district to the Zoning Map.
B. Identified floodplain area. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
(1) The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Middletown
Township, subject to the one-hundred-year flood, identified as a
special flood hazard area in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated
November 18, 2009, and the accompanying maps or most recent
revisions thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS). The above-referenced FIS and Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by the Township of Middletown
and declared to be a part of this chapter. The identified floodplain
area shall consist of the following specific areas: [Amended
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
(a) The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and
the FIRM as "floodway" and which represent the channel of a
129. Editor's Note: Said map is available in the online version of the Township Code and in the
Township offices.
§ 275-168 CHARTER § 275-170
C:801
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the
water surface elevation by more than one foot at any point.
This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM. [Amended 8-24-2015
by Ord. No. 758]
[1] Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
[2] Within any floodway area, no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(b) The AE Area shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided. [Amended
8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
[1] AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have
been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(c) The A Area shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state,
or other acceptable sources shall be used when available.
Where other acceptable information is not available, the base
flood elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a
point on the boundary of the identified Floodplain area which is
nearest the construction site. [Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 758]
(d) FA (General Floodplain Area) - The areas identified as Zone A
in the FIS for which no one-hundred-year flood elevations have
been provided. When available, information from other federal,
state, and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine
the one-hundred-year elevation, as well as a floodway area, if
possible. When no other information is available, the onehundred-
year elevation shall be determined by using a point on
§ 275-170 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-170
C:802
§ 275-171. Identifying areas subject to regulations.
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest
the construction site in question.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Township.
C. Amending the map. The delineation of the FW, AE and A portions of the
Floodplain Conservation District may be revised, amended or modified
by Council, in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program
when: [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709; 8-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 758]
(1) There are changes in flood elevations through natural or other
causes.
(2) Different locations are identified by additional hydrologic,
hydraulic or soils information.
D. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the
Township Council where studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior
to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of
the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. [Amended
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709; 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
A. Identifying map boundaries on the ground.
(1) The boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District and the four
subdistricts shall be determined initially by scaling the distances as
shown on the Floodplain Conservation District Map. Where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions, the Township Engineer shall determine the district
and/or subdistrict boundaries using the best available information.
The applicant may submit additional information in support of a
proposed boundary relocation.
(2) The Township Engineer's determination shall be controlling unless
appealed. Any party aggrieved by the Township Engineer's
determination or other decision or determination under this
Section may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The person
contesting the Township Engineer's determination shall have the
§ 275-170 CHARTER § 275-171
C:803
§ 275-172. Regulations.
burden of proof on any such appeal. If the Township Engineer's
initial determination is challenged, the Township Engineer shall
make a written report of the results of his initial determination, and
the reasons therefor, which shall be made available to the applicant
and any other appellants.
(3) No determination by Council or decision by the Zoning Hearing
Board shall constitute a reduction of the FW or AE Area
subdistricts until such reduction is approved by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 709; 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
B. The Floodplain regulations shall apply to all areas actually subject to
flooding. Therefore, the Floodplain Conservation District, as mapped, is
only a guide to the minimum area subject to these regulations.
A. Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all areas of Middletown
Township which are within the Floodplain Conservation District and
any other areas which are subject to flooding, now or in the future. This
article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of
the provisions of this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
[Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
B. Compliance. No structure, land or course or body of water shall be
used, improved or developed and no structure shall be located,
expanded, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this section and all other applicable regulations. Such
regulations include, but are not necessarily limited to, the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, as amended, the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachment Act, as amended, the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act,
as amended, and the Federal Clean Water Act.
C. General performance standard.
(1) Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development
in the Floodplain Conservation District adversely affect the
capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage
ditch or any other drainage facility or system or any stormwater
management system; or cause any increase in the area inundated
by the one-hundred-year flood.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way. [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715130]
§ 275-171 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-172
C:804
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Township
Engineer to make the above determination: [Added 12-14-2009
by Ord. No. 709]
(a) A completed building permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site drawn at a scale of one inch being
equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following: [Amended
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
[1] North arrow, scale and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available;
[3] All property and lot lines including dimensions and the size
of the site expressed in acres or square feet;
[4] The locations of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and land
development;
[5] The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways;
[6] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas and, if available,
information pertaining to the floodway and the flow of
water, including direction and velocities;
[7] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988;
[8] The elevation of the base flood;
[9] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(c) The following data and documentation: [Added 11-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 715]
[1] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood elevation;
[2] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations;
130. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection C(2) and (3) as
Subsection C(3) and (4), respectively.
§ 275-172 CHARTER § 275-172
C:805
[3] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development within a floodway, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation at
any point. [Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
[4] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood elevation.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
[5] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 275-173A(2)(d), regarding storage, and
§ 275-173A(4)(d), regarding development which may
endanger human life, including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 275-173A(2)(d), regarding
storage, and § 275-173A(4)(d), which are intended to
be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on
site.
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 275-173A(4)(d) during a base flood.
[6] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
[7] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
(d) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely
or partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that: [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
[1] All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and conform to the requirements
of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
§ 275-172 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-172
C:806
[2] All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
[3] Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
[4] Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse,
or lateral movement;
[5] Building materials are flood-resistant;
[6] Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have
been used;
[7] Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(e) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee,
payable to the municipality based upon the Township of
Middletown master fee schedule resolution. [Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
(4) Building permit required and issuance of building permit. [Added
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
(a) Building permits required. Building permits shall be required
before any construction or development is undertaken within
any area of the Township.
(b) Issuance of building permit. Prior to the issuance of any
building or zoning permit, the Building Permit Officer shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal
laws have been obtained, such as those required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1965-537, as
amended)131; the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments
Act (Act 1978-325, as amended)132; the Pennsylvania Clean
Stream Act (Act 1937-394, as amended)133; and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
D. Alteration of watercourses. Before any stream or other watercourse
within the Township is altered or relocated, a permit must be obtained
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP),
Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management, or verification from DEP
that such permit is not required. Notification of such a proposed
131. Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
132. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
133. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 275-172 CHARTER § 275-172
C:807
alteration or relocation shall be given to all affected adjacent
municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall also be forwarded
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development.
E. Special requirements for subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway
information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map
revision or letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. [Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
F. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in
Zones A1-30, All and AE must either: [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
715]
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Be removed from the floodplain when a flood warning is issued.
[Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
G. Floodplain Administrator. [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
(1) Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Zoning Officer of the
Township of Middletown is hereby appointed to administer and
enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain
Administrator.
(2) Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
(a) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken
will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application for the permit to
determine if all other necessary government permits required
by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended);134 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);135 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
134. Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
135. Editor’s Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
§ 275-172 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-172
C:808
§ 275-173. Use regulations. [Amended 10-25-1993 by Ord. No. 527;
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
amended);136 and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33
U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
(c) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review
the history of repairs to the subject building so that any
repetitive loss issues can be addressed before the permit is
issued.
(d) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator
or other authorized official shall inspect the premises to
determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make
as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
(e) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure,
premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour, to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(f) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the
work does not comply with the permit application or any
applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and report
such fact to the Township Council of the Township of
Middletown for whatever action it considers necessary.
(g) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, permitting, inspection and
enforcement. [Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
(h) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements
of the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 International Building Code
and the 2009 International Residential Code or latest revisions
thereof.
A. The following uses and no others shall be permitted in all identified
floodplain areas, provided that no buildings shall be erected.
[Amended 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
136. Editor’s Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 275-172 CHARTER § 275-173
C:809
(1) Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted, provided
that they will not cause an increase in the one-hundred-year flood
height:
(a) Agricultural uses such as pastures, orchards, grazing and
outdoor plant nurseries. Such activities shall be conducted in
accordance with a plan approved by the Delaware County Soil
and Water Conservation District or recognized soil
conservation practices approved by the Township. No plowing
shall be permitted.
(b) Selective cutting of trees, provided that desirable mature
shade trees are not eliminated; particular attention is paid to
retaining trees within 25 feet of any stream bank; and no
mature trees growing upon a stream bank shall be removed
unless dead, diseased or damaged and threatening the stability
of the bank.
(c) Recreation uses such as parks, camps, picnic grounds, golf
courses, golf driving ranges, archery and shooting ranges,
hiking and riding trails, hunting and fishing areas, game farms
and fish hatcheries, provided that no tennis or basketball
courts or other uses involving significant paved areas and/or
fences shall be permitted.
(2) Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted only when
Council grants a conditional use pursuant to a specific application.
In considering applications for these conditional uses, Council shall
be guided by the factors cited in § 275-174 of this article and
Article XXXVI of this chapter:
(a) Storm and sanitary outlets, but not in the FW subdistricts;
(b) Circuses, festivals and similar transient amusement
enterprises.
(c) Boat rentals, docks and piers.
(d) Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not
buoyant, flammable or explosive; are not prohibited by
Subsection A(4)(c) and (d) below; are not subject to major
damage by flooding; and provided that such material and
equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement
and/or can be readily removed from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
(e) Other similar uses and activities, provided they cause no
increase in the one-hundred-year flood heights, velocities and/
or direction or otherwise represent a potential safety hazard.
All uses, activities and structural improvements shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing
§ 275-173 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-173
C:810
provisions contained herein and with all other applicable codes
and ordinances.
(3) Accessory uses. Accessory uses, which do not involve structures,
customarily incidental to the permitted use or the approved
conditional use.
(4) Activities and uses specifically prohibited. The following activities
and uses are not permitted whether proposed in conjunction with a
permitted use or otherwise in all identified floodplain areas.
[Amended 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
(a) Clear-cutting.
[1] Clear-cutting of trees or the clearing of vegetation, except
where such clearing is necessary to:
[a] The preparation of land for a permitted use or
approved conditional use;
[b] A reforestation measure; or
[c] A means to eliminate dead, diseased or hazardous tree
stands.
[2] Where a clear-cutting operation is deemed permissible for
one of the above reasons, it shall be consistent with the
terms of a woodland management plan approved by
Council. Under no circumstances shall a clear-cutting
operation be conducted within 50 feet of a stream.
(b) Sod farming.
(c) Storage of any material which, if inundated, would float; any
flammable or toxic material; any other material which, if
inundated, or otherwise released to the stream, would degrade
or pollute the stream or cause damage if swept downstream.
(d) Under no circumstances will the following activities and/or
development be located, enlarged or expanded since they
present a special hazard to the safety and health of the public:
[1] Hospitals (public or private).
[2] Nursing homes (public or private).
[3] Jails or prisons.
[4] Individual mobile homes, new mobile home parks, mobile
home subdivisions and substantial improvements thereto.
[5] Production and/or storage of the following toxic chemicals
and the construction, enlargement or expansion of any
§ 275-173 CHARTER § 275-173
C:811
structure which would be used for the production, storage
or maintenance of such toxic chemicals:
[a] Acetone.
[b] Ammonia.
[c] Benzine.
[d] Calcium carbide.
[e] Carbon disulfide.
[f] Celluloid.
[g] Chlorine.
[h] Hydrochloric acid.
[i] Hydrocyanic acid.
[j] Magnesium.
[k] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
[l] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
[m] Phosphorous.
[n] Potassium.
[o] Sodium.
[p] Sulphur and sulphur products.
[q] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
[r] Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances
are not otherwise regulated.
[s] Any other toxic and/or dangerous materials or
substances regulated by the appropriate federal or
state agencies.
(e) Depositing fill material.
(f) No part of any on-lot or on-site sewage disposal system.
(g) Any new construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment that would cause any increase in flood heights.
B. Special floodplain area (A Area). Within any A Area (special floodplain
area), no new construction or development shall be allowed unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
§ 275-173 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-173
C:812
will not increase the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood more than
one foot at any point. [Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
C. Development of lots partially within the Floodplain Conservation
District. When part of a lot is in the Floodplain Conservation District
and part is in another district and the part in such other district is to be
developed, such development shall comply with the following:
(1) To the extent not prohibited by other requirements of this chapter,
parts of lots within the Floodplain Conservation District may be
counted toward the minimum lot area and density requirements of
the district where the development, use or activity is to be located.
(2) No part of any yard or setback required for any other district may
be located within the Floodplain Conservation District.
D. Existing nonconforming structures and uses. Existing structures and
land uses within the Floodplain Conservation District which do not
conform to the requirements of this section may continue but must
comply with the following:
(1) Existing structures located in the Floodway (FW) shall not be
expanded or enlarged.
(2) Any modification, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any
existing structure in the Floodway (FW) must be authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception and must comply with
the requirements listed in § 275-174 and in the Building Code,137
provided that the cost of such construction shall not exceed 50% of
the fair market value of the structure prior to the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage.
(3) Existing uses (other than structures) located in the Floodway (FW)
may be expanded only when authorized as a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that such expansion shall not
cause an increase in flood levels.
(4) The expansion, enlargement or the substantial modification,
alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of an existing
structure or use located in the AE Area or A Area subdistricts must
be authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board
and must comply with the requirements of § 275-174. [Amended
8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
(5) No nonconforming structure located in the FW or AE Area
subdistricts which is destroyed to an extent that reconstruction
would cost 50% or more of its predamage fair market value shall be
reconstructed. [Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Art. II, Building Standards.
§ 275-173 CHARTER § 275-173
C:813
§ 275-174. Conditional use and special exception applications.
[Amended 10-25-1993 by Ord. No. 527]
(6) Council may authorize, as a conditional use, the expansion,
enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement or reconstruction of
any structure located in the Floodplain Conservation District which
is listed in or determined to be eligible for the National Register of
Historic Places or the Pennsylvania Inventory or Register of
Historic Places. In deciding upon any such application, Council
shall consider the degree to which the requested use will be
essential to preserving the structure and weigh the preservation
benefits of the proposed use against its potential impact on flood
heights and velocities and the flood hazards attendant to the
structure itself. In no event shall a conditional use be granted that
would result in an increase in flood heights within the Floodway
(FW) subdistrict.
E. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any A Area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the one-hundredyear
flood elevation more than one foot at any point. [Amended
8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this article.
(4) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
F. Zoning applicable to land removed from the Floodplain Conservation
District. Should the Floodplain Conservation District, which is an
overlay district, become inapplicable to any tract by reason of
amendment by Council or interpretation by Township Engineer or the
Zoning Hearing Board or a court of competent jurisdiction, the zoning
applicable to such tract shall be that of the (underlying) district in
which the land is located.
§ 275-173 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-174
C:814
A. Burden of proof. The applicant for a conditional use or special exception
must establish that the use proposed complies with all of the
requirements of this section and the specific standards and criteria in
Subsection C below. At the hearing on such an application, opponents
who seek the denial of the application should be prepared to identify
and establish specific aspects of the proposed use which do not comply
with this chapter.
B. Evidence in support of the application. [Amended 12-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 709]
(1) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood;
(c) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a one-hundred-year flood; and
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations. [Amended
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
(e) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401-405 as amended, and Sections 1612.5.1,
104.7 and 109.3 of the 2003 IBC and Sections R106.1.3 and
R104.7 of the 2003 IRC.
(2) The following data and documentation:
(a) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an A Area (special floodplain area), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood
more than one foot at any point. [Amended 8-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 758]
(b) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the one-hundred-year flood. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development.
§ 275-174 CHARTER § 275-174
C:815
(c) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§§ 275-173A(2)(d) and 275-173A(4)(d)[5]. [Amended
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 715]
(d) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(e) Where any excavation of grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
C. Standards and criteria to be applied to applications.
(1) In addition to the standards and criteria stated in Article XXXVI of
this chapter, Council, in deciding conditional use applications and
the Zoning Hearing Board in deciding special exception
applications, shall consider the following general criteria and apply
the following specific standards:
(a) General criteria.
[1] The danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
[2] The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
or downstream to injure persons or property.
[3] The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and
ability of these systems to prevent contamination and
unsanitary conditions.
[4] The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the users.
[5] The importance of the use to the community.
[6] The need for a waterfront location for the use and any
unique characteristics of the site.
[7] The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding.
[8] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the
foreseeable future.
[9] The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and the flood management facilities and needs of the
area and the Township.
[10] The safety of and need for access to the use, during
flooding, by both ordinary and emergency vehicles.
§ 275-174 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-174
C:816
[11] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site,
the impact of these conditions on the proposed use and of
the use on these flood characteristics.
[12] The likelihood that the proposed use will result in
extraordinary public expense or create public nuisance.
[13] The possibility that the proposed use will alter natural
water flows or water temperatures.
[14] Any adverse effects, degradation or destruction of historic
sites, structures or wildlife habitats.
[15] Any adverse impact, during construction or afterward, of
the proposed use on stream bank and soil stability.
[16] Such other factors as are relevant to the purposes and
intent of this chapter.
(b) Specific standards.
[1] No conditional use or special exception shall be granted
for any proposed use, development or activity that will
cause any increase in flood levels during the one-hundredyear
flood.
[2] Elevation. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
[a] Any new development, construction or substantial
improvement to an existing structure shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to 1 1/2
feet above the one-hundred-year flood level. All
proposed lowest floor and basement elevations shall
be shown in relation to mean sea level, based upon the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988. However, in
areas shown on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's Flood Insurance Rate Map as "AE Area," the
required elevation shall be based on the profiles
contained in the Flood Insurance Study of Delaware
County, Pennsylvania, prepared by FEMA dated
November 18, 2009, as may be revised, with the
lowest floor elevated a minimum of 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood height as shown therein. Also, in areas
where no detailed study has been done, the required
elevation shall be determined by selecting the point on
the boundary of the Floodplain Conservation District,
nearest to the site in question and locating the lowest
floor of the structure 1 1/2 feet above such elevation.
[Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
[b] Space below the lowest floor.
§ 275-174 CHARTER § 275-174
C:817
[i] Partially enclosed and fully enclosed space below
the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
[ii] Consideration may be given to the requirements
of 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended)
and the 2003 IRC (Sections R323.2.2 and
R323.1.4) and the 2003 IBC (Sections 1612.4,
1612.5, 1202.3.2 and 1203.3.3) as amended.
[3] All such structures shall be securely anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse and lateral movement and shall employ
construction materials and techniques to minimize flood
damage. Appropriate drainage shall be provided.
[4] The provisions of all other federal and state rules and
regulations are applicable to such construction.
[5] Required floodproofing measures may include, without
limitation because of specific enumeration, the following:
[a] Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and
shutters.
[b] Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
[c] Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce
seepage of water through walls.
[d] Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist
flotation.
[e] Installation of pumps to lower water levels in
structures.
[f] Construction of water supply and waste treatment
systems so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
[g] Pumping facilities for subsurface external foundation
wall and basement floor pressures.
[h] Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris.
[i] Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of
gravity flow basement drains.
[6] The following minimum standards shall apply for all
construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area: [Amended 12-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 709]
[a] Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
§ 275-174 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-174
C:818
[i] Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the
building line from all points;
[ii] Consist of soil or small rock materials only;
sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
[iii] Be compacted to provide the necessary
permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring,
or settling;
[iv] Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal
feet unless substantiated data, justifying steeper
slopes, are submitted to and approved by the
Building Permit Officer; and
[v] Be used to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties. The
provisions contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections
1801.1 and 1803.4) shall be utilized.
[b] Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
[i] All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
[ii] Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
[iii] No part of any on-site sewage system shall be
located within any identified floodplain area
except in strict compliance with all State and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during
a flood.
[c] Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines,
electrical and telephone systems shall be located,
elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize
the chance of impairment during a flood.
[d] Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings
and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to
the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of
floodwater.
[e] Anchoring.
§ 275-174 CHARTER § 275-174
C:819
[i] All buildings and structures shall be firmly
anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement.
[ii] All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other
similar objects or components located below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be securely
anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
[iii] The design and construction requirements of the
UCC pertaining to this subsection as referred to
in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405 as amended)
and contained in the 2003 IBC (Sections 1605.2.2,
1605.3.1.2, 1612.4 and Appendix G501.3), the
IRC (Sections R301.1 & R323.1.1) and ASCE
24-98 (Section 5.6) shall be utilized.
[f] Floors, walls and ceilings.
[i] Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be installed to accommodate
a lateral expansion of the flooring perpendicular
to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
[ii] Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
[iii] Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be designed and constructed of
materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
[iv] Windows, doors, and other components at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be made
of metal or other water-resistant material.
[v] The provisions of the UCC pertaining to this
subsection and referenced in the 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401-405, as amended) and contained in
the 2003 IBC (Sections 801.1.3, 1403.2, 1403.4,
1403.6 and 1404.2), the 2003 IRC (Sections
R323.1.7 & R501.3) and ASCE 24-98 (Chapter 6).
[g] Paints and adhesives.
[i] Paints and other finishes used at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
§ 275-174 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-174
C:820
[ii] Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
[iii] All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets,
etc.) shall be finished with a marine or waterresistant
paint or other finishing material.
[iv] The standards and specifications contained in 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) the
2003 IBC (Sections 801.1.3, 1403.7 and Appendix
G) and the 2003 IRC (Section R323.1.7.).
[h] Electrical components.
[i] Electrical distribution panels shall be at least
three feet above the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
[ii] Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower
levels and shall be dropped from above.
[iii] The provisions pertaining to the above provisions
and referenced in the UCC and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401-405) as amended and contained in
the 2003 IBC (Section 1612.4), the IRC (Section
R323.1.5), the 2000 IFGC (Sections R301.5 and
R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall be
utilized.
[i] Equipment.
[i] Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical
or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be
located below the regulatory flood elevation.
[ii] The provisions pertaining to the above provision
and referenced in the UCC and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401-405), as amended and contained in
the 2003 IBC (Section 1612.4), the 2003 IRC
(Section R323.1.5) the 2000 IFGC (Sections
R301.5 and RI601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8)
shall be utilized.
D. Council, in deciding conditional use applications, and the Zoning
Hearing Board, in deciding special exception applications, shall attach
such conditions to approved uses as are necessary implement the intent
of this section in terms of the specific use and site.
§ 275-174 CHARTER § 275-175
C:821
§ 275-175. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide all appeals from
administrative actions and determinations under this article.
§ 275-176. Variances.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide all requests for
variances from the terms of this article. In making its decision, the
Board shall consider the factors listed in Section 912 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,138 and those
listed in § 275-174C(1)(a). Council has determined that no variance
from the terms of this article is de minimus and, therefore, to be
entitled to relief, the applicant for a variance must establish that this
article imposes an unnecessary hardship.
B. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township shall consider,
but not be limited to, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; nor
(b) Create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the public or
conflict with any other applicable state statute or regulation.
C. If the Board determines that a variance from the terms of this article
shall be granted, the Board shall attach such conditions to the approved
application as are necessary to maximize the proposed use's
compliance with the intent of this section. Whenever a variance is
granted to permit the erection or expansion of a structure, the Board
shall require, as a condition, that the terms of the approval be recorded
so that they appear within the chain of title of the property. Appropriate
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Special designs for waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(2) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions.
(3) Floodproofing measures such as the following:
(a) Anchorage to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
any structure.
(b) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.
§ 275-175 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-176
C:822
§ 275-176.1. Severability. [Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 758]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the article, which shall remain in
(c) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
(d) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls.
(e) Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation.
(f) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
(g) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so
as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
(h) Pumping facilities for subsurface external foundation wall and
basement floor pressures.
(i) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
(j) Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of gravity flow
basement drains.
(k) Elevation of structures to reduce likelihood of flood damage.
D. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activity: [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
(1) Within any floodway (FW) area that would cause any increase in the
one-hundred-year flood elevation. All structures shall be designed
and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the onehundred-
year flood.
(2) Within any A Area that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the one-hundred-year flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. [Amended 8-24-2015
by Ord. No. 758]
E. Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
F. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 275-176 CHARTER § 275-176.1
C:823
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 275-176.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-176.1
C:824
ARTICLE XXX
Steep Slope Conservation District
§ 275-177. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to expand upon the community development
objectives associated with environmental protection and the preservation of
natural resources expressed in Article I and to complement the provisions
in Article XXXV relating to open space. Further, the provisions of this
article are designed to encourage the sensitive treatment of hillsides and
their related soil and vegetation resources in an effort to minimize adverse
environmental impacts. The following objectives serve to complement these
specific purposes and the overall purposes of this chapter:
§ 275-178. Scope. [Added 7-27-1994 by Ord. No. 542]
The provisions of this Article XXX shall only apply in those instances where
the particular development, land use, building permit application or other
zoning permission or approval is of such nature and scope that application
for land development plan approval or subdivision plan approval is not
required under and pursuant to Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development. In those instances where Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land
Development, is applicable, Article IX, Steep Slope Conservation Districts,
of that chapter shall govern and prevail.
§ 275-179. General provisions. [Amended 8-14-1989 by Ord. No.
449; 6-27-1994 by Ord. No. 542]
A. To conserve and protect steep and very steep slopes from inappropriate
development such as excessive grading, land form alteration and
extensive vegetation removal.
B. To avoid potential hazards to property and the disruption of ecological
balance which may be caused by increased runoff, flooding, soil erosion
and sedimentation, blasting and ripping of rock and landslide and soil
failure.
C. To encourage the use of steep and very steep slopes for open space and
other uses which are compatible with the preservation of natural
resources and protection of areas of environmental concern.
A. Compliance. No area within the Steep Slope Conservation District shall
hereafter be used without full compliance with the terms of this article
and other applicable regulations.
B. Preservation of other restrictions. It is not intended by this article to
repeal, abrogate or impair any regulations set forth in any other articles
herein any regulations set forth in any other articles herein, any
regulations of Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development, or any
easements, covenants or deed restrictions, except that where this
article imposes greater restrictions, its provisions shall prevail. Further,
§ 275-177 CHARTER § 275-179
C:825
nothing contained in this article shall diminish in any way the
provisions of the Clean Streams Law139 and/or Chapter 102 of the
Department of Environmental Protection's rules and regulations, or any
other applicable state, federal, county or Township regulations, codes,
ordinances and the like.
C. Boundary definition and mapping.
(1) The Steep Slope Conservation District is comprised of areas of
steep and very steep slopes, as shown on the Steep Slope
Conservation District Map, which is attached to and made part of
this chapter. The map constitutes only a general representation of
steep and very steep slopes, based on the analysis of the contours
displayed on the most recent United States Geological Survey
(USGS) quadrangles for Media, Pennsylvania, and Marcus Hook,
Pennsylvania. As such, refined mapping will be required to more
accurately define the district, as specified in Subsection C(5) below.
(2) Areas of steep slope are characterized by a change in elevation
from 15 to 25% over the distance and contour interval specified in
Subsection C(5) below.
(3) Areas of very steep slope are characterized by a change in
elevation greater than or equal to 25% over the distance and
contour interval specified in Subsection C(5) below.
(4) The Steep Slope Conservation District Map shall be considered as
an overlay to the Middletown Township Zoning Map, subject to the
following:
(a) The district shall have no effect on the permitted uses in the
underlying zoning district, except where said uses, intended to
be located within the boundaries of the district, are in conflict
with the permitted uses set forth in § 275-180.
(b) In those areas of the Township where the district applies, the
limitations of the Steep Slope Conservation District, as set
forth herein, shall be in addition to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district or districts.
(c) Should the district boundaries be revised as a result of judicial
decision, the zoning requirements applicable to the area in
question shall revert to the requirements of the underlying
zoning district(s) without consideration of this section.
(5) Interpretation of district boundaries.
(a) The applicant shall use an actual field topographic survey as
the source of contour information and the basis for depicting
steep and very steep slopes as described below.
139. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 275-179 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-179
C:826
§ 275-180. Use regulations. [Amended 8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 449;
9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 544]
(b) The Steep Slope Conservation District Map (based on the tenfoot
contour interval from USGS) shall be used as a general
guide for determining the boundaries of the district. In any
application for subdivision and/or land development, the
applicant shall, using the contour interval as required in
Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development, delineate
slopes from 15% to 25% and greater than or equal to 25%.
(c) Mapping of steep and very steep slopes shall be performed
using a tick-strip or other suitable measuring device.
(d) Whenever five-foot contour intervals are required by Chapter
210, Subdivision and Land Development, for minor
subdivisions, the applicant shall delineate all steep and very
steep slopes on this basis. However, the use regulations of this
article will be invoked only when there is a cumulative steep or
very steep slope over a ten-foot or more vertical change in
grade. Thus, the representative sample of steep and/or very
steep slopes for minor subdivisions will be 10 or more feet of
vertical grade change.
(e) Whenever two-foot contour intervals are required by Chapter
210, Subdivision and Land Development, for major
subdivisions and/or land developments or as required for an
environmental impact assessment under Article XXXIV, the
applicant shall delineate all steep and very steep slopes on this
basis. However, the use regulations of this article will be
invoked only when there is a cumulative steep or very steep
slope over a six foot or more vertical change in grade. Thus,
the representative sample of steep and/or very steep slopes for
major subdivisions and/or land developments will be six or
more feet of vertical grade change.
(f) The mapping by the applicant will be reviewed by the Township
Engineer. The applicant will be required to follow all
regulations of this article for those areas which reflect steep
slope and very steep slope conditions, as determined through
the Township Engineer's review.
A. Areas of very steep slope (greater than 25%).
(1) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Agricultural uses that do not require cultivation or structures.
(b) Conservation and recreation uses not requiring structures.
(c) Front, rear or side yards of any lot or tract.
§ 275-179 CHARTER § 275-180
C:827
(d) Structures existing prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(2) Uses permitted as conditional uses.
(a) Conservation and recreation uses requiring structures.
(b) Agricultural structures and cultivation.
(c) Utility lines for public utilities, such as but not limited to sewer,
gas, electrical, telephone and cable television.
(d) Accessory structures to any uses permitted in Subsection A(1)
and/or A(2)(a), (b) and/or (c) above.
(e) Roads and driveways only when no viable alternative
alignment or location is feasible, provided that such roads and
driveways are aligned predominantly parallel to the contours.
(f) Uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
(3) Prohibited uses and activities.
(a) Cut and fill, other than in association with any uses related to
Subsection A(1) and/or (2) above.
(b) Soil, rock or mineral extraction and/or removal, other than in
association with any uses related to Subsection A(1) and/or
A(2) above.
(c) Removal of topsoil, other than in association with any uses
related to Subsection A(1) and/or A(2) above.
(d) Stormwater management facilities other than in association
with any of the uses related to Subsection A(1) and/or A(2)
above.
B. Areas of steep slope (15% to 25%).
(1) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Any principal use permitted in Subsection A(1).
(2) Use permitted as conditional uses.
(a) Any uses identified in Subsection A(2) and the following:
[1] Stormwater management facilities.
[2] Sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations.
[3] Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to
the foregoing.
(3) Prohibited uses and activities.
§ 275-180 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-180
C:828
§ 275-181. Application procedure. [Amended 9-26-1994 by Ord. No.
544]
(a) Cut and fill other than in association with any uses related to
Subsection B(1) and/or B(2) above.
(b) Soil, rock or mineral extraction and/or removal other than in
association with any uses related to Subsection B(1) and/or
B(2) above.
(c) Removal of topsoil other than in association with any uses
related to Subsection B(1) and/or B(2).
A. All applicants for any use of land within the Steep Slope Conservation
District shall include the submission of the following materials and
information:
(1) Plans drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet, sealed by
a registered professional engineer, depicting the following:
(a) The location, dimensions and elevation of the property.
(b) Existing and proposed uses and development.
(c) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals.
(d) The location and boundaries of steep slopes and very steep
slopes as described in § 275-179C(5).
(e) Typical cross-sections and elevations of the property and
proposed structures at intervals prescribed by the Township
Engineer.
(f) Existing land cover characteristics of that portion of the
property within the Steep Slope Conservation District
indicating wooded areas, open areas and their ground cover
type and any areas with impervious surfaces. The
modifications proposed to the existing land cover shall also be
indicated.
(g) Photographs showing existing uses, vegetation and topography
of areas within the Steep Slope Conservation District.
(h) A report describing the slope, soil and vegetation
characteristics of that portion of the property within the
subject district. Such report shall also describe the proposed
type and methods of proposed building construction, the type
of foundation system(s) to be employed and proposals for
landscaping, sewage disposal and water supply. Further, the
report shall describe all sediment and erosion control
measures to be used as required by Middletown Township, the
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Delaware
County Conservation District, and any and all additional
§ 275-180 CHARTER § 275-181
C:829
§ 275-181.1. Standards for approval of conditional uses.
engineering and conservation techniques designed to alleviate
environmental impacts which may be created by proposed
development activities.
A. In addition to the standards described in Article XXXVI pertaining to
conditional uses, the Township Council shall consider the following:
(1) The degree of modification, proposed within the district, to the
topographic, soil and vegetation resources and the techniques
proposed to mitigate potential adverse environmental impacts.
(2) The effect the development of the subject district would have on
adjacent properties.
(3) The relationship of the proposed uses to the objectives described in
§ 275-177.
B. Any use(s) or structure(s) approved as a conditional use shall provide
evidence that:
(1) The Steep Slope Conservation District is being proposed for
development since no other alternative location is feasible or
practical.
(2) Earthmoving activities and vegetation removal will be conducted
only to the extent necessary to accommodate proposed uses and
structures and in a manner that will not cause excessive surface
water runoff, erosion, sedimentation and unstable soil conditions.
(3) Mitigation techniques will be utilized, including but not limited to
retaining walls, tree wells, the establishment of ground covers and/
or low spreading shrubs, the use of erosion control fabric and the
like. Such techniques shall be evidenced through the submission of
plans and construction details which depict, delineate and
otherwise describe the land development proposal.
(4) Proposed buildings and structures will be of sound engineering
design and footings will be designed in response to the site's slope,
soil and bedrock characteristics. Such design shall be evidenced
through the submission of plans and construction details which
depict, delineate and otherwise describe the land development
proposal.
§ 275-181 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-181.1
C:830
ARTICLE XXXI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 275-182. Required off-street parking spaces.
A. Unless specified otherwise in another article of this chapter, all offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained in
accordance with the following provisions for each building or use
which, after the effective date of this chapter, is established, erected,
enlarged or altered for any of the following purposes or uses in any
district. For uses not specifically listed, the requirements for the most
similar use listed shall be followed: [Amended 8-26-2002 by Ord. No.
631; 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 658; 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 698]
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
Agricultural Uses
Agriculture 1 for each full-time employee
Residential Uses
Apartments with 3 or more
bedrooms
2 1/2 for every such apartment
unit
Other dwelling units 2 for every dwelling unit
Home professional offices and
home occupations
2 in addition to the spaces for
the dwelling unit, plus 1 for
every 100 square feet of space
used for the office
Public or Private Recreational Uses
Private clubs, lodges 1 for every 100 square feet of
floor area available to patrons
Golf course 5 for each hole plus club
requirement as listed above
Golf driving range 2 for each tee
Miniature golf 1 for each hole
Bowling alley 5 for each lane
Gymnasium, stadium 1 for every 4 seats
Public swimming pool 1 for every 12 square feet of
water surface or 1 for every 5
persons for whom dressing
facilities are provided
(whichever is greater)
Outdoor commercial recreation 1 for every 1,500 square feet of
area
§ 275-182 CHARTER § 275-182
C:831
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
Indoor commercial recreation 1 for every 150 square feet of
gross floor area devoted to such
use
Governmental, Institutional and
Educational Uses
Places of public or private
assembly including churches,
auditoriums, theatres and
assembly halls
1 for every 4 permanent or
temporary seats plus 1 for every
100 square feet of meeting room
area (where the capacity is not
determined by the number of
fixed seats, 1 for every 60 square
feet of floor area devoted to
seating area)
Club, lodge 1 for every 50 square feet of
assembly area or 1 for every 5
persons of total capacity
(whichever is greater)
Community center, library,
museum
1 for every 250 square feet of
floor area in public use
Hospital, convalescent home,
nursing home, sanitarium
1 for each bed plus 1 for each
employee on the shift of greatest
employment
Private kindergarten or child
institutional home
1 for each adult attendant plus 1
for every 500 square feet of
gross floor area
Schools 1 for each faculty member and
other full-time employee, plus 2
for each classroom, plus 1 for
every 12 students aged 16 years
or older
Dormitory 1 for every 4 residents
Retail, Commercial and Other
Business Uses
Retail store, shop or personal
service establishment (not a part
of a shopping center)
1 for every 100 square feet of
gross sales floor area or area
serving customers
Department store or
supermarket
1 for every 75 square feet of
store sales floor area or other
area serving customers
§ 275-182 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-182
C:832
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
Personal service businesses such
as barber shops, photo shops,
tailor, beautician, shoe repair
and the like
1 for every 100 square feet of
gross floor area or area serving
customers
Restaurant, cafeteria, tavern or
cafe
1 for every 50 square of floor
space devoted to patron use,
plus 1 for each employee on the
maximum shift
Self-service laundromat 1 for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area
Automobile service and repair 4 for each bay, or 1 every 200
square feet of floor and ground
area devoted to service and
repair (whichever is greater),
plus 1 for each employee
New and used automobile sales
and service agency
1 for every 200 square feet of
floor and ground area devoted to
sales, service and repair, plus 1
for each employee (parking
within a building may be used to
meet this requirement)
Banks, credit unions and the like 1 for every 75 square feet of
floor area for serving customers
Medical or dental offices and
clinics
6 for each practitioner
Funeral home 1 for every 4 seats for patron use
or 1 for very 50 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Professional offices and
businesses
Office building having less than
100,000 square feet of gross
floor area
1 for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Office building having 100,000
square feet or more of gross
floor area
1 for every 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Shopping center 4 for every 1,000 square feet of
gross leasable areas for centers
having a gross leasable area
from 25,000 to 400,000 square
feet
§ 275-182 CHARTER § 275-182
C:833
§ 275-183. General regulations for off-street parking.
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
4 1/4 for every 1,000 square feet
of gross leasable area for centers
having a gross leasable area
greater than 400,000 square feet
Movie theatre 1 for every 4 seats plus 1 for
every employee on the shift of
greatest employment
Hotel, motel or inn 1.2 for each rental room or suite
plus 1 for every 3 seats in
restaurants or meeting rooms
Temporary places where
Christmas trees, flowers,
produce or other goods are sold
10 minimum, plus any additional
spaces as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer after
personally observing traffic
conditions at such locations
Industrial and other related uses 1 for each employee on the shift
of greatest employment, or 1 for
every 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area (whichever is greater),
plus 1 for each company vehicle
Convenience store One for every 100 square feet of
net floor area of the building(s)
on the lot, and one for each
fueling position used for the
dispensing of automotive fuel,
plus one space for each
employee on the largest shift
B. Buildings or uses other than those specified above.
(1) Determination of the appropriate parking space requirements shall
be made by the Township Council consistent with the standards set
forth herein for comparable buildings or uses.
A. Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of
adoption of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this
article, provided that the type or extent of use is not changed, and
further provided that off-street parking facilities existing at the
effective date of this chapter shall not subsequently be reduced to an
amount less than required under this chapter for a similar new building
or new use.
§ 275-182 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-183
C:834
B. Off-street parking facilities provided to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall not subsequently be reduced below the requirements
of this chapter.
C. Changes in use. Whenever a structure is altered or a use is changed or
extended which increases its parking requirements, then the total
additional parking required for the alteration, change or extension shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of § 275-182.
D. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
E. Continuing character of obligation. All required parking facilities shall
be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities
were designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities shall not be
reduced in total extent except when such reduction is in conformity
with the requirements of this article.
F. Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served. However, in
all cases where it is sought to utilize adjacent premises for parking
facilities, the applicant or owner shall be required to enter into an
appropriate agreement, duly acknowledged, for recording, reciting that
the property upon which aforesaid establishment is erected and the
said adjacent premises are both owned by the applicant; that they are
to be used with relation to each other, as above provided; and that
neither property shall be separately sold or encumbered, unless other
provisions for compliance with this chapter have first been entered into
in writing and fully approved by the Township Council.
G. Fractional spaces. Where the computation of required parking spaces
results in a fractional number, the fraction of 1/2 or more shall be
counted as one.
H. Maintenance of parking areas. All parking areas, loading areas, and
driveways shall be graded and surfaced with asphalt or other suitable
materials to prevent dust and erosion. Such areas shall also be drained
in conformance with municipal standards to prevent excessive water
flow onto streets or adjoining properties. All parking spaces and
parking areas shall be clearly line striped and maintained.
I. Lighting. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking area shall
be arranged to prevent glare on adjoining properties.
J. Handicapped persons parking. All uses shall designate reserved
parking spaces for handicapped persons as close as possible to the
main entrance of the building with the exception of single-family or twin
dwellings, service stations, garages, cemeteries or any other use for
which 10 or fewer parking spaces are required under this chapter. Said
spaces shall be considered as part of the required spaces and shall be
§ 275-183 CHARTER § 275-183
C:835
§ 275-184. Parking area design standards.
§ 275-185. Shared parking and conditions.
appropriately marked with signs to designate handicapped use, as
approved by the Township Council.
A. All parking areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 210, Subdivision
and Land Development.
B. For purposes of this chapter, a parking space shall be a space in a
garage or on a lot which meets the size and other requirement of this
section, is reserved for the parking of a motor vehicle and which has
direct access from a street. Each parking space shall be not less than 9
1/2 feet wide and 19 feet in length, except as otherwise provided for in
the PRD District, the I-1 District, and the I-2 District; and within the
SU-1 District, for parking areas associated with adjacent regional rail
facilities, each parking space shall be not less than 8 1/2 feet wide and
18 feet in length. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 704; 7-25-2011
by Ord. No. 720]
C. The aisle space between rows or banks of parking spaces shall be not
less than 25 feet for 90° parking and not less than 20 feet for parking at
angles of 60° or less.
D. Parking areas shall be graded to provide convenient vehicular access
and proper drainage and shall be paved in accordance with Township
specifications, provided that the Township Council may authorize that
the paving of a portion of the required parking area be deferred until
such time as the unpaved area is required to meet parking needs. All
parking, access or other vehicular service areas shall be adequately
illuminated during night hours of use. Such lighting shall be arranged
so as to protect the highway and adjoining property from direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind.
E. Every parking lot or area for off-street parking shall be separated from
the street or highway by a raised curb, planting strip, wall or other
suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle entrance or exit,
except for necessary accessways or exits, and the layout of such lot or
area shall be such as not to require vehicles to back out directly onto a
street.
F. Parking spaces provided to serve accessory uses or other nonresidence
uses in Residence Districts shall be located to the rear of the required
front yard. Such parking spaces shall be appropriately landscaped to
screen such lot from adjoining or opposite residential properties.
G. All parking shall be accessible from a street and an individual or shared
driveway.
A. Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a common
parking lot if the total space provided is not less than the sum of the
§ 275-183 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-185
C:836
§ 275-186. Design and layout of off-street loading facilities.
spaces required for each use individually; however, the total number of
spaces required in a common parking facility may be reduced if:
(1) It is demonstrated to the Township Council that the hours or days
of peak parking demand for the uses are so different that a lower
overall total of parking spaces will adequately provide for the uses
to be served.
(2) Such demonstration and proof shall be provided by a registered
Transportation Engineer, the fees for whom shall be paid by the
landowner(s).
A. In addition to the off-street parking space required in this article, any
building erected, converted and/or enlarged for any nonresidential use
shall provide off-street areas for loading and unloading and commercial
vehicle parking space adequate for their needs.
B. The minimum size loading space shall be 50 feet in depth, 12 feet in
width, with an overhead clearance of 15 feet exclusive of drives and
maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being served. Any
overhead canopy should extend a minimum of four feet beyond a
loading dock.
C. All loading space shall have adequate access from a street or way which
does not block or interfere with the required parking as specified in
§ 275-167. This required space will be provided in addition to
established requirements for patron and employee parking.
D. In no case shall public rights-of-way be used for loading or unloading of
materials. Furthermore, no loading dock or space shall be located or
arranged in such a way that it is necessary to back any vehicle into or
off any public right-of-way nor require the use of any public right-of-way
for maneuvering space.
E. Two-way driveways shall have a minimum width of 25 feet and a
maximum width of 36 feet. One-way driveways shall have a minimum
width of 12 feet.
F. All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded, paved and
drained to Township standards, to the extent necessary to prevent
nuisance of dust, erosion or excessive water flow across streets and
adjoining properties.
G. All off-street loading berths shall be provided on either the side or rear
of the lot. In no case shall off-street loading berths be provided in the
front of the lot.
H. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no
time constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an impediment to traffic.
§ 275-185 CHARTER § 275-186
C:837
§ 275-187. Access for off-street parking and loading areas.
Access to and from all off-street parking, loading and vehicle service areas
along public rights-of-way shall consist of well-defined separate or common
entrances and exits and shall comply with the following provisions:
§ 275-188. Screening and landscaping requirements.
All screening and landscaping shall conform to the provisions of Article
XXXIV and the following:
I. All lighting fixtures used to illuminate parking areas shall be arranged
to prevent glare into public streets and adjoining properties.
A. Access drives shall not open upon any public right-of-way within 150
feet of the nearest right-of-way line of any intersecting public street or
highway.
B. The required sight distance for access drives which open upon any
street or highway shall be in accordance with the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
A. Screening between any parking area and the street line shall be
effective at the time of occupancy, subject to the following provisions:
(1) All off-street parking areas which provide more than five parking
spaces shall be screened from any abutting property of a more
restrictive zoning district.
(2) Effective screens may be accomplished through the use of the
following: plant materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding
through the use of earthen berm forming a continuous visual buffer.
(3) The area for planting and fencing walls or earthen berms shall not
extend beyond the street line. No off-street parking or loading and
unloading facilities shall be located within 20 feet of the street line,
unless otherwise provided in other sections of this chapter.
(4) When planting screens are employed, the following shall apply:
(a) A buffer planting strip shall be provided. It shall be a minimum
of 15 feet in width unless required otherwise in this chapter.
(b) Planting screens shall be of sufficient height and sufficient
density to constitute a continuous visual buffer five feet in
height at the time of planting except as provided below. The
type and spacing of plant materials shall be subject to review
and approval by the Township Council.
(c) At all intersections of accessways, the required screening shall
not be greater than 18 inches in height for a distance of 10 feet
from the street.
§ 275-186 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-188
C:838
§ 275-189. Reserve parking.
(5) Whenever fencing or walls are employed, the effective height of the
continuous visual buffer shall be no less than five or more than six
feet, subject to other regulations of this chapter.
(6) Whenever earthen berms are employed, the effective height of the
continuous visual buffer shall be no less than five feet in height.
B. Landscaping within any parking area which provides more than five
parking spaces shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) Off-street parking areas and parking lots shall be landscaped to
reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise and the glare of
automobile lights; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide; to provide
shade; to ameliorate stormwater drainage problems; to replenish
the groundwater table; and to provide for a more attractive setting.
(2) Each parking lot shall have one shade tree of three inches to 3 1/2
inches in caliper for every five parking spaces if there are no
existing shade trees. Shrubs, ground covers and other plant
materials are encouraged to be used to complement the trees but
shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping.
(3) The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed
throughout the parking lot; except where there are 20 or more
parking spaces, in which case, the following shall apply:
(a) Landscaped "islands" shall be provided at the end of each
parking bay which contains 20 parking spaces. Such "islands"
shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and 18 feet in length.
Such "islands" shall be provided to enhance the appearance of
the parking area and to control access and movement within
the parking area.
(4) All planting islands and planting beds within a parking lot shall be
surfaced with ground covers and/or dwarf shrubs and shall not be
grassed. Stone mulch may be used in conjunction with shrubs and
ground covers, and shredded hardwood mulch shall only be used to
form the plant saucers.
(5) The type, location, arrangement and dispersal of planting areas
and plant materials shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Township Council.
A. Conditions. The Township Council may, in its sole discretion, permit not
more than 40% of the number of parking spaces required by the
Township for a building, use or purpose to be designated "reserve
parking," subject to the following conditions, together with any other
reasonable conditions imposed by the Township:
§ 275-188 CHARTER § 275-189
C:839
(1) The owner of the property on which the reserve parking will be
located must provide financial security which:
(a) Is acceptable to the Township; and
(b) Is in a form as provided in Article V of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,140 or any successor provisions
thereto; and
(c) Guarantees the cost of completing the reserve parking,
including the cost of all improvements necessary to construct,
install, pave and complete the reserve parking. Such
improvements shall include, but not be limited to,
improvements relating to stormwater management and
landscaping as well as to the physical construction of the
reserve parking.
(2) The owner of the property on which the reserve parking will be
located must enter into an agreement or agreements with the
Township relating to the completion of the reserve parking and the
provision of financial security therefor [reserve parking
agreement(s)]. The form of the agreements must be approved by
the Township Solicitor.
(3) The amount of financial security may not exceed 110% of the
estimated cost of completing the reserve parking as approved by
the Township Engineer and may be increased for each one-year
period beyond the first anniversary date of the initial posting of the
financial security to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of
completing the reserve parking as then determined and approved
by the Township Engineer.
(4) The financial security must be maintained for a period beginning on
the date the financial security is posted and ending on a date which
is 10 years from the date of completion of the development on
which the reserve parking is located or for such lesser time period
which is approved by the Township Council (the reserve parking
period).
(5) The reserve parking must be appropriately designated on plans
specified by the Township and in a manner approved by the
Township.
B. Construction and completion.
(1) At any time, either before, during or after the reserve parking
period, the Township Council may, in its sole discretion, require and
direct that all or any portion of the reserve parking, including all
improvements necessary to construct, install, pave and complete
the reserve parking, be completed within the time frame specified
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 275-189 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-189
C:840
by the Township. The foregoing time frame may not be less than
180 days from the date of the Township's written notice or direction
to complete. After the reserve parking period ends, the obligation
to construct, install, pave and complete the reserve parking and the
reserve parking agreement(s) (with the exception of the financial
security requirements) shall continue until such time as either the
reserve parking is completed to the Township's satisfaction; or,
if earlier, the number of satisfactorily completed parking spaces
is equal to or greater than the number required by the laws,
ordinances and regulations then in effect.
(2) The reserve parking which the Township requires to be completed
must be installed, constructed, paved and completed in a good and
workmanlike manner at no cost or expense whatsoever to the
Township and in strict conformity with all applicable agreements,
plans, permits, laws, ordinances, resolutions, regulations and
Township specifications. The construction, installation, paving and
completion of the reserve parking shall be subject to inspection by
and approval of the Township Engineer.
(3) If the required reserve parking is not completed in the manner and
within the time frame required, then the Township may cause the
reserve parking to be completed. In such event, the Township may
pay for the cost thereof from the financial security provided or, if
the reserved parking period has ended and the financial security
has been released or if for any other reason the financial security is
insufficient to cover all Township costs of completion, then the
Township may require direct payment of or reimbursement for all
such costs from the landowner.
(4) The Township may, in accordance with procedures set forth in the
reserve parking agreement(s), authorize the release of portions of
the financial security during the reserve parking period as portions
of the reserve parking are satisfactorily completed.
(5) The Township shall authorize the release of all of the remaining
financial security upon the earlier to occur of:
(a) The satisfactory completion of all of the reserve parking and
the compliance with all requirements of the reserve parking
agreement(s); or
(b) The expiration of the reserve parking period; and the
satisfactory completion of all of the reserve parking which the
Township has, during the reserve parking period, required be
completed; and the compliance with all requirements of the
reserve parking agreements.
C. Change in use. In the event that the use of property subject to reserve
parking obligations changes at any time, either before, during or after
the reserve parking period, the property owner shall have the
obligation to inform the Township of the change and to construct,
§ 275-189 CHARTER § 275-189
C:841
install, pave and complete any additional parking required by the this
chapter and other laws, ordinances and regulations then in effect,
unless the Township either approves of the creation of reserve parking
pursuant to and in accordance with the requirements of this section,
including, but not limited to, the execution of reserve parking
agreements, the posting of financial security and the commencement
of a reserve parking period, or approves of the continuation of any
existing reserve parking agreements applicable to the property.
D. Protective period under the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
The construction, installation, paving and completion of the reserve
parking spaces shall be governed by the laws, ordinances and
regulations in effect at the time of such construction, installation,
paving or completion, unless otherwise required by Section 508(4) of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10508(4), or
any successor provision thereto governing the effect of ordinance
changes on approved plats. This section is not intended to and shall not
be interpreted as extending the five-year period or any other protective
period described in 53 P.S. § 10508(4) or any successor provision.
[Added 8-24-1998 by Ord. No. 587]
§ 275-189 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-189
C:842
ARTICLE XXXII
Signs
§ 275-190. Scope and applicability.
A. Any sign hereafter erected or maintained shall conform with the
provisions of this chapter any other ordinance or regulations of the
Township relating thereto. Any sign not specifically authorized by the
provisions of this chapter shall not be erected or maintained in the
Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or individual to
erect and maintain signs, ground signboards, roof signboards, wall
bulletins, projecting signs, marquees and marquee signs without first
obtaining a permit from the Township, except those listed specifically in
§ 275-193.
C. No display sign shall hereafter be erected or attached to, suspended
from or supported on a building or structure, and no display sign shall
hereafter be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated until a
permit for the same has been obtained, except those listed specifically
hereafter in § 275-193.
D. Application for such permits shall be made in writing to the Township in
accordance with § 275-194 and shall present full particulars as to size,
shape, material, supports, location and height above the sidewalk or
ground, together with the written consent of the owner of the property
on which the sign is to be located. All applications shall be accompanied
by a plan drawn to scale, showing the sign, its size and its location with
respect to the building and to the boundaries of the lot upon which it is
situated.
E. Nonconforming signs. Signs and their respective illumination existing
at the time of the passage of this chapter and which do not conform to
the requirements of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming
signs, and once destroyed or removed for any reason, shall be replaced
only with conforming signs and lighting. Nonconforming signs may be
painted, repaired (including lighting) and altered in their wording
provided such modifications do not exceed the dimensions of the
existing signs.
F. Abandoned signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained
on any premises owned or controlled by him a sign which has been
abandoned. An "abandoned sign," for the purpose of this chapter, is a
sign erected on and/or related to the use of a property which becomes
vacant and unoccupied for a period of six months or more; or any sign
which was erected for a prior occupant or business; or any sign which
relates to a time, event or purpose which is past. Any such abandoned
sign shall be removed by the landowner or person controlling the
property within 10 days of the abandonment as described above.
§ 275-190 CHARTER § 275-190
C:843
§ 275-191. Determination of size of signs.
§ 275-192. Sign restrictions and standards. [Amended 7-24-1989 by
Ord. No. 447; 7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 676]
G. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
revoke any permit issued by the Township, upon failure of the holder
thereof to comply with any provision of this article.
H. The provisions of this article shall not apply where signage is erected
and maintained by Township Council for Township purposes, provided
that all other required governmental permits are obtained by Township
Council prior to such Township use.
A. The size of any sign shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of this article and the following:
(1) When a sign consists of letters, numbers and/or logos and not a
lettered board and such sign is erected on or attached to a building
wall or other similar surface, the size of such sign shall be
measured by the rectangle or square formed by the extreme
outside edge of the largest letters, numbers or logos contained in
the sign.
(2) When a sign consists of a letterhead board and such sign is erected
on or attached to a building wall or other similar surface, the size of
such sign shall be determined by calculating the area of the
lettered board.
(3) When a sign is a freestanding sign, the size of such freestanding
sign shall be determined by calculating the area of the lettered
board or the area of the combination of letters, numbers and/or
logos without a lettered board, as the case may be, and the area of
the largest single surface of each support upon which such sign is
erected.
A. Prohibited signs. It is unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs:
(1) Spinning, animated, twirling or any other moving objects used for
advertising purposes, whether containing a message or not.
(2) Flashing, blinking, twinkling, spinning, animated or lighted moving
signs of any type including automatic color-changing and rotating
lamps of other displays that call attention to a sign.
(3) Advertising cloth or paper banner or signs of any similar character
suspended or hung on any property, except for temporary banners
which may be permitted through special permission of the
Township.
(4) Wall bulletins or any other signs painted directly on the facade of a
building or other structure.
§ 275-190 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-192
C:844
(5) Signs on mobile stands which can be moved from place to place and
thereby not permanently affixed to the ground and other portable
signs, be they freestanding, on the ground or temporarily attached
to a building or other support.
(6) Curb or sidewalk signs or signs painted, attached or suspended
from any outdoor bench, chair or other structure.
(7) Swinging and hanging signs.
(8) Any signs which are not internally illuminated (example: direct
flood lighting onto a wood pole sign).
(9) Signs, letters and advertisements which are tacked, pasted, tied or
otherwise affixed to poles, posts, trees, buildings, fences or other
structures located on public property in the Township of
Middletown.
(10)No sign shall be temporarily or permanently placed, erected,
attached or painted on any vehicle if such sign identifies, advertises
or gives information with respect to a premises or a part thereof, or
any sale or special event or other circumstance. A sign is permitted
on a vehicle when:
(a) Such sign is required by law;
(b) Such sign is in transit from one location to another, for
permanent installation, for a time not to exceed three days;
(c) The sign which is permanently painted or affixed to a vehicle
and is incidental to the use of a currently licensed vehicle when
that use is a means of transportation;
(d) The vehicle, capable of sheltering a use or occupancy, is used
as a construction shed or is located as prescribed for buildings
in the zoning regulation regulating the premises and is used
and occupied for a purpose permitted by the zoning regulation.
In such a case, the sign shall otherwise comply with this
chapter.
(11) Neon signs placed in windows of premises which can be seen from
the outside are specifically prohibited.
(12) Unsafe and lawful signs. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find
that sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe
or insecure or is a menace to the public or has been constructed or
erected or is being maintained in the violation of the provisions of
this chapter, he shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. If
the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply
with the standards set forth herein within 10 days after such notice,
such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered
to comply by the Code Enforcement Officer at the expense of the
permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The
§ 275-192 CHARTER § 275-192
C:845
Code Enforcement Officer shall refuse to issue a permit to any
permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed. The
Code Enforcement Officer may cause any sign or other advertising
structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be
removed summarily and without notice.
(13) Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the roofline or any
structure which extends above the roofline of any building.
(14) Hot- or cold-air balloons or other floating devices, with or without a
message, placed or tethered on any property or structure, except
for balloons used for human conveyance, which may be permitted
upon approval of the Township Council.
B. General restrictions and standards. The following restrictions shall
apply to all permitted signs:
(1) No sign shall be located, arranged or placed in a position that it will
cause danger to traffic or will interfere with traffic through: glare;
blocking of required sight lines for streets, sidewalks or driveways;
confusion with a traffic-control device by reason of color, location,
shape or other characteristic; or through any other means.
(2) All signs constructed or erected under the provisions of this
chapter shall comply with the standards set forth in both Article
XXXII of the BOCA National Building Code, as amended, and the
National Electric Code, as amended.
(3) No sign shall be erected within the right-of-way lines of any public
street, nor shall any such sign be closer than 15 feet to the curbline
of a public street, unless specifically authorized by other
ordinances and regulations of Middletown Township or other
governmental bodies or agencies having jurisdiction or regulatory
authority in the matter.
(4) No sign shall be designed or lighted in such a manner or placed in
such a position or location that it will cause danger to traffic on a
street by obstructing or hindering the view.
(5) No sign shall be designed or lighted in such a manner or placed in
such a position or location that it will present an unreasonable risk
of injury to persons or property.
(6) All external illuminated signs shall be turned off 1/2 hour after
closing of the business or entity which they identify or advertise.
(7) No illuminated sign shall be lighted on days when the business or
permitted use is not open for business.
(8) Every sign must be constructed of durable materials and shall be
solidly and firmly attached, supported and/or anchored to the
supports or framework.
§ 275-192 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-192
C:846
(9) Every sign must be kept in good condition and repair. Any sign
which is allowed to become dilapidated shall be removed by and at
the expense of the landowner or lessee of the property on which is
located.
(10) All permanent signs affixed to any permitted building shall be
integrated into the architectural design of the building on which
they are placed.
C. Double-faced signs.
(1) A sign may be double faced providing it has two parallel surfaces
that are directly opposite and matching in size and shape and,
except as specifically provided in § 275-195B(4)(a)[3], are not over
24 inches apart. Should the two surfaces deviate from being
parallel, the sign shall be considered as two signs.
(2) Should the faces of double-faced sign be parallel, the sign shall be
considered as one sign and only one face shall be used to calculate
the total size of the sign.
(3) Each face of a double-faced sign shall be equal in size. Should the
faces of a double-faced sign differ in size, then the area of both
faces shall be used to calculate the size of the sign.
D. Multifaced signs. A freestanding sign may be multifaced beyond two
faces provided that:
(1) The combined area of all of the sign faces is no more than 50%
greater than the combined area of both faces of a permitted doublefaced
sign in that district.
(2) No single perimeter dimension of any sign face shall be more than
50% greater than any other perimeter dimension of the same sign
face.
(3) No place or planes on any multifaced signs shall be open.
(4) All sign faces shall be of the same dimensions.
E. Ground signs.
(1) The overall height of any ground sign, including support structure,
shall not exceed six feet above the ground and any message portion
of the sign may be displayed on both sides of the structure to which
it is attached. [Amended 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 737]
(2) All single-post ground signs shall be made of metal or steel, except
for those used in residential districts, which may be made of
pressure-treated timbers. All such posts shall be embedded in the
ground at least three feet six inches unless otherwise so directed by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 275-192 CHARTER § 275-192
C:847
§ 275-193. Permitted signs for which a permit is not required.
(3) Ground signs will be permitted in residential areas only when set
back a distance of 10 feet from the front property line.
F. Projecting signs. Such signs may be erected and maintained, provided
that:
(1) No such sign shall project more than 12 inches beyond the building
line if internally illuminated and not more than four inches if it is
not internally illuminated, except that no sign shall project over a
public sidewalk area.
(2) All projecting signs shall be rigidly affixed to the building and to all
supporting and framing structures, attachments and hardware.
(3) No part of the projecting sign shall be less than eight feet or more
than 14 feet above the ground on walkway level.
(4) No projecting sign shall be permitted within 25 feet of any other
projecting sign.
G. Each sign shall be removed within 10 days of the time when the
circumstances leading to its erection no longer apply, or as provided for
otherwise herein.
H. All sign provisions of this article shall apply to smokestacks, water
towers, silos and other similar structures.
A. The following signs, exactly as described below, are exempt from the
need to secure a permit, but are subject to the provisions of §§ 275-190
to 275-192.
(1) Decorations for a recognized officially designated holiday, provided
they do not create a traffic or fire hazard.
(2) Official and governmental signs which shall include safety signs,
trespassing signs, signs indicating scenic or historical points of
interest and traffic signs.
(3) Signs designated the name of the owner or occupant of a property,
the address of such property, the private ownership or roadways or
other property provided:
(a) Such sign is not in excess of one square foot in area.
(b) Not more than one such sign is erected for each use.
(4) Temporary yard sale or garage sale signs, provided such signs:
(a) Do not exceed two square feet in area.
(b) Shall be removed within 24 hours after said sale.
§ 275-192 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-193
C:848
(5) Temporary signs announcing a political, public, educational,
charitable, civic, religious or similar campaign or event provided:
(a) Such sign may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 days in
any calendar year.
(b) Such sign shall not exceed in size the area permitted for
permanent signs as provided for each zoning district.
(c) Such sign shall not be placed in such a position that it will
cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
(d) Such sign shall be no closer than 10 feet to the curbline of a
public street, unless specifically approved by the Township
Council.
(6) Window signs. Such signs, excluding neon signs, shall be used to
serve as an accessory sign to the sign associated with the principal
use.
(a) Window signs shall be permitted in Commercial Districts and
where nonconforming commercial uses occur in other districts.
(b) The total area of window signs shall not exceed 25% of the
total glass area of the window in which it is placed.
(7) Official traffic signs.
(8) Trespassing signs indicating the private nature of a driveway or
premises, provided that the size of any such sign shall not exceed
two square feet.
(9) Real estate signs which do not exceed six square feet.
(a) Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises or lot upon
which they are erected provided that:
[1] No more than one such sign shall be erected for any
premises or lot held in single and separate ownership.
[2] No such sign shall be illuminated.
[3] All such signs shall be removed on the date of settlement.
(10) Signs of contractors, mechanics and artisans, provided that:
(a) Such signs shall be erected only on the premises or lot where
such work is being performed.
(b) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated.
(d) Such signs shall be removed promptly upon completion of the
work by the contractor, mechanic or artisan.
§ 275-193 CHARTER § 275-193
C:849
(e) Not more than one such sign shall be erected for any premises
or lot held in single and separate ownership.
(11) Signs advertising sale of farm products grown on the premises,
provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet.
(b) Not more than one such sign shall be erected on the premises,
unless such premises fronts on more than one street, in which
case one such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
(c) No such sign shall be illuminated.
(d) Such signs shall be displayed only when farm products are on
sale.
(12) Informational signs such as: "entrance," "exit," "no parking,"
"visitor's parking," "no hunting," "no trespassing," "keep off the
grass" and the like, on the same lot as the use to which the sign
relates or the prohibition of the use to which the sign relates,
provided that:
(a) The area of said sign shall not exceed six square feet in area.
(b) Such sign shall not contain any advertising.
(13) Signs installed at an athletic field or other exterior athletic facility
owned, operated or utilized by a governmental or not-for-profit
entity, advertising a product, business or activity not provided or
conducted on the premises where such signs are installed,
provided: [Added 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 687]
(a) A plan depicting the location, number and size of all signs
proposed to be installed pursuant to this section shall be
submitted to the Township of Middletown for review and
approval by the Zoning Officer prior to the installation of such
signs.
(b) Such signs shall be installed so that the message face side of
each sign is directed toward the playing surface or spectator
seating area, or both;
(c) Such signs shall be attached to a fence, wall or other surface
within the athletic facility so that the message face of the sign
is not visible from the nearest public street or residential
property;
(d) The side of a sign opposite the message face when installed on
a fence or other structure which is open to view from outside
the athletic field or facility shall be painted or otherwise
colored the same as the color of the fence or other structure on
which the sign is installed;
§ 275-193 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-193
C:850
§ 275-194. Permits.
§ 275-195. Permitted signs for which permit is required. [Amended
8-27-1990 by Ord. No.472; 7-26-1993 by Ord. No. 524 5-9-1994 by
Ord. No. 539; 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 549]
The following signs, exactly as described under each specific district are
permitted, provided a sign permit has been obtained for such sign.
(e) No individual sign shall exceed 15 square feet;
(f) No such sign shall be illuminated or animated;
(g) All such signs shall advertise legal products, businesses or
activities.
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 275-193, no sign shall be erected in
the Township until a permit therefor has been obtained in the following
manner:
(1) An application in writing shall be made to the Township's Code
Enforcement Officer by the person desiring the permit.
(2) The application submitted to the Township's Code Enforcement
Officer shall give full particulars regarding the size, shape, material
and supports of the sign as well as a sketch or sketches showing the
location of the sign on the building or lot, the distance from the
curbline and the height of the sign. The application shall be
sufficiently specific to enable the Township's Code Enforcement
Officer to determine if the sign complies with the Township Zoning
Ordinance as well as any other ordinance or regulation of the
Township relating thereto.
(3) If the person submitting the application is not the owner of the
property upon which the sign is to be erected, the written consent
of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be erected shall
accompany the application.
B. Except as otherwise provided in § 275-193, whenever any sign is
replaced by another sign, enlarged in any manner or altered,
dismantled, damaged or otherwise destroyed to the extent of more than
75% of its value, a permit shall be required as provided in Subsection
A(1) above before the sign is replaced, enlarged, altered or repaired.
A. Signs in residence and similar districts. The following types of signs and
no other shall be permitted in R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, PRC and
Planned Residential Development Districts.
(1) Signs of a permanent nature.
(a) Professional, accessory use or name signs indicating the name,
profession or activity of the occupant of a dwelling, provided
that:
§ 275-193 CHARTER § 275-195
C:851
[1] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 200 square
inches.
[2] Not more than one such sign shall be erected for each
permitted use or dwelling.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(b) Identification signs for apartment complexes, schools,
colleges, churches, hospitals, sanitariums and other permitted
uses other than dwellings, provided that: [Amended
3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 727]
[1] The size of any such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet.
[2] Not more than one such sign shall be erected on the
premises.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
[4] Schools are permitted, in addition to the sign permitted
under Subsection A(1)(b)[1] above, one manual
changeable copy sign not to exceed 25 square feet
installed along the principal road frontage of the facility,
or, in the alternative, one sign consisting of an
identification portion not to exceed 20 square feet and the
changeable copy portion not to exceed 25 square feet
within a single structure.
(2) Signs of a temporary nature.
(a) Real estate signs from six to 20 square feet.
[1] Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises or lot
upon which they are erected, provided that:
[a] Not more than one such sign shall be erected for any
premises or lot held single and separate ownership.
[b] No such sign shall be illuminated.
[c] All such signs shall be removed on the date of
settlement.
[2] Signs advertising the development of the premises upon
which they are erected, provided that:
[a] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet.
[b] Not more than one such sign shall be erected on the
premises or lot unless such premises fronts on more
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:852
than one street, in which case one such sign may be
erected on each street frontage.
[c] No such sign shall be illuminated.
[d] All such signs shall be removed upon settlement of all
lots on the premises in all approved phases of the
development.
[3] Signs indicating the location and direction of premises in
the process of development, provided that:
[a] The size of any such sign shall not exceed six square
feet.
[b] Nor more than one such sign shall be erected on each
500 feet of street frontage.
[c] No such sign shall be illuminated.
[d] All such signs shall be removed upon settlement of all
lots in all approved phases of development.
B. Signs in B General Business Districts, B-1 Neighborhood Shopping
Center Districts, B-2 Major Shopping Center Districts and Special Use
Districts.
(1) General provisions. The following types of signs shall be permitted
in B, B-1, B-2 and Special Use Districts:
(a) Any sign permitted in Residence Districts which relate to a use
permitted in such districts.
(b) Real estate signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises
upon which they are erected, provided that:
[1] Not more than one such sign shall be erected for any
premises held in single and separate ownership, unless
such premises fronts on more than one street, in which
case one such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
[2] The size of any such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated.
[4] All such signs shall be removed on the date of settlement.
(c) Real estate development signs advertising the development of
the premises upon which they are erected, provided that:
[1] Not more than one such sign shall be erected on any
premises held in single and separate ownership, unless
such premises fronts on more than one street, in which
case one such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
§ 275-195 CHARTER § 275-195
C:853
[2] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated.
[4] All such signs shall be removed when all the buildings,
stores or lots on the premises have been rented or sold
within one year from the date the application for such
signs was approved, whichever occurs first. Such signs
shall be permitted for additional periods of six months
upon application to the Township Code Enforcement
Officer provided that at the time said application is filed
not more than 90% of the buildings, stores or lots on the
premises have been rented or sold.
(2) B General Business Districts. Signs advertising and identifying
businesses or permitted commercial uses in General Business
Districts.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection B(2)(b) below, not more than
one freestanding sign for each building or combination of
buildings on the premises held in single and separate
ownership shall be erected regardless of the number of uses or
businesses in each building or combination of buildings,
provided that:
[1] No such freestanding sign shall be less than seven feet nor
more than 15 feet in height above the grade of the center
line of the nearest public roadway. In the interest of public
safety, a sign of greater height may be permitted by
unanimous vote of Township Council.
[2] The size of any sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(b) A restaurant with drive-through service may erect one
additional freestanding sign which is a menu sign, provided
that:
[1] Such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
(c) Each occupant in the building or combination of buildings on
the premises with a direct public entrance from a parking lot
or street shall be permitted one sign, provided that:
[1] Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building or
combination of buildings on the premises.
[2] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:854
(d) All occupants in the building or combination of buildings on the
premises with no direct public entrance from a parking lot or
street shall be permitted one sign, which sign shall identify all
such occupants, provided that:
[1] Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building or
combination of buildings on the premises and shall be
located in the immediate vicinity of the public entrance to
the building or combination of buildings.
[2] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(e) A motel or hotel that regularly provides as part of its operation
banquet facilities and/or conference and meeting rooms for
group social functions shall be permitted, in addition to other
permitted signage, a fifty-square-foot reader board sign to
advertise special functions on such hotel or motel premises.
(3) B-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center Districts. Signs advertising
and identifying shopping centers in B-1 Districts.
(a) Not more than one freestanding sign advertising and
identifying each shopping center held in single and separate
ownership shall be erected for each street upon which the
shopping center has frontage, provided that:
[1] No such freestanding sign shall be less than seven feet nor
more than 15 feet in height above the grade of the center
line of the nearest public roadway. In the interest of public
safety, a sign of greater height may be permitted by
unanimous vote of the Township Council.
[2] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(b) Each occupant in the shopping center with a direct public
entrance to a parking lot or street shall be permitted one sign,
provided that:
[1] The sign shall be attached to the wall of the building or
combination of buildings on the premises.
[2] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
§ 275-195 CHARTER § 275-195
C:855
(c) All occupants in the shopping center with no direct public
entrance to a parking lot or street shall be permitted one sign,
which sign shall identify all such occupants, provided that:
[1] Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building or
combination of buildings on the premises and shall be
located in the immediate vicinity of the public entrance to
the shopping center.
[2] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(4) B-2 Major Shopping Center Districts. Signs advertising and
identifying major shopping centers and occupants of major
shopping centers in B-2 Districts. [Amended 5-24-2010 by Ord.
No. 713]
(a) Not more than two freestanding signs identifying or
advertising each shopping center shall be erected for each
street upon which the shopping center has frontage, provided
that:
[1] One of the said freestanding signs on each street frontage
shall not exceed 42 feet in height above the grade of the
center line of the nearest public roadway and the height of
the second freestanding sign on the same street shall not
exceed 20 feet in height above the grade of the center line
of the nearest public roadway.
[2] The size of any one of such signs on any given street
frontage shall not exceed 600 square feet, and the size of
the other such sign on that same street frontage shall not
exceed 100 square feet.
[3] No such sign shall have a distance between the faces
thereon in excess of six feet.
[4] All such signs shall be set back at least 15 feet from any
street or highway right-of-way line.
[5] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting
concealed or indirectly attached to the sign itself.
(b) In addition to the freestanding signs provided for in Subsection
B(4)(a) above, one freestanding sign shall be permitted at each
access drive into the shopping center, provided that:
[1] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[2] No such sign shall exceed six feet in height above the
grade of the center line of the nearest public roadway. In
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:856
the interest of public safety, a sign of greater height may
be permitted by unanimous vote of the Township Council.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(c) The occupant of an anchor store, the principal occupant of a
multi-occupancy building and the occupant of a singleoccupancy
building occupying 20,000 square feet or more of
gross floor area shall be permitted signs on the exterior of said
building, provided that:
[1] Not more than two signs shall be permitted on the wall of
any one side of the building.
[2] Not more than a total of six such signs shall be permitted
on the four sides of the building.
[3] Such signs shall be attached to the walls of the building.
[4] No one sign shall exceed 360 square feet or have a length
of more than 35 feet.
[5] The total square footage of all signs shall not exceed either
0.08% of the gross floor area of the building or 1,250
square feet, whichever is less.
[6] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(d) Except for the principal occupant, each occupant of a multioccupancy
building, having a tenant space with direct public
access to a parking area or street, shall be permitted one sign
on the exterior of said building, provided that:
[1] Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building.
[2] Such sign shall be located in the immediate vicinity of said
occupant's direct public access to the parking area or
street.
[3] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet,
and the length thereof shall not exceed 30 feet.
[4] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(e) The occupant of a single occupancy building occupying a
tenant space with less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor
area shall be permitted signs on the exterior of said building,
provided that:
[1] Not more than one sign shall be permitted on each side of
the building.
§ 275-195 CHARTER § 275-195
C:857
[2] Not more than two such signs shall be permitted.
[3] Signs shall be attached to the wall of the building.
[4] The total size of all signs shall not exceed an area equal to
0.08% of the gross floor area of the building, except that
buildings having gross floor areas of less than 6,300
square feet may have two signs with a total area of not
more than 50 square feet.
[5] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(f) All occupants in a multi-occupancy building which do not have
a direct public access to a parking area or street shall not be
permitted an exterior sign.
(g) Interior signs shall be permitted within the immediate vicinity
of the store front of each individual tenant space with direct
access to a common mall area.
(h) Directional signs for the purpose of directing vehicular and
pedestrian traffic within the shopping center shall be
permitted in proximity to the entrances to the shopping center
and at selected locations within the shopping center. The
directional signs shall be for the convenience and safety of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, giving direction to specific
stores and buildings within the shopping center.
[1] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
[2] The height of any such sign above grade immediately
surrounding same shall not exceed eight feet.
[3] No such sign shall be illuminated, except by lighting
concealed or indirectly attached to the sign itself.
[4] No such sign shall advertise any particular item, program
or product but rather shall be limited to the giving of
directions to particular stores or buildings within the
shopping center.
[5] The location and placement of directional signs as
permitted by this subsection shall be pursuant to a master
plan depicting all such signs filed with the Township.
[6] "Entrance," "exit," "pick-up," "loading area" and similar
directional signs shall be permitted by the Township Code
Enforcement Officer if necessary for the safety and
protection of the public, provided no such sign shall
exceed six square feet in area and no such sign shall
contain any advertising.
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:858
(5) Special use districts. Signs advertising and identifying businesses
and permitted uses in Special Use Districts.
(a) The following types of signs advertising conforming special
uses on conforming lots shall be permitted:
[1] When the use of business is other than an office building or
office complex, not more than one sign for the building or
combination of buildings on the premises held in single
and separate ownership shall be erected for each street
upon which the special use has frontage, regardless of the
number of uses or businesses in the building or
combination of buildings, provided that:
[a] Where the sign is a freestanding sign:
[i] No such freestanding sign shall exceed 10 feet in
height measured from the mean grade at the base
of the sign.
[ii] The size of any such sign shall be determined as
follows:
[A] One square foot of sign shall be permitted for
every four linear feet of street frontage on the
street where the sign is erected up to a
maximum size of 125 square feet.
[B] Where a special use has street frontage on
more than one street, the linear feet along all
streets where the special use has frontage
may be used to calculate the size of such sign
up to a maximum size of 125 square feet,
provided that the Township Council
unanimously agrees to permit the use of this
type of calculation, and further provided that
if this method of calculating the size of a sign
is used, only one freestanding sign shall be
permitted.
[b] Where the sign is attached to the wall of the building
on the premises, the size of such sign shall be
determined as follows:
[i] One square foot of sign shall be permitted for
every four linear feet of building on the side
facing the street where the sign is erected, up to a
maximum size of 125 square feet.
[ii] Where the special use has street frontage on more
than one street, the linear feet of building on all
sides with street frontage may be used to
§ 275-195 CHARTER § 275-195
C:859
calculate the size of such sign, up to a maximum
size of 125 square feet, provided that Township
Council unanimously agrees to permit the use of
this type of calculation, and further provided that
if this method of calculating the size of a sign is
used, only one wall sign shall be permitted.
[c] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
[2] When the use of a business is an office building or office
complex, the following types of signs are permitted:
[a] One freestanding sign designating the name and
address of the building or combination of buildings,
and identifying the occupants of said building or
buildings, provided that:
[i] The size of such sign shall not exceed 36 square
feet.
[ii] No such freestanding sign shall exceed 10 feet in
height measured from the mean grade at the base
of the sign.
[iii] No such sign shall be illuminated except by
lighting, concealed or indirect, attached to the
sign itself.
[b] One sign for each occupant on the exterior of the
office building identifying the occupant and his
business or occupation, provided that:
[i] Such sign is attached to the wall of the building
where the occupant is located.
[ii] The size of such sign shall not exceed 500 square
inches.
[iii] No such sign shall be illuminated except by
lighting, concealed or indirect, attached to the
sign itself.
[c] Such directional signs as are necessary to promote the
safe and convenient movement of traffic within the
driveways and parking areas, provided that:
[i] The size of such sign shall not exceed the product
of the number of occupants listed on such
directory multiplied by 250 square inches.
[ii] Such sign shall be erected perpendicular to the
driveway nearest their location.
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:860
[iii] No such sign shall be illuminated except by
lighting, concealed or indirect, attached to the
sign itself.
(b) The following types of signs advertising nonconforming uses
on conforming lots, or conforming uses on nonconforming lots
or nonconforming uses on nonconforming lots shall be
permitted:
[1] Not more than one freestanding sign designating the name
and address of the building or combination of buildings on
the premises held in single and separate ownership and
identifying the occupants of said building or combination
of buildings shall be erected, provided that:
[a] No such freestanding sign shall be more than 15 feet
in height above the grade of the center line of the
nearest public roadway. In the interest of public safety,
a sign of greater height may be permitted by
unanimous vote of Township Council.
[b] The size of such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
[c] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
[2] Each occupant in the building or combination of buildings
on the premises with a direct public entrance from a
parking lot or street shall be permitted one sign, provided
that:
[a] The sign shall be attached to the wall of the building
or combination of buildings on the premises.
[b] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square
feet.
[c] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
[3] All occupants in the building or combination of buildings
on the premises with no direct public entrance from a
parking lot or street shall be permitted one sign which sign
shall identify all such occupants and tenants, provided
that:
[a] Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building
or combination of buildings and shall be located in the
immediate vicinity of the public entrance to the
building or combination of buildings.
[b] The size of any such sign shall not exceed 25 square
feet.
§ 275-195 CHARTER § 275-195
C:861
[c] No such sign shall be illuminated except by lighting,
concealed or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(c) Signs identifying conditional uses in SU Special Use Districts.
[1] One freestanding sign, provided that:
[a] The size of such sign shall not exceed 36 square feet.
[b] No such sign shall exceed 10 feet in height above the
grade of the center line of the nearest public roadway.
In the interest of public safety, a sign of greater height
may be permitted by Township Council.
(6) Office districts.
(a) The following types of signs shall be permitted in Office
Districts:
[1] One sign on the exterior of each office building
designating the name and address of the building,
provided that:
[a] Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building
on the premises.
[b] The size of such sign shall not exceed 36 square feet.
[2] One freestanding sign designating the name and address
of the building or office complex, if more than one
building, and identifying the occupants of said building or
buildings, provided that:
[a] The size of such sign shall not exceed 36 square feet.
[b] No such sign shall exceed 10 feet in height above the
grade of the center line of the nearest public roadway.
In the interest of public safety, a sign of greater height
may be permitted by Township Council.
[3] One sign for each occupant on the exterior of the office
building identifying the occupant and his business or
occupation, provided that:
[a] Such sign shall be attached to the wall of the building
where the occupant is located.
[b] The size of such sign shall not exceed 500 square
inches.
[4] Such directional signs as are necessary to promote the
safe and convenient movement of traffic within the
driveways and parking areas, provided that:
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:862
[a] The size of such sign shall not exceed the product of
the number of occupants listed on such directory
multiplied by 250 square inches.
[b] Such sign shall be erected perpendicular to the
driveway nearest their location.
(b) All signs permitted under Subsection B(1) above are also
subject to the following restrictions:
[1] No sign shall contain anything except numbers, words or
letters of the alphabet.
[2] No sign shall be illuminated except by lighting, concealed
or indirect, attached to the sign itself.
(c) Signs as permitted in Subsection C(1) below.
C. Signs which are nonconforming and signs which identify and advertise
nonconforming uses shall be permitted in accordance with the
following regulations, except as otherwise provided in this chapter:
(1) A sign which is nonconforming at the effective date of this chapter
may be continued although such sign does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter, but the size of any such nonconforming
sign shall not be enlarged.
(2) A nonconforming sign may be changed to or replaced by another
nonconforming sign, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board. Whenever a nonconforming sign has been
changed to a more restricted nonconforming sign, such sign shall
not thereafter be changed to a less restricted nonconforming sign.
(3) No nonconforming sign which has been dismantled, damaged or
otherwise destroyed to the extent of more than 75% of its value
shall be repaired or rebuilt, except as a conforming sign, except
when authorized to be repaired or rebuilt as a nonconforming sign
as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) If a nonconforming use of a building ceases or is discontinued for a
continuous period of one year or more and such nonconforming use
is deemed to be abandoned by virtue of the applicable provisions of
other ordinances and regulations of the Township of Middletown,
any nonconforming sign or any subsequent signs erected or
maintained on the premises shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(5) Signs which are conforming at the effective date of this chapter and
which identify and advertise nonconforming uses shall be
maintained as conforming signs in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
D. O-R Outdoor Recreation Districts.
§ 275-195 CHARTER § 275-195
C:863
(1) OR-1 Outdoor Recreation District. One identification sign shall be
permitted on a property or properties under single ownership and
management. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area.
(2) OR-2 Outdoor Recreation District. One identification sign shall be
permitted on a property or properties under single ownership and
management. The sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(3) OR-3 Outdoor and Indoor Recreation District. One identification
wall sign, not to exceed 50 square feet, shall be permitted on the
wall of the building facing the front property line. If the main
entrance to the building is located on a wall opposite the wall
facing the front property line, one additional identification wall
sign, not to exceed 50 square feet, shall be permitted on the
opposite wall. If a vehicular entrance is not on the property of the
Community Center Building, one additional sign, not to exceed 50
square feet, shall be permitted at not more than two entrances.
[Added 2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 582; amended 2-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 610]
E. Manufacturing and industrial districts. In M Manufacturing and
Industrial Districts, the regulations provided for in B General Business
Districts shall apply.
F. Off-premises signs. Signs may be erected and maintained that advertise
a product, activity or business not conducted on the premises where the
business is located, provided that: [Added 7-24-2006 by Ord. No.
676]
(1) No such sign shall be permitted in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
PRC or PRD District.
(2) Each off-premises sign shall be subject to the number, size, setback,
height and lighting of the signage provisions of the zoning district
in which it is located, and shall be included in the total signage
permitted on the premises where the sign is located.
G. Changeable signs. changeable signs shall be permitted in the I-1
Institutional District, I-2 Institutional District, I-3 Institutional District,
I-4 Institutional District, OR-3 Outdoor and Indoor Recreational
District, SU-1 Special Use District, SU-1-A Mixed Use District, SU-2
Special Use District, B General Business District, B-1 Neighborhood
Shopping Center District, B-2 Major Shopping Center District, PBC
Planned Business Center District, O Office District, OC-2 Office Campus
2 District, OC Office Campus Overlay District or M Manufacturing and
Industrial District, subject to the following restrictions and limitations:
[Added 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 737]
(1) The maximum square footage of the portion of a changeable sign
dedicated to electrical changeable copy display or manual
changeable copy display for any property is limited to a maximum
of 50% of the freestanding signage permitted for the property in
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:864
the zoning district in which the property is located; provided,
however, that the electrical changeable copy display or manual
changeable copy display shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(2) Each property permitted to install a changeable sign shall be
limited to one on-premises changeable sign, subject to the
limitations herein, which may only be installed along the principal
road frontage of the property.
(3) All signs constructed or erected hereunder shall not be subject to
restrictions set forth in § 275-195B(2)(a)[3]; (3)(a)[3]; (4)(a)[5] and
(b)[3]; and (5)(a)[1][c], (a)[2][a][iii] and (b)[1][c]
(4) The following restrictions and limitations shall apply to all
permitted changeable signs with an electrical changeable copy
display:
(a) All signs constructed or erected hereunder shall comply with
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulations related to
outdoor advertising. See 36 P.S. § 2718.101 et seq.; 67 Pa.
Code, Chapter 445.
(b) All signs constructed or erected hereunder shall be subject to
the prohibitions and restrictions set forth in § 275-192A(1) and
(2).
(c) All signs constructed or erected hereunder shall maintain a
minimum static display time of 30 seconds.
(d) No sign shall display a message which changes in intensity or
color during the fixed display period.
(e) The display message shall contain only words, numbers,
pictures and/or symbols, none of which may be animated.
(f) Message change sequence. The time interval used to change
from one complete message display to the next complete
message display shall be a maximum of one second.
(g) All signs constructed or erected hereunder shall utilize
automatic dimming controls in response to changing ambient
light conditions and be equipped with light intensity limit via
manual controls.
(h) All signs constructed or erected hereunder shall have a
maximum luminance level of 4,000 nits during daylight hours,
and, if illuminated at night, must have a maximum luminance
level at 750 nits, regardless of the method of illumination, at
least 1/2 hour before apparent sunset, as determined by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and
throughout the night, if the sign is energized, until apparent
sunrise, as determined by the NOAA.
§ 275-195 CHARTER § 275-195
C:865
(5) Changeable signs permitted under § 275-195A(1)(b)[4] shall not be
subject to the restrictions and limitations set forth hereunder.
§ 275-195 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-195
C:866
ARTICLE XXXIII
General Provisions
§ 275-196. Purpose.
The overall intent of these general provisions is to state the supplementary
regulations and standards which are common to all uses in any zoning
district.
§ 275-197. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if upon
petition of such corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation
of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or
welfare of the public. For the purposes of this section and chapter, a "public
utility" shall be defined and limited as provided under the terms of the
Pennsylvania Utility Code.
§ 275-198. Use requirements and restrictions.
A. General restrictions on use. No building may be erected, altered or
used, and no lot or premises may be used for any trade, industry or
business that is hazardous to the public whether by fire, explosion or
otherwise. In determining whether a proposed use is hazardous, each
such use shall be analyzed according to the environmental controls of
this article.
B. No internal combustion engine shall be used unless objectionable noise
and vibration are eliminated and safe disposition is made of exhaust
gases.
C. No more than one permitted principal use shall be permitted on a lot.
D. No activities which require the moving of earth or the filling or
excavation of an area shall occur without a permit issued by the
Township Engineer. Finish grading or incidental grading of a lot and
minor earth moving from one place to another on a lot for such
activities as landscaping or pond maintenance may not require such a
permit. The deposit and storage of soils, detritus or other debris shall
be done in a way which is not unsightly or detrimental to surrounding
properties, streets, sewers and natural watercourses.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or business entity of any
type, or their principals, officers, agents, and employees, to engage in
earthmoving, drilling, grading or any type of excavation work,
including, but not limited to, any activities that require a permit
pursuant to § 275-198D, within a right-of-way occupied by a natural gas
liquids pipeline that is within 1/4 mile of the property line of any school
§ 275-196 CHARTER § 275-198
C:867
§ 275-199. Lot and yard requirements. [Amended 10-24-1988 by
Ord. No. 425; 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461; 7-23-1990 by Ord. No. 470;
10-26-1992 by Ord. No. 510; 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 556]
in the Township during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. while the
school is in session. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 795]
F. Any person, persons or business entity found guilty of violating any of
the foregoing provisions shall be subject to a fine of $600 per day per
violation, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge. Should
any act of assembly permit a fine in an amount greater than $600, the
greater of that amount or $600 shall be permissible. [Added
9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 795]
A. Minimum lot size and setbacks. No lot area shall be so reduced that the
area of the lot or the dimensions of the setbacks creating the various
yard areas shall be made smaller than herein prescribed. Further, each
principal use shall have its own separate lot area which cannot be
counted as the lot areas for any other principal use. No chimney, tower,
antenna or tank shall be located closer to a lot line than the height of
the tower, chimney, antenna or tank.
B. Special exceptions for lot width. In the case of a lot held in bona fide
single and separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter
which does not fulfill the requirements for minimum width for the
district in which it is located, a building may be erected or altered
thereon, provided that all other yard and setback requirements of the
district are observed.
C. Lot width at the street line. Every principal permitted building shall be
built upon a lot with frontage upon a public or private street which is
improved to meet Township standards or for which such improvements
are required by a subdivision or land development plan, except as
provided below.
D. Common driveways for interior lots. When access to three or fewer
interior lots is to be provided by a common private driveway, the
following regulations shall apply:
(1) Common private driveways providing public street access to one
interior lot. A private driveway providing public street access to
one interior lot shall have a recorded easement right-of-way of 25
feet in width and a paved cartway of not less than 12 feet in width.
The paved cartway shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from
any existing dwelling. The twenty-five-foot-wide easement shall be
unobstructed by any building. The private driveway providing
access to a public street for one interior lot may also provide access
for one lot which must have a minimum lot width at the street line
as specified for the residence zoning district in which the lot is
located.
§ 275-198 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-199
C:868
(2) Common private driveways providing public street access to two or
three interior lots. A private driveway providing public street
access to two or three interior lots shall have a recorded easement
right-of-way of 50 feet in width and a paved cartway of not less than
16 feet in width. The paved cartway shall have a minimum setback
of 50 feet from any existing dwelling. The fifty-foot-wide easement
shall be unobstructed by any building. The private driveway
providing access to a public street for the two or three interior lots
may also provide access for one lot which must have a minimum lot
width at the street line as specified for the residence zoning district
in which the lot is located.
(3) In order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of
persons residing in dwellings on lots adjacent to a private driveway
providing public street access to an interior lot or interior lots,
buffer planting strips shall be provided within the easement area at
appropriate locations to prevent the headlights of motor vehicles
using the private driveway from shining directly on any dwelling or
dwellings on any adjacent lot or lots. The buffer planting area shall
be in accordance with Article XXXIV.
(4) If the easement providing public street access serves an interior lot
which is of sufficient size to be subdivided, the access easement
shall be 50 feet in width and have a paved cartway of 16 feet in
width; provided, however, if the owner of the interior lot records a
restriction against further subdivision of the interior lot with the
Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County, a recorded easement rightof-
way of 25 feet in width and a paved cartway of not less than 12
feet in width shall be permitted.
E. Front and side yards of corner lots. Corner lots shall be provided for
equal setbacks on both streets.
F. Front yard regulations. No building, accessory building, structure or
accessory structure shall be located or constructed within the front
yard except for the following structures, unless any such structures are
specifically prohibited within required buffer areas or buffer planting
strips: landscaping features such as walkways, benches, fences and
retaining walls; lighting; signs; off-street parking; access drives and
points of ingress/egress; and aboveground utility structures approved
by Township Council.
G. Side and rear yard regulations.
(1) Where a minimum width of side yard is required, no building,
accessory building, structure or accessory structure shall be
erected within the minimum side yard area, except as provided in
Subsections H and/or I, §§ 275-200 and/or 275-203C below.
(2) All residential reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard with a
minimum of 75 feet and, within such rear yard and immediately
adjacent to the street line of the major road, shall have a
§ 275-199 CHARTER § 275-199
C:869
§ 275-200. Height limitations of fences and walls.
No fence or wall (except a retaining wall or wall of a building permitted
under the terms of this chapter) over six feet in height shall be erected
within any of the required open yard areas, provided that a portion of the
fence or wall may exceed six feet in height if such portion contains openings
therein equal to 50% or more of the area of said portion of the fence or wall
and further provided that any fence or wall is in accordance with § 275-203.
landscaped buffer consisting of hedges, walls, trees or earthen
berms arranged so as to create a continuous visual barrier in
accordance with § 275-213 of this chapter.
H. Projections or encroachments into required yards. Except as provided
in Subsections F, G, I, §§ 275-200 and 275-203C, no building, accessory
building, structure or accessory structure or part thereof shall be
erected within, or shall project into, any required yard except for
patios, decks or other uncovered spaces, unenclosed fire escapes,
unenclosed steps and Class A and Class C accessory buildings or
accessory structures as provided in § 275-203C. However, except for
fences and approved driveways and except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, all Class A or Class C accessory buildings or accessory
structures must be located at least 10 feet from a property line.
I. Projections or encroachments into required yards in residence districts.
Buildings, accessory buildings, structures or accessory structures
located in residence districts may be constructed or altered so that the
following projections or encroachments are made into the required
yard:
(1) Cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys may not project more than 18
inches into any front, side or rear yard.
(2) Steps, balconies and bay windows not extending through more than
one story may project no more than five feet into any front, side or
rear yard.
(3) Any Class A accessory building or accessory structure may be
constructed in or may project into a required side and/or rear yard
if both of the following occur: the Class A accessory building or
accessory structure is located at least 10 feet from any side or rear
property line, unless a closer distance is authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception; and the Class A accessory
building or accessory structure is located at least 10 feet back from
the rearmost portion of the main building on the lot.
(4) Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, tennis courts,
swimming pools and similar accessory uses, accessory buildings or
accessory structures may extend into the required side and rear
yards only when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception.
§ 275-199 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-201
C:870
§ 275-201. Corner vision obstruction.
On any lot, no wall, fence, berm or other structure shall be erected or
maintained and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained
which may cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view. No
obstruction shall be placed or maintained within the clear sight triangle as
defined by the design standards and required improvements for streets set
forth in Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 275-202. Underground electric and telephone wiring.
Electric, telephone and cable television wiring shall be placed underground
for every structure, dwelling or other use in all residential districts and in
the Outdoor Recreation District, unless approved otherwise by Township
Council.
§ 275-203. Accessory uses and accessory buildings or accessory
structures. [Amended 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 556]
Accessory uses and accessory buildings or accessory structures may include
but not necessarily be limited to the following:
A. Uses, buildings and structures accessory to agriculture.
(1) The sale of farm products produced on the property, provided that
no roadside stands used for such sale shall remain on the property
during seasons when products are not sold and that adequate
parking and provisions for safe ingress and egress be provided.
(2) Signs for the sale of farm products shall be in accordance with
Article XXXII.
B. Uses, buildings and structures accessory to dwellings.
(1) Detached private garage, private parking area, private stable on lot
of not less than one acre, private noncommercial barn, shed,
shelter for pets, swimming pools in accordance with this section,
bath house and private noncommercial greenhouse.
(2) Quarters for guests and servants, when authorized as a special
exception.
(3) Pole, mast, tower or other structure for amateur radio operations,
subject to the determination made by the Township Council as
defined in Article XXXIV.
(4) Swimming pools. Swimming pools permitted as an accessory use to
a principal residential use shall comply with the following
conditions and requirements:
(a) The pool is intended, and is to be used, solely for the enjoyment
of the occupants of the principal permitted use of the property
§ 275-201 CHARTER § 275-203
C:871
on which it is located, and their guests, and may not be
operated commercially.
(b) Swimming pools designated to contain more than 18 inches of
water shall be erected in conformity with the following:
[1] A permit shall be required to locate, construct or maintain
a swimming pool as a residential accessory use.
[2] Swimming pools may be in the rear or side yard setback
area only when authorized as a special exception and shall
not be in the front yard. In no case shall such pool be
located under any electrical lines or over any utility lines
(including sewer and water lines).
[3] Every in-ground swimming pool shall be entirely enclosed
with a good-quality chain link, wooden or other equivalent
fence of not less than four feet in height, equipped with a
locking gate. Such fence shall be placed either near or
adjacent to the pool or at such other place on the owner's
premises as to constitute an adequate barrier against
entrance onto the owner's land or into said pool.
[4] If the water for such pool is supplied from a private well,
there shall be no cross-connection with a public water
supply system.
[5] If the water for such pool is supplied from a public water
supply system, the inlet shall be above the overflow level of
said pool.
[6] No permit shall be granted for the installation or
construction of any in-ground pool, permanent pool or
portable pool having a capacity of 15,000 gallons or more,
unless the Township Engineer has certified that the
drainage of such pool is adequate and will not interfere
with the water supply system, existing sanitary facilities or
public streets.
(5) Tennis courts. A tennis court may be located in a rear or side yard
setback area only when authorized by a special exception and shall
not be located in a front yard. Tennis court fences may be
constructed but shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
(6) Recreational vehicles and travel trailers. Recreational vehicles and/
or travel trailers may be stored in the rear or side yard of the
principal permitted use or in a garage or roofed structure and shall
be no closer to a property line than the setback line created by the
various yard requirements when stored outside. Such vehicles and/
or trailers shall be screened from adjacent properties.
§ 275-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-203
C:872
(7) No-impact home-based businesses. [Added 5-24-2010 by Ord.
No. 712]
(a) In residential districts, a no-impact home-based business shall
be permitted as an accessory use in a dwelling unit.
(b) Anyone who operates a no-impact home-based business shall
file an application for and secure a certificate of occupancy and
an annual business license from the Township.
C. Accessory buildings or accessory structures in yards.
(1) Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, Class A and Class C
accessory buildings or accessory structures may be located,
erected or maintained in a side yard that does not abut the street or
in a rear yard, provided that in no case shall such Class A or Class C
accessory buildings or accessory structures be any closer than 10
feet to any lot line except for: fences, landscaping, approved
driveways and, when authorized as a conditional use by Township
Council, other structures for which no other viable alternative
location is feasible.
(2) Unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise, no accessory
building or accessory structure may be located in a required front
yard or required side yard which abuts a street except for
permitted signs, fences and/or structures associated with ingress
and egress and structures required by the Township for stormwater
management, provided that they are no closer to the street than 15
feet from the street line.
(3) No Class B accessory building or accessory structure may be
located, erected or maintained in any front yard, side yard or rear
yard.
D. Home professional offices.
(1) In residential districts, all dwelling units except apartment units
may be used for a home professional office when approved as a
conditional use.
(2) A home professional office may be permitted if the principal person
using the office is the resident of the dwelling unit. Such office shall
be incidental or secondary to the principal use of the property as a
residence.
(3) Professions for which an accessory use office may be operated in a
residentially zoned dwelling may include a physician, attorney,
dentist, accountant, architect, professional engineer, or similar
profession who customarily has an office in the home. A
professional office shall not be interpreted to include a real estate
office or other commercial office, shop or use such as a barber
shop, beauty shop, hair stylist or a funeral home.
§ 275-203 CHARTER § 275-203
C:873
(4) Off-street parking spaces, in accordance with Article XXXI, are
required when a professional office is operated as an accessory use
in a dwelling. Such parking shall be screened from the view of
surrounding dwellings with landscaping approved by the Township.
(5) In addition to the owner-occupant, or more than one, or the
equivalent of one, full-time employee shall be employed at a
professional office operated as an accessory use in a dwelling.
(6) The area used for a home professional office shall occupy no more
than 25% of the total usable floor area of the dwelling unit.
(7) No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work performed
in connection with such home professional office shall be
performed in any open and/or outdoor area. Such activity shall be
conducted in such a way that no noise, odor, vibration,
electromagnetic interference or smoke shall be noticeable at or
beyond the property line.
(8) No storage of materials or products shall be permitted in open and/
or outdoor areas.
(9) No external alterations shall be permitted to the dwelling unit
which are not consistent with the principal residential character
and design.
(10) No products shall be sold on the premises.
(11) Signs or outside advertisement may be permitted only in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXII.
(12) The operation of any home occupation involving the physical
presence of customers, clients or other business visitors shall be
limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., except that any business
conducted between 9:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the
following day may take place only if authorized by Township
Council upon the determination that the privacy and tranquility of
the surrounding residential area will not be disrupted by the
proposed hours of operation.
E. Home occupations.
(1) In residential districts, all dwelling units except apartments may be
used for home occupations as a conditional use when approved by
the Township Council.
(2) A home occupation shall be permitted, provided that the principal
person engaged in the home occupation is a resident of the
dwelling unit. Such home occupation shall be incidental or
secondary to the use of the property as a residence and is limited to
those occupations listed below.
§ 275-203 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-203
C:874
§ 275-204. Conversion into two-family or multiple-family dwellings.
The Township Council may permit, as a conditional use, the conversion of
a building in any residence district to a dwelling for more than one family,
provided that:
(3) Occupations which may be authorized as an accessory use include
the following occupations: manufacturer's representative,
dressmaker, milliner, music teacher, teacher, artist or like
occupation which is lawfully conducted for pecuniary gain by a
resident within the dwelling unit. A home occupation shall not be
interpreted to include such facilities as: a barber shop, beauty shop
or hair stylist; tea room, tourist home, funeral home, convalescent
home, kennel or similar use of a commercial nature.
(4) Off-street parking spaces in accordance with Article XXXI shall be
screened from the view of surrounding residential homes by
landscaping approved by the Township.
(5) No individuals shall be employed on the premises by the operator
of a home occupation.
(6) The area of dwelling used for the home occupation shall be no more
than 25% of the total usable floor area of the dwelling unit.
(7) No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work, performed
in connection with such home occupation, shall be performed in
any open and/or outdoor area. Such activity shall be conducted in
such a way that no noise, odor, vibration, electromagnetic
interference or smoke shall be noticeable at or beyond the property
line.
(8) No storage of materials or products shall be permitted in open and/
or outdoor areas.
(9) No external alterations shall be permitted to the dwelling unit
except those customarily conducted for residential buildings.
(10) Signs or outside advertisement may be permitted only in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXXII.
(11) The operation of any home occupation involving the physical
presence of customers, clients or other business visitors shall be
limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., except that any business
conducted between 9:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the
following day may take place only if authorized by Township
Council upon the determination that the privacy and tranquility of
the surrounding residential area will not be disrupted by the
proposed hours of operation.
A. The plans for the conversion of said dwelling shall be submitted to the
Township Council.
§ 275-203 CHARTER § 275-204
C:875
§ 275-205. Restrictions on keeping and storing junk vehicles.
[Amended 1-9-1989 by Ord. No. 434; 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
The following regulations shall apply to all vehicles:
§ 275-206. Nonconformities. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
B. Such plans shall provide adequate and suitable parking in accordance
with Article XXXI.
C. In order to qualify for conversion, the building must be located on a lot
with an area not less than the product of the minimum single-family lot
area of the district multiplied by the number of dwelling units to which
such building is to be converted.
D. There shall be no external alteration of the building, except as may be
necessary for reasons of safety, that will disrupt the residential
character of the surrounding area. Fire escapes and outside stairways
shall, where practicable, be located in the rear of the building.
A. Junk vehicles or unregistered vehicles or registered vehicles under
repair may not be kept or stored outdoors on public or private property
for longer than 96 hours during any thirty-day period, provided that
junk vehicles or unregistered vehicles or registered vehicles under
repair may be worked on or stored within a garage or other fully
enclosed structure. This regulation does not apply to the following:
(1) Commercial businesses which are permitted principal land uses
and are normally involved in the repair or assembly of such
vehicles.
(2) Vehicles designed for farming when these vehicles are stored on an
active farm.
(3) Antique cars or other automobiles in the process of being
reconstructed for purposes of qualifying as antique cars and which
have been registered with the Township Zoning Officer, provided
that:
(a) Such vehicles shall be suitably covered at all times when not
actively being worked on.
(b) The vehicles must receive antique registration within one year
from the date of initial registration of the vehicles with the
Township Zoning Officer as provided herein.
A. Continuation. All structures, uses of structures and uses of land that do
not conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located
after the effective date of this chapter shall be regarded as
nonconforming, and the following regulations shall apply to them.
B. Alteration or extension.
§ 275-204 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-206
C:876
(1) Nonconforming structures. Nonconforming structures may be
altered or enlarged, provided that such alteration or enlargement
does not, on the effective date of this chapter, increase the extent of
the nonconformity of the overall structure more than 10%, except
patios, decks and screened and open porches. These excepted
extensions of the nonconforming structure shall not protrude any
further into the setbacks but can align with the structure the extent
to which it is already nonconforming. In the case of a
nonconforming structure which is used by a nonconforming use,
such alteration or enlargement shall also meet the requirements of
Subsection G below.
(2) Nonconforming lots. A building may be constructed on any lot
which was lawful when created and which, prior to the effective
date of this chapter, was in separate ownership duly recorded by
plan or deed, provided that the yard requirements of this chapter
are observed.
(3) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses shall not be altered or
enlarged, except in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) Such alteration or enlargement shall be permitted only by
conditional use under the provisions of Article XXXVI.
(b) Such alteration or enlargement shall be upon only the same lot
as was in existence on the date the use became
nonconforming.
(c) Any increase in volume or area of the nonconforming use shall
not exceed an aggregate of more than 10% of said volume of
floor area during the life of the nonconformity.
C. Restoration. A nonconforming building or any building containing a
nonconforming use wholly or partially destroyed by fire, explosion,
flood or other phenomenon or legally condemned may be reconstructed
and used for the same nonconforming use, provided that reconstruction
of the building shall be commenced within one year from the date the
building was destroyed or condemned, and shall be carried on without
interruption, or else the nonconforming building or use shall be deemed
to be abandoned.
D. Ownership. Whenever a lot is sold to a new owner, a previously lawful
nonconforming use may be continued by the new owner, provided that
there is no enlargement or change in the nonconformity.
E. Abandonment. If a nonconforming use of a building or land is
abandoned for 12 consecutive months, whereby the owner discontinues
the use with the intention neither of transferring rights of the property
to another owner nor of resuming the use of the property, the
subsequent use of such building or land shall conform to the regulations
of the district in which it is located, unless another nonconforming use
is approved by the Township Council in accordance with Subsection F
§ 275-206 CHARTER § 275-206
C:877
§ 275-207. Environmental controls.
and that such approved use be initiated within 30 days after the end of
the twelve-month period.
F. Changes. Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall
be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use
may be changed to another equally restrictive or more restrictive
nonconforming use only if permitted as a conditional use by the
Township Council and subject to the following conditions:
(1) The applicant shall show that a nonconforming use cannot
reasonably be changed to a conforming use.
(2) The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be no more
objectionable in external effects than the existing nonconforming
use with regard to:
(a) Traffic generation and congestion.
(b) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases heat, odor, glare or
vibration.
(c) Outdoor storage.
(d) Sanitary sewage disposal.
(3) In the case of an application for a conditional use to alter or enlarge
a nonconforming use or to change a nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use, the applicant shall be responsible for
establishing to the satisfaction of the Township Council that the
proposed expansion or change in use will not cause an increased
detrimental effect on surrounding properties or the neighborhood
in which it is located. In making its decision on the relative
detriment, the Township Council shall also take into consideration
the standards included in Article XXXVI. Any alteration or
enlargement authorized by the Township Council shall represent
the minimum modification that will afford the relief required.
G. District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed so
as to transfer an area from one district to another district, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses of structures
existing in the district to which the area was transferred.
A. No building may be erected, altered or used and no lot or premises may
be used for any trade, industry, business or other activity that is noxious
or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination,
noise, toxic chemicals or other disturbance which constitutes a public
hazard, whether by fire, explosion or otherwise. In determining
whether a proposed use is or may become noxious, hazardous or
offensive, each such use shall comply with the performance standards
below; and no internal combustion engine shall be used unless
§ 275-206 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-207
C:878
objectionable noise and vibration are eliminated and proper disposition
is made of exhaust gases.
B. It is the intent of these regulations to prevent land or buildings,
including those permitted by right, conditional use or special exception,
from being used or occupied in any manner so as to create any
dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable condition such
as fire, explosion or other hazards; noise or vibration; glare or heat;
condition conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects; or other
substance, adversely affecting the surrounding area. All uses shall
operate in conformance with the environmental controls set forth
herein and relevant statutes, codes, rules and other regulations of the
United States Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Delaware County and governmental, quasi-governmental and
governmentally regulated bodies, companies and authority entities. The
most stringent regulation applicable shall be used.
C. All plans for proposed development in the Township shall illustrate,
depict, note or otherwise demonstrate compliance with this section and
in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 210, Subdivision and
Land Development, and § 275-198A through F, if applicable.
[Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 795]
D. Noise controls.
(1) The sound level of any operation (other than the operation of motor
vehicles or other transportation facilities, operations involved in
the construction or demolition of structures, emergency alarm
signals or time signals) shall not exceed the decibel levels in the
designated octave bands as stated below. The sound pressure level
shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave band
analyzer that conform to specifications published by the American
Standards Association (American Standard Sound Level Meters for
Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, American Standards
Association, Inc., New York, New York, and the American Standard
Specifications for an Octave Bank Filter Set for the Analysis of
Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.10-1953, American Standards
Association, Inc., New York, New York, shall be used).
(2) The maximum permissible sound-pressure levels for noise shall be
as follows (all of the decibel levels stated below shall apply in each
case):
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-
Pressure Level
(decibels)
0 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
§ 275-207 CHARTER § 275-207
C:879
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-
Pressure Level
(decibels)
600 to 1200 46
1200 to 2400 40
2400 to 4800 34
Above to 4800 32
(3) The measurement of sound levels called for in this section shall be
at the property line which abuts the nearest residential district.
E. Smoke. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source of
visible gray opacity greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart
as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a shade
not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for not
more than four minutes in any thirty-minute period.
F. Dust, fumes, vapors and gases.
(1) The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which can
cause any damage to human health, animals or vegetation, or to
other forms of property or which can cause any soiling or staining
of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use
creating the emission in herewith prohibited.
(2) Except as otherwise designated below under specific contaminants
in Subsection F(3) of this section, no emission of liquid or solid
particles from any chimney or otherwise shall exceed 0.3 grains per
cubic foot of the covering gas at any point beyond the lot line of the
use creating the emission. For measurement of the amount of
particles in gases resulting from combustions, standard correction
shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess
air in the stack at full load.
(3) Specific contaminants. The Ambient Air Quality Standards for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply to the release or
airborne toxic materials across lot lines. Specific contaminant
standards are as follows:
(a) Fugitive emissions. As required by Sections 123.1 and 123.2,
Chapter 123, Article III, Sub-Part C, Part I, Title 25 of the Rules
and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, as revised 27 January 1972, or as
may be revised in the future.
(b) Particulate Matter Emissions. As required by Sections 123.11,
123.12, and 123.13, Chapter 123, Article III, Sub-Part C, Part I,
Title 25 of the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
§ 275-207 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-207
C:880
Department of Environmental Protection, as revised 27
January 1972, or as may be revised in the future.
(c) Sulfur compound emissions. As required by Sections 123.21,
123.22, and 123.23, Chapter 123, Article III, Sub-Part C, Part I,
Title 25 of the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, as revised 27
January 1972, or as may be revised in the future.
Where there are, in addition to the above regulations, relevant
air pollution regulations of the United States Government or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the most stringent
regulation applicable shall be used.
G. Heat and glare. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot
lines. The specific Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection with respect to heat and glare
shall apply.
H. Odor. No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in such
quantities as to be offensive at any point on or beyond its lot lines. The
guide for determining such quantities of offensive odors shall be the
most restrictive provisions of Table III (odor thresholds) in Chapter 5,
"Air Pollution Abatement Manual," copyright 1951 by Manufacturing
Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., as revised.
I. Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions
detectable beyond its lot lines without aid of instruments with the
exception of that vibration produced as a result of construction activity.
J. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) All storage of flammable materials shall comply with the provisions
of the Middletown Township Fire Code.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream
or watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or
recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter
any stream or watercourse.
(3) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which
constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards or any leaching to substratum.
K. Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading control.
(1) No construction or development activity shall occur unless in strict
compliance with Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
and all other Code provisions. Such reference is made to call
§ 275-207 CHARTER § 275-207
C:881
§ 275-208. Microwave antennas for satellite communication.
particular attention to the controls which shall be exercised when
clearing trees and other vegetation or otherwise changing or
altering the landform.
L. Slope controls. Refer to Article XXX.
M. Traffic control.
(1) No activity shall occur which would adversely affect traffic flow
and/or present traffic controls within the Township by creating a
level of service below that which is specified in this subsection.
(2) To minimize potential adverse conditions, the level of service for
traffic along any portion of a road which leads to the points of
ingress and egress of a tract or other proposed property shall be a
level of service "C" or better. The term "level of service" and the
categories thereof are used herein in accordance with the
definitions or meaning ascribed thereto in the document entitled
"Trip Generation, An Institute of Transportation Engineers
Informational Report, Second Edition, 1979," or the edition in use
at the time a development or other building application is made.
(3) The determination of levels of service shall be made after an
experienced Transportation Engineer/Traffic Consultant conducts
a traffic study, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the
tract or other property owner. Said study shall be based in part on
the aforementioned report and in part on the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Handbook of Vehicle Code
Regulations, in particular, the following chapters: 471-610
pertaining to Engineering and Traffic Studies; 471-611 pertaining
to Maintenance and Protection of Traffic; and 471-615 pertaining
to Official Traffic-Control Devices. Said study shall indicate
compliance with the requirement for a level of service "C" or better
as set forth in Subsection M(1) above and shall include the data
upon which the conclusions of said study are based, including,
without limitation, traffic counts, the hours thereof, the dates
thereof and the types of motor vehicles comprising such counts.
(4) All streets and/or intersections showing a level or service below "C"
shall be considered deficient, and specific recommendations for the
elimination of these problems shall be listed. This listing of
recommended improvements shall include, but not be limited to,
the following elements: internal circulation design, site access
location and design, external street and intersection design and
improvements traffic signal installation and operation, including
signal timing.
A. All parabolic ground- or roof-based reflectors, together with the
pedestal and any other attachments and parts, commonly referred to as
§ 275-207 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-208
C:882
§ 275-209. Rotorcraft helicopters, fixed-wing aircraft, amateur-built
aircraft and non-fixed-wing aircraft, including power gliders, ultra
lights, etc.
a "dish-shaped antenna," used or intended to receive radio or
electromagnetic waves from an overhead satellite, shall conform to the
following:
(1) The diameter of a ground-based reflector shall not exceed 10 feet.
(2) The entire structure, including the microwave antenna, shall not
exceed 18 feet in height.
(3) Any such structure, including the microwave antenna, shall not
exceed 18 feet in height.
(4) No more than one microwave antenna shall be permitted on any
lot.
(5) Before erecting any structure, a building permit shall be obtained.
(6) All such structures shall be screened by landscaping or fencing
approved by Township Council.
A. No helicopter or related fixed- or non-fixed-wing aircraft (hereinafter
referred to as "aircraft") shall be flown or power tested in any manner
on any lot except in conformance with the following standards:
(1) Each lot proposed to be utilized for the flight or testing of such
aircraft shall be a minimum of seven acres.
(2) The aircraft shall be owned or operated by the owner or occupant
of the lot. An aircraft not owned by the owner or occupant of a lot
may be operated on such lot on an infrequent basis with the
owner's permission.
(3) Each flight or power test shall be conducted in accordance with
applicable Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations.
Prior to flight or power test, amateur-built aircraft must obtain an
FAA airworthiness certificate setting forth aircraft operating
limitations that specify the flight test area for the aircraft.
(4) Each flight or power test shall be conducted in a manner as to
prevent the creation of any unsafe condition or annoyance to
adjacent property owners.
(5) Each flight or power test shall be conducted under visual flight
rules, daylight hours only.
(6) Prior to initiation of any flight or power test activity, the owner or
occupant of said lot shall obtain a permit pursuant to applicable
provisions of the Township Fire Code. Said permit shall be valid
§ 275-208 CHARTER § 275-209
C:883
only for the calendar year in which it was issued and shall be
renewed on an annual basis.
(7) No aircraft may take off, land, taxi or maneuver upon a lot unless
operated by a person possessing proof of having attained a national
standard of competence in the operation of that aircraft, where
required by an applicable governmental agency.
B. Permanent heliports licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration
and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Bureau of
Aviation are exempt from the regulations contained in this section.
C. Nothing in this section shall prevent or restrict the use of aircraft
operated by an agency of the federal or state government or aircraft
associated with police, fire or emergency medical incidents when said
aircraft are being operated under the direction and control of a bona
fide public safety agency serving Middletown Township. [Amended
11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 457]
§ 275-209 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-209
C:884
ARTICLE XXXIV
Special Provisions
§ 275-210. Purpose.
The intent of these provisions is to set forth standards and requirements
which pertain to special types of projects, special land development
practices and other circumstances which apply to certain districts or
conditions. These provisions relate to height exceptions, environmental
impact assessment for special projects, plan review and evaluation for
certain individual buildings and regulations for buffer areas, buffer planting
strips and landscaping.
§ 275-211. Exceptions to height regulations for buildings and
structures. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
The Township Council shall determine that the height regulations
prescribed within this chapter may be exempted for spires, steeples,
belfries, cupolas or domes not used for human occupancy or for chimneys,
ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment, roof structures for the housing
of elevators and/or stairways, fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles,
water tanks, utility poles or towers, windmills, silos, smokestacks and
ornamental or other necessary mechanical appurtenances. The height
regulations set forth in Articles IV through XIII and Article XVI through
Article XXVIII shall not apply to communication antennas. The height
regulations set forth in Articles XII, XIII, XIX through XXVIII shall not
apply to communications towers. The height regulations for communication
antennas and communications towers shall be as set forth in §§ 275-216 and
275-216.1.
§ 275-212. Floodlighting and spot lighting restrictions.
No building shall be illuminated on the exterior by floodlighting,
spotlighting or similar-type lighting, except for security lighting, which shall
be approved by Township Council.
§ 275-213. Buffer area standards.
A. Buffer areas, as defined in Article II and required in various districts,
shall be adjacent to a property boundary.
B. Buffer areas shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with
§ 275-214.
C. All plantings shall be installed and maintained for the full width
required in a particular district, except that certain structures may be
placed within the buffer area, including:
(1) The required plantings and related landscape treatment, such as
berms, fences or walls which aid in screening and do not conflict
§ 275-210 CHARTER § 275-213
C:885
§ 275-214. Landscaping requirements.
with the character of adjoining properties or block the clear sight
distance required at intersections.
(2) Appurtenant landscaping structures such as: tree wells, tree
guards and tree grates and retaining walls used to preserve stands
of existing trees or used for other functional purposes.
(3) Roads which provide direct ingress/egress for the tract, including
appurtenant structures within such road rights-of-way such as
curbs, sidewalks, signs, lighting standards or benches.
(4) Underground utilities.
D. No structures other than those set forth in § 275-213C shall be placed
within a buffer area, and no parking of any kind shall be permitted
within the required buffer area.
A. Landscaping as required in this chapter shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the
Township Council. A landscaping plan shall depict all proposed
plantings as required within buffer areas in the form of a buffer planting
strip and in other landscaped areas which relate to, complement,
screen or accentuate buildings roads, parking areas, sidewalks,
walkways, sitting areas, service or maintenance structures, courtyards
and other site features.
B. A landscaping plan shall be submitted at the time when all other
required applications and/or plans are submitted. It shall be based on
the reflect the following:
(1) The functional and aesthetic factors which relate to the tract and to
the principal and accessory buildings and other structures.
(2) Concealing views to the tract.
(3) Enhancing views from and within the tract.
(4) Screening and complimenting proposed buildings and other
structures.
(5) Creating visual interest for the users and/or residents of the
proposed project.
(6) Using plant materials which are hardy and acclimated to the
conditions at the tract and within the Township.
C. The landscaping plan shall include notes, diagrams, sketches or other
depictions to present the consideration and analysis of the following:
(1) An analysis of the site in terms of: the existing views to and from
the areas which are proposed for development, the existing
§ 275-213 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-214
C:886
topography and vegetation conditions and other existing conditions
which are relevant to the site.
(2) An analysis of proposed planting and other landscaping needs as
related to: screening views of buildings, screening buildings and
sections of buildings, screening parking areas and other areas
where vehicles are parked, screening storage areas, screening site
utilities, and other appropriate types of screening.
(3) The consideration of locations where plantings and other
landscaping is needed to: provide visual interest; define outdoor
spaces; complement the proposed architectural style; and achieve
other functional and aesthetic requirements for buffer areas, buffer
planting strips and other landscaped areas.
D. A preliminary and final landscaping plan shall reflect the following
detailed criteria, unless more specific criteria are provided for in other
articles of this chapter:
(1) Buffer planting strips shall be installed and maintained in the
buffer areas at the width required in this chapter to form a
continuous visual buffer. In addition to ground covers and
evergreen shrubs, the buffer planting strips shall be comprised of
evergreen trees which are six to eight feet in height at the time of
planting and shall be spaced at nine foot centers. The combined
evergreen shrubs and tree plantings shall constitute a continuous
visual screen at the time of occupancy of any buildings and/or at
the time of initiation of any use.
(2) Shade trees shall be provided along all streets and shall be located
at least three feet beyond the right-of-way line. No less than one
tree of 3 1/2 inches to four inches in caliper shall be planted for
each 30 feet of roadway length. Such trees shall be planted in
alternating rows whereby trees on one side of the street are placed
at intervals of 60 feet. However, such trees may be grouped in
certain cases to achieve a particular design objective when
approved by the Township Council.
(3) The outer perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
Effective screens may be accomplished through the use of plant
materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding through the use of
earthen berms.
(4) Parking lots shall be landscaped as required in Article XXXI.
(5) All buildings shall be landscaped in accordance with the following
criteria:
(a) A combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs
shall be used as "foundation" plantings, i.e., plantings to be
installed in reasonably close proximity to the facades.
§ 275-214 CHARTER § 275-214
C:887
(b) One specimen deciduous tree of 3 1/2 inches to four inches in
caliper shall be planted for every fifty-foot length of building
facade measured from end to end of buildings, without regard
to indentations and the like in the buildings or facades, and
excluding any enclosed walkway connectors and elevator
cores, such trees shall be a minimum of 11 feet to 13 feet in
height at the time of planting; and one eight-foot to ten-foot
specimen evergreen tree shall be planted for every 50 feet of
length of building facade.
(c) Five evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted for
every 20 feet of length of building facade.
(d) Trees and shrubs shall be grouped in accordance with specific
needs and objectives.
(6) Other landscaping including trees, shrubs and ground covers shall
be provided along walkways, in courtyards, around sitting areas, at
the entrance to the site and in other highly visible locations,
especially on the outer side of any internal access roads which are
visible from a public street which may adjoin a tract, at the
entrance to buildings and around structures used for service,
storage or maintenance purposes.
(7) The location, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Township Council.
E. The preliminary landscaping plan shall be drawn at a scale of at least
one inch equals 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated with the overall
site plan and shall contain the following:
(1) A delineation of existing and proposed plant materials.
(2) A delineation of other landscaping features such as berms, planting
beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be devoted to lawns
and other elements of the proposed improvements such as fences,
walls, berms, retaining walls, lighting, benches, signs, paving,
stone, tree wells and the like.
(3) One color rendering of the preliminary landscaping plan shall be
submitted for review by the Township in addition to the number of
prints which are otherwise required. The color-rendering shall
reflect total coordination with the overall site plan in terms of its
relationship to proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, walks,
walls, fencing, benches, signs, lighting and other like structures.
(4) A written narrative of the analysis and objectives for plantings as
required under Subsection C above.
F. After the Township has reviewed the preliminary landscaping plan and
submitted comments on the plan to the applicant, a final landscaping
§ 275-214 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-214
C:888
plan shall be submitted. The final landscaping plan shall be drawn in
greater detail than the preliminary plan. It shall be totally coordinated
with the overall site plan and shall contain the following:
(1) A final version of all of the plan requirements stated in Subsection
E above, for a preliminary plan.
(2) A plant list wherein the botanical and common names of proposed
plants are tabulated, along with the quantity, caliper, height and
other characteristics.
(3) Details for the planting and staking of trees, the planting of shrubs
and any other details which depict other related installation.
(4) Information in the form of notes or specifications concerning
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be devoted
to lawns and the like. Such information shall convey the proposals
for seeding, sodding, mulching and the like.
(5) Information regarding the continued maintenance of all plantings
and notes indicating that all plantings will be installed, maintained
and replaced, if dead or diseased, in locations as shown on the
approved landscaping plan.
G. Plant characteristics and maintenance.
(1) All plants shall conform with the standards for nursery stock of the
American Association of Nurserymen.
(2) Trees and shrubs shall be typical of their species and variety, have
normal growth habits, well developed, densely foliated branches
and vigorous, fibrous root systems.
(3) Trees and shrubs shall be free from defects and injuries and
certified by appropriate federal and state authorities to be free
from diseases and insect infestations.
(4) Trees and shrubs shall be freshly dug and nursery grown. They
shall have been grown under climatic conditions similar to those in
locality of the project or properly acclimated to conditions of the
locality of the project.
(5) Any tree or shrub which dies within one year of planting shall be
replaced. Any tree or shrub which within one year of planting or
replanting is deemed, in the opinion of the Township, not to have
survived or grown in a manner characteristic of its type shall be
replaced. Substitutions for certain species of plants may be made
only when approved by the Township Council.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the landowners, tenants and/or
other occupants of the premises to adequately and properly
maintain the landscaped areas, which responsibility shall include
watering, cleaning of weeds and debris, pruning and trimming,
§ 275-214 CHARTER § 275-214
C:889
§ 275-215. Environmental impact assessment report.
replacement of dead or diseased plantings and fertilizing to
maintain healthy growth.
(7) All trees along the right-of-way of any property shall be kept
trimmed nine feet above the sidewalk and 11 feet above all streets.
(8) All shrubs and other growth abutting the sidewalks shall be kept
cut back six inches from the edge of the sidewalks.
(9) Existing trees and shrubs at the corner of an intersection and/or
driveway shall be cut to the height of 18 inches from point of
intersection of corner property lines back 25 feet to avoid blocking
sight distance to oncoming traffic, and shrubs or ground covers to
be planted shall be of the dwarf variety and shall not exceed 18
inches in height at maturity.
A. An environmental impact assessment (EIA) report shall be submitted
with the following types of applications or plans in order to more
effectively evaluate subdivision, land development or other building and
construction proposals:
(1) Applications for tentative and final plan approval for planned
residential developments.
(2) Applications for preliminary plan approval for any subdivision and/
or land development in the PRC, B-2, SU-1, M or OC Districts.
(3) Applications for building or construction permits for any proposed
industrial, commercial or institutional use; provided, however, that
the applicant may request a finding of inapplicability of certain
sections of the EIA report by Township Council in accordance with
Subsection D.
(4) Applications and/or plans for any proposed residential, commercial
or industrial use which is governed by the special exception or
conditional use provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that
the applicant may request a finding of inapplicability of certain
sections of the EIA report by Township Council in accordance with
Subsection D.
(5) Preliminary plans for any proposed subdivision of land for
residential purposes consisting of 25 or more dwellings.
(6) Applications or plans for other uses which Township Council finds
potentially to have significant environmental consequences or
effects.
(7) For the purposes of this section, a community center shall not
constitute an industrial, commercial or institutional use. [Added
2-23-1998 by Ord. No. 582]
§ 275-214 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-215
C:890
B. The EIA report shall disclose the environmental consequences or
effects of proposed projects and the actions proposed to avoid, remedy
and/or mitigate adverse impacts. The EIA report shall contain text,
maps and analysis in accordance with Subsection C below. The EIA
report may be cross-referenced to plans prepared for a subdivision or
land development and may utilize such plans to fulfill some of the
required plan data requested below.
C. Twenty-six copies of the EIA report shall be submitted in accordance
with the format and content specified below. Within the EIA report,
specific emphasis shall be directed toward the proposed project's
effects on the relationship to applicable site, neighborhood (including
areas in adjacent townships, where applicable) and Township-wide
resources, conditions or characteristics. The EIA report shall include
text, tables, maps and analyses for the purpose of describing the project
site, proposed use(s), environmental characteristics and the
environmental effects of the proposal as follows:
(1) An identification of the site location and area by use of a location
map, drawn at a scale of not more than 2,000 feet to the inch. The
location map shall depict all streets, adjoining properties, zoning
district boundaries and municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of
any part of the property. In the case of development of a section of
the entire tract, the location map shall also show the relationship of
the section to the entire tract.
(2) An identification of site character and appearance through the
presentation of black-and-white photographs or copies thereof.
Such photographs shall provide a representation of what the site
looks like from the ground. Photographs shall be properly identified
or captioned and shall be keyed into a map of the site.
(3) An identification of the nature of the proposal through the
presentation of the following:
(a) A site development plan including notes pertaining to the
number and type of lots or units, the square footage and/or
acreage of the tract and depiction of the features which are
proposed such as streets, driveways, parking areas, buildings
and other structures and other impervious surfaces. The plan
shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch
and may be either incorporated into the EIA report or
submitted as an attachment to the report. The plan shall reflect
all the information required under the plan requirements
section of Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development;
however, existing and proposed contours shall be depicted at
vertical intervals of two feet or less.
(b) Floor plans and elevations depicting the proposed size, square
footage, height, number of rooms or bedrooms (where
applicable), of buildings and/or other structures.
§ 275-215 CHARTER § 275-215
C:891
(c) A statement indicating the existing and proposed ownership of
the tract and, where applicable, the type of ownership,
operation and maintenance proposed for areas devoted to open
space or otherwise not under the control of a single lot owner.
(d) A statement indicating the proposed staging or phasing of the
project, where applicable, and a map depicting the boundaries
of each stage or phase of the project. It is suggested that such
boundaries be superimposed on a version of the site
development plan.
(4) An identification of physical resources associated with the natural
environment of the tract including such features as topography,
soils, hydrology and the like. The identification of physical
resources shall include a narrative description of the qualitative
and quantitative aspects of each of the resources mentioned above.
In addition, these resources shall be mapped at a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch as specified below and either may be
incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as attachment to the
report.
(a) A map depicting the topographical characteristics of the site.
Such map shall contain contours with at least two-foot
intervals and shall depict slopes from 0% to 8%, 8% to 15%,
15% to 25% and greater than 25%.
(b) A map depicting the soil characteristics of the site. Such map
shall depict all soil types and shall include a table identifying
soil characteristics pertinent to the proposed development
such as depth to bedrock, depth to water table, flood hazard
potential and, where applicable, limitations for septic tank
filter fields.
(c) A map depicting the hydrological characteristics of the site.
Such map shall depict surface water resources, their drainage
characteristics, watersheds and floodplains and groundwater
resources. Surface water resources include features such as
creeks, runs and other streams, ponds, other natural bodies of
water, springs, wetlands and any man-made impoundments.
Groundwater resources include features such as aquifers and
aquifer recharge areas.
(5) An identification of biological resources associated with the natural
environment of the site including such features as vegetation. The
identification of biological resources shall include a narrative
description of each of the resources mentioned above. In addition,
these resources shall be mapped at a scale of not more than 100
feet to the inch as specified below and may be either incorporated
into the EIA report or submitted as attachments to the report.
(a) A map depicting the vegetation characteristics of the site. Such
map shall define the locations and boundaries of the wooded
§ 275-215 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-215
C:892
areas of the tract and shall note the types of vegetation
associations which exist in terms of their species, types and
size. In addition, all trees 12 inches or greater in caliper shall
be accurately located on the map.
(6) An identification of the land use conditions and characteristics
associated with the site such as current and past use, land cover
and physical encumbrances and the relationship of these to
adjacent sites. The identification of land use condition and
characteristics shall include a narrative description of the above. In
addition, the following maps, drawn at a scale of not more than 100
feet to the inch, unless otherwise noted, shall be incorporated into
the EIA report or submitted as attachments to it.
(a) A map depicting the land cover characteristics of the site. Such
map shall define existing features including, where applicable:
paved or other impervious surfaces, wooden areas, cultivated
areas, pasture, old fields, lawns and ornamentally landscaped
areas and the like.
(b) A map depicting any physical encumbrances to the subject
property. Such map shall define, where applicable, easements
and areas where certain use privileges exist.
(c) A map depicting the land uses adjacent to the proposed tract.
Such map may be at the same scale as the location map, i.e.,
one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(7) An identification of the historic resources associated with the site
such as areas, structures and/or roads and trails which are
significant. Areas, structures and/or routes included on the
National Register of Historic Places, the Pennsylvania Inventory of
Historic Places and the Historic American Building Survey and
those depicted on the Township's Historic Sites Map shall be
identified. The identification of historic resources shall include a
narrative description of the above. In addition, a map drawn at a
scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch depicting historic
resources shall be incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as
an attachment to the report.
(8) An identification of the visual resources associated with the site
such as areas which have a particular amenity value and areas
which offer interest in viewing the tract. The identification of visual
resources shall include a narrative description of the above. In
addition, a map drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the
inch depicting visual resources shall be incorporated into the EIA
report or submitted as an attachment to the report.
(9) An identification of the community facility needs associated with
the users and/or residents of the proposed project. The community
facility needs assessment shall indicate in narrative form the types
of services which will be in demand. Where applicable, community
§ 275-215 CHARTER § 275-215
C:893
facilities (such as schools, park and recreation areas, libraries,
hospitals and other health care facilities, fire protection, police
protection, ambulance and rescue service and postal services) shall
be discussed in terms of the ability of existing facilities and services
to accommodate the demands of future users and/or residents
of the site and the need for additional or expanded community
facilities.
(10) An identification of the utility needs associated with the users and/
or residents of the proposed project. The utility needs assessment
shall indicate in narrative form the type of installations which will
be in demand. Where applicable, utilities (such as those used for
water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage,
communications and electrical transmission) shall be discussed in
terms of: the ability of existing utility installations to accommodate
the demands of future users and/or residents of the lots and/or
tract; the need for additional or expanded utility installations; the
ability to achieve an adequate, potable quantity of water wherever
individual wells are proposed; the ability to achieve an adequate
system for on-site sewage disposal wherever such a system is
proposed; and the ability to achieve an adequate system for storm
drainage and stormwater management.
(11) An identification of the relationship of the transportation and
circulation system needs of the proposed project to the existing
street or highway network. A discussion of this relationship shall be
in narrative form and shall indicate factors such as methods to be
used for traffic control within the site and at points of ingress to
and egress from it and expected traffic volumes generated from the
project including their relationship to existing traffic volumes on
existing streets for peak hour and nonpeak hour conditions. In
addition, there shall be a discussion of the physical condition of
existing streets which will service the proposed project to remedy
any physical deficiencies. The analysis and evaluation of traffic
shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
(a) No activity shall occur which would adversely affect traffic flow
and/or present traffic controls within the Township by creating
a level of service below that which is specified in this
subsection.
(b) To minimize potential adverse conditions, the level of service
for traffic along any portion of a road which leads to the points
of ingress and egress of a tract or other proposed property
shall be a level of service "C" or better. The term "level of
service" and the categories thereof are used herein in
accordance with the definitions or meanings ascribed thereto
in this document entitled "Trip Generation, An Institute of
Transportation Engineers Informational Report, Second
Edition, 1979," or the edition in use at the time a development
or other building application is made.
§ 275-215 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-215
C:894
(c) The determination of levels of service shall be made after an
experienced transportation engineer/traffic consultant
conducts a traffic study, the cost of which shall be borne by the
owner of the tract or other property owner. Said study shall be
based in part on the aforementioned report and in part on the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Handbook of
Vehicle Code Regulations, in particular the following chapters:
471-610 pertaining to Engineering and Traffic Studies,
471-611 pertaining to maintenance and Protection of Traffic
and 471-615 pertaining to Official Traffic Control Devices. Said
study shall indicate compliance with the requirement for a
level of service "C" or better as set forth in Subsection C(9)(b)
above and shall include the data upon which the conclusions of
said study are based including, without limitation, traffic
counts, the hours thereof, the dates thereof and the types of
motor vehicles comprising such counts.
(d) All streets and/or intersections showing a level or service
below "C" shall be considered deficient, and specific
recommendation for the elimination of these problems shall be
listed. This listing of recommended improvements shall
include, but not be limited to, the following elements: internal
circulation design, site access location and design, external
street and intersection design and improvements and traffic
signal installation and operation including signal timing.
(12) An identification of the social and demographic characteristics
related to the proposed project. The characteristics which shall be
presented in narrative form shall include a profile of the future
users and/or residents including information such as the number of
people expected to work or live at the tract. Such information shall
be related to initial and completed project conditions.
(13) An identification of the economic and fiscal characteristics related
to the proposed project. The characteristics which shall be
presented in narrative form shall include a profile of the Township;
county and school district revenues which the proposal may
generate; and the Township, county and school district costs it may
create. Such information shall be related to initial and completed
project conditions.
(14) An identification of characteristics and conditions associated with
existing and potential air and water quality and noise levels,
vibration, toxic materials, electrical interference, odor, glare and
heat, radioactive materials, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases or
other emissions.
(15) An identification of compliance with the environmental controls/
performance standards as required in Article XXXIII.
§ 275-215 CHARTER § 275-215
C:895
(16) The implications of the proposed project in terms of the type of
beneficial or adverse effects which may result from it and the
duration of these effects in terms of their short-term or long-term
nature. To indicate such effects, there shall be a discussion of the
implications of the proposed project to the resources, conditions
and characteristics described in Subsection C(1) through (15)
above. In addition to a narrative presentation of implications, the
applicant shall display where the project adversely affects the
resources of the tract, conditions or characteristics, by mapping
same at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, wherein the
areas adversely affected from the proposed development are
highlighted. Such map either may be incorporated into the EIA
report or submitted as an attachment to the report. Further, the
applicant must demonstrate and specify in the EIA report how and
where the findings in the EIA report and its attachments are
reflected in the proposed plans in terms of avoiding or reducing
potential adverse effects.
(17) Alternatives to the proposed project. The applicant shall comment
on how alternatives such as revised location, redesign, layout or
sitting of buildings, roads and other structures; alternate methods
for sewage disposal and water supply; reduction in the size of
proposed structures or number of structures; and the like, would
preclude, reduce or lessen potential adverse impact to produce
beneficial effects. In addition, the applicant shall submit exhibits or
diagrams which will depict the type of alternatives described in
narrative form.
(18) Probable adverse effects which cannot be precluded. In indicating
such effects, a discussion shall be presented regarding whether
they will have primary or secondary implications, that is, whether
the adverse effects will have direct or indirect influence on a
particular resource, condition or characteristic.
(19) Measures to mitigate adverse effects. To indicate such measures,
the applicant shall submit exhibits or diagrams which will depict
the type of remedial, protective and mitigative measures described
in narrative form. These measures shall include those required
through existing procedures and standards and those unique to a
specific project, as follows:
(a) Mitigation measures which pertain to existing procedures and
standards are those related to current requirements of the
state, county and/or Township for remedial or protective
action, such as sedimentation and erosion control, water
quality control, air quality control and the like.
(b) Mitigation measures related to impacts which may be unique
to a specific subdivision and/or land development or other
project are those related to efforts such as revegetation,
screening, fencing, emission control, traffic control, noise
§ 275-215 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-215
C:896
§ 275-216. Communications antennas and communications
equipment buildings. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
control, relocation of people and/or businesses, land
acquisition and the like.
(20) Any irreversible environmental changes which would occur due to
the proposed subdivision and/or land development or other project
should it be implemented. To indicate such changes, the use of
nonrenewable resources during the initial and continued phases of
the subdivision and/or land development or other project shall be
discussed. Further, the loss of environmental resources shall be
indicated through a presentation of the quantity of loss and related
qualitative effects.
D. In making its evaluation, the Township Council and/or the Planning
Commission may request any additional information it deems necessary
to adequately assess potential environmental impacts. Further,
whenever any information required in this section is not applicable to
the proposed subdivision and/or land development or other project, the
applicant shall indicate such inapplicability in the narrative of the EIA
report and state why such information is considered to be inapplicable
in the case or the particular subdivision or land development in
question.
E. The EIA report shall be prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape
architect or land planner.
A. Building-mounted communications antennas shall not be located on any
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling.
B. Communications antennas mounted on lawfully existing buildings or
structures, other than communications towers, shall be permitted to
exceed the height of said lawfully existing buildings or other structures
by no more than 15 feet.
C. Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed 20
feet in height and seven inches in diameter.
D. Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five feet
in height and three feet in width, and a maximum of eight directional or
panel communications antennas shall be permitted on any single
building where communications antennas are permitted. This limitation
on the maximum number of directional or panel communications
antennas shall not be applicable to communications towers or water
towers where communications antennas are permitted.
E. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed
installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building or
§ 275-215 CHARTER § 275-216
C:897
§ 275-216.1. Standards for communications towers as conditional
uses. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 588]
other structure, considering wind and other loads associated with the
antenna location.
F. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall require a building permit and shall
submit detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating how the
antennas will be mounted on the structure for review by the building
inspector for compliance with the Middletown Township's Building
Code141 and other applicable law.
G. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or
easements necessary to provide access to the building or structure on
which the communications antennas are to be mounted so that
installation and maintenance of the antennas and communications
equipment building can be accomplished.
H. Communications antennas shall comply with all applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
I. Communications antennas shall not cause radio frequency interference
with other communications facilities located in the Township.
J. A communications equipment building shall be subject to the height
and setback requirements of the applicable Zoning District and shall be
screened by suitable evergreen landscaping from abutting properties
and streets.
K. All utilities and wiring for communications antennas and
communications equipment buildings shall be located underground or
within a building or other enclosure whenever possible.
L. The owner or operator of communications antennas shall be licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate such
communications antennas.
A. The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission to operate a communications tower, if
applicable, and communications antennas.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower and communications antennas proposed to be mounted thereon
comply with all applicable standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Art. II, Building Standards.
§ 275-216 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-216.1
C:898
C. Communications towers shall comply with all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration and Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation
Regulations.
D. Any applicant proposing construction of a new communications tower
shall demonstrate that a good-faith effort has been made to obtain
permission to mount the communications antennas on an existing
building, structure, or communications tower. A good-faith effort shall
require that all owners of potentially suitable structures within a 1/4
mile radius of the proposed communications tower site be contacted
and that one or more of the following reasons for not selecting such
structure apply:
(1) The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing structure, and its reinforcement
cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio
frequency interference with other existing equipment for that
existing structure, and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space,
access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to
allow it to perform its intended function.
(4) Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would
result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding
applicable standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic
radiation.
(5) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with
the owners of such structures.
E. Access shall be provided to the communications tower and
communications equipment building by means of a public street or
easement to a public street. The easement shall be a minimum of 25
feet in width and shall be improved to a width of at least 12 feet with a
dust-free, all-weather surface for its entire length.
F. A communications tower may be located on a lot occupied by other
principal structures and may occupy a leased parcel within a lot,
provided that the lot meets the size requirements for the Zoning
District.
G. Recording of a plat of land development shall be required for a lot on
which a communications tower is proposed to be constructed.
H. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the
communications tower is the minimum height necessary to perform its
function.
§ 275-216.1 CHARTER § 275-216.1
C:899
I. In all zoning districts where communications towers are permitted, the
maximum height of any communications tower shall be 150 feet;
provided, however, that such height may be increased to no more than
200 feet, provided that the required setbacks from adjoining property
lines (not lease lines) are increased by one foot for each one foot of
height in excess of 150 feet.
J. The foundation and base of any communications tower shall be set back
from a property line a distance equal to the height of the
communications tower.
K. The base of a communications tower shall be landscaped so as to screen
the foundation and base and communications equipment building from
abutting properties and streets.
L. The communications equipment building shall comply with the required
yards and height requirements of the applicable zoning district.
M. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer that a proposed communications tower will be
designed and constructed in accordance with the current Structural
Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association and applicable requirements
of the Township's Building Code.142
N. The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license; the name, address and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the communications
tower; and a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 per
occurrence covering the communications tower and communications
antennas.
O. All guy wires associated with guyed communications towers shall be
clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within
a fenced enclosure.
P. All utilities and wiring for communications towers shall be located
underground or within a building or other enclosure whenever possible.
Q. The site of a communications tower shall be secured by a fence with a
minimum height of six feet to limit accessibility by the general public.
R. No signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications tower, except
as may be required by the Federal Communications Commission,
Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agency which
has jurisdiction.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Art. II, Building Standards.
§ 275-216.1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-216.1
C:900
§ 275-216.2. Purposes of permitting billboards as conditional uses.
[Added 9-14-2009 by 707]
§ 275-216.3. Billboard area and bulk regulations. [Added 9-14-2009
by Ord. No. 707]
The following area and bulk regulations shall govern the regulation of
billboards:
S. Communications towers shall be constructed, protected and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the Township's
Building Code.143
T. If a communications tower remains unused for a period of 12
consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and remove
the communications tower within six months of the expiration of such
twelve-month period.
U. One off-street parking space shall be provided within the fenced area.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this section to recite the purposes of
permitting billboards as conditional uses in the SU-2 Special Use
District and B-2 Major Shopping Center District, subject to the area and
bulk regulations in § 275-216.3 and the standards and criteria for
approval of billboard conditional uses in § 275-216.4 and the general
standards and criteria for approval of conditional uses in § 275-236.
B. The purposes of permitting billboards are:
(1) To support the First Amendment rights of advertisers to promote
legal products and services while retaining the sense of community
and protecting the character of the Township.
(2) To ensure that billboards are provided for in the Township and are
located safely and appropriately where they can be viewed by the
traveling public with the least distraction and degradation in
driving performance.
(3) To place reasonable limits on the size and total number of
billboards within the Township.
(4) To promote the quality, appearance and safety of billboards
through the use of the latest digital technology.
A. The minimum lot size for a billboard shall be 20,000 square feet.
B. Only one billboard shall be permitted on any one lot. The lot shall be
free from all other buildings, structures and improvements, except
those required for the operation, maintenance and security of the
billboard.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Art. II, Building Standards.
§ 275-216.1 CHARTER § 275-216.3
C:901
§ 275-216.4. Standards and criteria for approval of billboard
conditional uses. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 707]
In addition to the standards and criteria for approval of conditional uses
set forth in § 275-236, the following standards and criteria shall apply to a
billboard conditional use:
C. The maximum height of the highest point of the billboard, including its
supporting structure, shall not exceed 35 feet.
D. The minimum lot width at both the street line and the front yard
setback line shall be 100 feet.
E. The minimum setback from the street line shall be 35 feet, and the
minimum setback from all other property lines shall be 25 feet.
F. Billboards shall have no more than two display faces, neither of which
may exceed 150 square feet. The display faces shall be back-to-back
and shall not be more than four feet apart.
G. No billboard shall be located closer than 500 feet to any other billboard,
as measured between the closest points of each billboard, including the
supporting structure.
H. No billboard shall be located closer than 500 feet to any residential
district.
A. No billboard shall be located within the safe clear sight distance or safe
stopping distance of a signalized intersection, which distance shall be
determined in accordance with applicable Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation standards, and no part of a billboard shall interfere with
or obstruct vehicle traffic, travel or ingress and egress to a public
street.
B. All billboards shall be stationary and shall utilize digital technology to
produce static images which may be changeable. Billboards shall not
scroll, flash or twinkle, feature motion pictures, moving images or
moving lights, or have mechanical or animated movement.
C. Only one advertisement, display or message may appear on a billboard
face at any one time. When a billboard has two sides, each of the two
sides of a billboard may contain a separate advertisement.
D. Changes from one advertisement, display or message to another may
occur no more frequently than three times per side in any twenty-fourhour
period and no more than one time per six-hour period, with
transitions that do not have the effect of moving text images or lights.
E. Each face of a billboard shall be demonstrated to be oriented toward
the road upon which the billboard fronts or faces to cause the least
visual impact upon neighboring properties.
§ 275-216.3 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-216.4
C:902
F. The billboard shall not be used to advertise, display or otherwise direct
attention to a product, activity, message or business within the SU-2
Special Use District or B-2 Major Shopping Center District wherein the
billboard is located, except where the advertisement, display, attention
or message is not for the local product, activity, message or business
but is part of an off-site regional or national campaign or program.
G. All billboards shall be internally lit. No exterior lighting shall be
permitted, except in connection with safety or maintenance and as
approved by the Township. Illumination of billboard signs shall, at a
minimum, follow the standards and requirements of the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) and shall be subject to
review and approval by the Township.
H. Where billboards are visible from a residential district or use, the
billboard shall be extinguished automatically by a form of
programmable controller, with Eastern standard time and daylight
saving time control and spring or battery outage reset, from 12:00
midnight until 5:00 a.m. on the following day.
I. Billboards shall be freestanding and selfsupporting. No part or portion
of a billboard shall be attached or connected to any other building or
structure. All utilities serving the billboard shall be located below the
ground.
J. Billboards shall be properly and adequately secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
K. Billboards, including support structures, shall be properly and regularly
maintained and shall at all times be kept in safe and operational
manner.
L. There shall be no objects or other structures attached to a billboard or
its support structure, except as may be necessary for the proper and
safe operation and maintenance of the billboard.
M. A permanent means of vehicular ingress and egress to the billboard lot
shall be provided.
N. It shall be the burden of an applicant wishing to construct a billboard to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section, as well
as those of § 275-236.
O. The provisions of the Middletown Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,144 as amended, shall apply.
P. A bond, or other security acceptable to the Township, in form and
amount satisfactory to the Township, shall be posted with the Township
to ensure that the billboard will be properly removed upon termination
of use for a period of one year.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 275-216.4 CHARTER § 275-216.4
C:903
Q. Billboards shall require a building permit and related permits and shall
be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Building Code145 of the Township of Middletown.
R. To the extent of any conflict between the provisions of this section and
any other section of the Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this section
shall be controlling as to billboards.
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes.
§ 275-216.4 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-216.4
C:904
ARTICLE XXXV
Open Space Provisions146
§ 275-217. Purpose.
These provisions are designed to:
§ 275-218. Required open space. [Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No.
615]
A. Provide an effective means for identifying, organizing and maintaining
open space.
B. Provide for necessary active and passive recreation areas to
complement existing open space and recreational uses.
C. Preserve natural environmental resources and maintain ecological
stability by:
(1) Encouraging the preservation of land contiguous to floodplains and
thus supplementing existing floodplain district regulations;
(2) Limiting the development of steep slopes;
(3) Encouraging the preservation of open areas for groundwater
recharge (aquifers);
(4) Limiting the disruption of existing woodlands;
(5) Encouraging the preservation of land surrounding natural
resources as open space.
D. Encourage the preservation of existing and potential agricultural land,
particularly land with prime agricultural soils.
E. Preserve historic and cultural resources by:
(1) Encouraging the use of historic sites as open space.
(2) Protecting the character of historic and cultural sites and
structures by encouraging the preservation of surrounding land as
open space.
F. Aid in the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan and the
attainment of its goals, objectives and strategies.
A. The provisions of this article are applicable to:
(1) The cluster option where open space is required in the R-1 and R-2
Districts.
146. Note: These provisions are intended to establish interrelated use regulations,
performance standards and design and locational criteria for all designated open space
land. Designated open space is land, as shown on a developer's plan, to be held in
perpetuity for recreational use or other open space purposes.
§ 275-217 CHARTER § 275-218
C:905
§ 275-219. Use regulations.
Land designated as open space may be used for any of the following
purposes and no other:
(2) The association with townhouses and apartments in the R-4 and R-5
Districts.
(3) Common open space in the PRD Districts.
(4) Designated open space within a mobile home park in the SU-2
Overlay District.
B. Open space shall be provided in subdivisions and land developments in
accordance with §§ 210-40 and 210-41 of Chapter 210, Subdivision and
Land Development.
A. Permitted principal open space uses:
(1) Conservation uses including woodlands and other natural areas
such as grassland, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams and floodplains.
(2) Agricultural uses, including cropland, pasture, silvaculture and
nurseries.
(3) Passive recreational uses such as parks and natural trails.
(4) Active recreational uses including playing fields and playgrounds.
(5) Planted areas used for visual screening purposes and noise control.
(6) Presently existing structures may be used only in connection with
the open space.
B. Conditional open space uses when approved by Township Council are
as follows. The design of all recreational buildings and structures must
be compatible with the character of the surrounding area, other open
spaces and the development as a whole. An architect's or landscape
architect's analysis of the compatibility of the proposed design, siting,
materials and colors should accompany all applications for conditional
use approval.
(1) Bridges.
(2) Signs which are accessory to permitted open space uses. Whenever
reasonably possible, signs should be placed outside of designated
open space areas (also, see Article XXXII, Signs).
(3) Boundary fences and walls.
(4) Recreational structures.
C. Accessory uses:
§ 275-218 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-219
C:906
§ 275-220. Calculating open space areas.
The following are limitations on land which can be counted for the purposes
of determining compliance with open space requirements:
§ 275-221. Delineating open space areas.
(1) No new parking facilities shall be located in designated open space
areas.
(2) Retail sales of agricultural products, including those grown or
raised on the premises, shall not be located in designated open
space areas.
A. The surface area of existing bodies of water, areas with seasonal high
water table soils as designated in the soil survey, utility easements,
rights-of-way, buffer areas to be used for permanent sedimentation and
erosion control or stormwater management facilities shall not be
counted.
B. When land with slopes of 15% or more is designated as open space, only
1/2 of such land may be counted, provided that only one-quarter of the
land with slopes of 25% or more may be counted.
C. When land which is in the floodplain, as described in Article XXIX, is
designated as open space, only one-quarter of such land may be
counted.
D. No area within 100 feet of an area used for retail sales of agricultural
products, whether or not grown or raised on the premises, shall be
counted. Such retail uses include all accessory parking areas.
E. Any parking areas accessory to a noncommercial use in a designated
open space area.
A. Locational criteria. Land designated for open space must be suitable for
the proposed open space use. The location and proposed use of land
designated to meet open space requirements must be shown on a
preliminary and final subdivision and land development plans and on
planned residential development plans.
B. In planning a development, land with the following characteristics
should be given a high priority for designation as open space:
(1) Land contiguous to floodplains, as described in Article XXIX, or as
depicted on the Flood Hazard Map;
(2) Important farmlands as defined by the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service, including prime farmlands and farmlands of
statewide importance, identified in the Comprehensive Plan;
(3) Areas with steep and very steep slopes as depicted on the Steep
Slope Conservation District Map;
§ 275-219 CHARTER § 275-221
C:907
§ 275-222. Design standards. [Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 615]
The open space designated within a development area shall not be only
left over or otherwise unusable land. Such open space areas shall be laid
out according to sound site design principles and shall provide appropriate
access for residents and occupants of the development. Open space
designated to meet minimum open space area requirements must meet the
following design standards:
(4) Prime woodlands, as defined by the Pennsylvania Office of State
Planning and Development, and stands of trees where the majority
of trees are greater than 12 inches in caliper;
(5) Land surrounding surface water resources such as lakes, ponds,
streams and springs;
(6) Significant groundwater recharge areas (aquifers);
(7) Land surrounding historic and cultural sites and structures
including:
(a) Residential, farm and other structures on sites on, or
candidates for, the National Register of Historic Places, the
Pennsylvania Inventory of Historic Places or the Historic
Building Survey;
(b) Sites and/or structures identified as being historically or
culturally significant in the Comprehensive Plan;
(8) Lands already used for various passive or active recreational
purposes and land surrounding such areas.
A. Minimum contiguous area. A designated open space parcel shall have a
contiguous area of not less than 1/2 acre.
B. Minimum parcel width. An open space parcel shall have a minimum
width of 30 feet at all points and a minimum average width of 50 feet.
C. Maximum impervious coverage. Not more than 5% of the total
designated open space area shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
D. Minimum setback.
(1) New property lines shall be located so that any recreational or
historic buildings or existing structures within the designated open
space shall be no less than 50 feet from any lot line created by the
proposed subdivision.
(2) New structures, including recreational structures, but not signs,
boundary fences, walls, benches, light standards and landscaping,
shall have a setback of at least 100 feet from all property lines.
E. Minimum active recreational area.
§ 275-221 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-222
C:908
§ 275-223. Open space ownership and maintenance.
(1) At least 25% of the required open space shall be designed,
improved and maintained for playgrounds, or other active
recreational facilities, unless the applicant or developer pays the
recreational fee in lieu thereof, in accordance with § 210-40 of
Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Areas within a development designated as open space for
recreational use shall be contiguous to the developed area and not
separated from it by existing roads, railroads, or public ways unless
safe pedestrian access can be demonstrated. Whenever practical,
such recreational uses shall be proposed on a single parcel, or
minimum number of parcels, linked by a common means of
circulation and access.
(3) Whenever practical, designated open space shall be arranged to
supplement other designated open space or similar areas on
adjacent properties, either by providing direct contact or some
common means of circulation and access. In open space areas,
provision of pedestrian pathways, to be available for general public
use, is encouraged, where appropriate, in order to create an
interconnected open space network throughout the Township.
A. The developer shall restrict the open space areas so that their use will
be limited to the use which is proposed and insure that it will be
appropriately maintained in perpetuity. The developer shall also
identify who will own the open space.
B. The Township Solicitor shall review the open space ownership and legal
method used to insure compliance with the provisions and shall
determine whether it is effective. It is important to the Township that
the open space owner be financially responsible and have both the
means and incentive to pay the taxes and maintain the property.
C. The following are some specific criteria applicable to alternative
methods for restricting open space use:
(1) Fee simple dedication. The Township may, but shall not be required
to, accept an offer of a deed of dedication, provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township.
(b) The Township shall be reimbursed for all costs pursuant to the
transfer of ownership.
(c) The Township will have access to the open space.
(d) The Township may require a maintenance escrow and a title
certificate.
(2) Homeowners' association: the establishment of a nonprofit
homeowners' association. Such an association may dedicate an
§ 275-222 CHARTER § 275-223
C:909
easement for public use of the open space land. The Township
Council may, but shall not be required to, accept such an easement
if an agreement is reached concerning the scope of public use and
the future maintenance of the easement area.
(3) Condominium agreement. The open space may be controlled
through the use of condominium agreements. All open space land
so controlled shall be held as "common element."
(4) Dedication of easements. The Township may, but shall not be
required to, accept easements for public use of any portion of open
space land, provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township.
(b) The Township incurs no cost pursuant to the transfer.
(c) There is a satisfactory maintenance agreement with the owner
of the open space.
(5) Transfer to a private conservation organization. With permission of
the Township Council, the landowner or developer may transfer
either the fee simple title with appropriate deed restrictions
running in favor of the Township, or the development rights or
easements, to a private, nonprofit organization among whose
purposes are to conserve open space land, provided that:
(a) The organization is acceptable to the Township Council and is a
bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence.
(b) The organization is chartered under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to administer deed restrictions
limiting eventual disposition of such property for the purposes
stated in their Articles of Incorporation.
(c) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for reversion
of title in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or
unable to continue to function.
D. If a homeowners' association is formed, it shall be governed according
to the following regulations:
(1) The landowner or developer shall provide Township Council with
the legal framework for the association, including its bylaws and
methods for maintaining open space, which shall be acceptable to
the Township Solicitor.
(2) The association is to be organized by the landowner or developer
and operating before the sale of any lots within the development.
(3) Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of
dwelling units therein and their successors.
§ 275-223 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-223
C:910
(4) The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining the open spaces. If a member fails to pay his pro rata
share, then a lien against an individual property may be made in
accordance with the provisions for same in the bylaws of the
organization.
(5) The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance
and taxes on open space.
(6) The association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the open space to the satisfaction of
the Township Council.
(7) The association shall have the authority and ability to promptly
correct hazard conditions in the open space areas.
E. The Township shall have the right and the documents creating the
association and shall acknowledge that in the event that the association
established to own and maintain open space, or any successor
organization, shall at any time after designation fail to maintain the
open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with any
and all approved plans, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization or upon the residents and owners, setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the open space
in reasonable condition; and said notice shall include a demand that
such deficiencies be cured within 30 days thereof and shall state the
date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 days
of the notice.
(1) At such hearing, Township Council may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of
the time within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set
forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof shall not
be cured within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the
Township, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties
and to prevent the open space from becoming a public nuisance,
may enter upon said open space and maintain the same for a period
of one year at the expense of the organization. The cost of any such
maintenance shall be borne by the owners of lots within the
development from which the open space was derived. Said entry
and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
open space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the
public by the residents and owners.
(2) Before the expiration of said year, Township Council shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization thereto before
responsible for the maintenance of the open space, call a public
hearing upon notice to such organization, or to the residents and
owners of the project, to show cause why such maintenance by the
Township shall not, at the election of the Township, continue for a
succeeding year. If the Township shall determine that such
§ 275-223 CHARTER § 275-223
C:911
organization is ready and able to maintain said open space in
reasonable condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said
open space at the end of said year. If the Township shall determine
such organization is not ready and able to maintain said open space
in a reasonable condition, the Township may, at its discretion,
continue to maintain said open space during the next succeeding
year and subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each
year thereafter. The decision of the Township, in any such case,
shall constitute a full administrative decision subject to judicial
review at the expense of the homeowners' association.
(3) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the project that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space and shall become a municipal lien on
said properties. The Township, at the time of entering upon said
open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of
such lien in the office of Judicial Support of Delaware County, upon
the properties affected.
F. The landowner of any subdivision or land development which is
proposed to contain open space or common open space shall, when
applicable, arrange with the Delaware County Board of Assessment a
method of assessment of the open space which will allocate to each tax
parcel in the development a share of the total assessment for such open
space.
§ 275-223 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-223
C:912
ARTICLE XXXVI
Administration
§ 275-224. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 1-8-1990 by
Ord. No. 461]
A. There shall be a Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed by the Township
and be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter. The Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications established by the
Township and shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township
experience and a working knowledge of municipal zoning, subdivision
and land development standards and construction principles. The
Zoning Officer shall not hold any elected office in the Township. The
duties of the Zoning Officer shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Enforce all provisions of this chapter and all amendments thereto.
(2) Receive, examine record and file all applications and fees for
building permits and issue building permits only for any use which
conforms to this chapter.
(3) Refer applications for special exceptions to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(4) Issue permits for construction of uses requiring a special exception
or variance only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board. Permits
requiring approval by the Township Council shall be issued only
after receipt of an authorization from the Township Council.
(5) Following refusal of a permit, receive applications for
interpretation appeals and variances and forward these
applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.
(6) Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter.
(7) Issue stop, cease and desist orders and order, in writing, correction
of all conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter. Such written orders shall be served personally or by
certified mail upon persons, firms or corporations deemed by the
Zoning Officer to be violating the terms of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any such order lawfully issued by
the Zoning Officer, and any person violating such order shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(8) Keep an official record of all business and activities, including
complaints of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and
of the subsequent action taken on each such complaint.
(9) Maintain or cause to have maintained a map or maps showing the
current zoning classifications of all land in the Township.
§ 275-224 CHARTER § 275-224
C:913
§ 275-225. Requirements for zoning permits. [Amended 5-24-2004
by Ord. No. 652; 10-25-2004 by Ord. No. 656]
§ 275-226. Application for zoning permits. [Amended 5-24-2004 by
Ord. No. 652]
(10) Identify and register all nonconforming uses and nonconforming
structures created as a result of the adoptions of this chapter or
created as a result of amendments thereto.
(11) Issue use and occupancy permits in accordance with the terms of
this article.
(12) Make such reports as the Township Council may require.
A. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the use or change in use of a
building or land and prior to the change or extension of a
nonconforming use and for the followings structures if the structure has
a building area of 1,000 square feet or less and is accessory to a
detached one-family dwelling.
(1) Carport.
(2) Detached private garage.
(3) Greenhouse.
(4) Shed.
B. A zoning permit shall be required for an agricultural building as defined
by the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act of 1999, No. 45.147
C. A zoning permit shall be required for manufactured or industrialized
housing certified by the manufacturer to conform to applicable federal
and state construction and safety standards, as identified in Section 901
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act of 1999, No. 45.
D. Applications for permits shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning Officer
on such forms as may be furnished by the Township. Such application
shall contain all information necessary for the Zoning Officer to
ascertain whether the proposed erection, alteration, use or change in
use complies with the provisions of this chapter.
A. An application for a zoning permit shall be made, in writing, by the
landowner or his authorized agent on forms furnished by the Township
and shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale, showing the
exact size and location of any buildings or other structures existing on
the subject lot and the setback lines within which the proposed building
or other structure shall be erected or altered and the location of any
easements or rights-of-way existing on the lot. In addition, there shall
be included with the application such other plans, documents and
147. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 275-224 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-226
C:914
§ 275-227. Issuance of zoning permits. [Amended 5-24-2004 by Ord.
No. 652]
Zoning permits shall be granted or denied within 30 days after the written
application has been filed with the Zoning Officer.
§ 275-228. Requirement for use and occupancy permit. [Amended
1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
§ 275-229. Applications for use and occupancy permits. [Amended
1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
All applications for use and occupancy permits shall be made, in writing, by
the landowner or his authorized agent on forms furnished by the Township
and shall include all information necessary to enable the Zoning Officer to
ascertain compliance with this chapter.
information as may be necessary to enable the Zoning Officer to
ascertain compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent
ordinances, codes and regulations.
A. Upon completion of the erection or alteration of any building or portion
thereof authorized by any permit and prior to occupancy or use, the
holder of such permit shall notify the Zoning Officer of such completion.
No permit shall be considered complete or permanently effective until
the Zoning Officer has certified that the work has been inspected and
approved as being in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
other applicable ordinances and regulations, including permits by other
agencies.
B. A use and occupancy permit shall be required prior to any of the
following:
(1) Use and occupancy of any building or other structure hereafter
erected or altered, for which a building permit is required.
(2) Change in use of any building or other structure or any part
thereof.
(3) Use of land or change in the use thereof, except that the placing of
vacant land under cultivation shall not require a use and occupancy
permit.
(4) Change in use or extension of a nonconforming use.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any building or
other structure or land until a use and occupancy permit, if required,
has been duly issued.
§ 275-226 CHARTER § 275-230
C:915
§ 275-230. Issuance of use and occupancy permits. [Amended
1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
No use and occupancy permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has
certified that the proposed use complies with all the provisions of this
chapter and all other ordinances, regulations and codes of Middletown
Township; provided, however, that a temporary use and occupancy permit
may be issued by the Zoning Officer for a period not exceeding six months
during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion,
provided that such a temporary permit requires any needed conditions and
safeguards which will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
§ 275-231. Issuance or refusal of permits.
If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an application is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his/her duty to
issue the appropriate permit, and, if he/she determines that an application
is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his/her
duty to refuse the permit, in which case, he/she shall instruct the applicant
in the method of appeal or application to the Zoning Hearing Board or the
Township Council, whichever is applicable. No permit shall be issued to any
applicant until any and all fees incurred, which are payable to the Township,
are paid in full.
§ 275-232. Fees. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
§ 275-233. Enforcement notice. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No.
461]
A. The Township Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and collection procedures for building permits,
occupancy permits, sign permits, special exceptions, variances,
appeals, conditional uses, amendments and others pertaining to this
chapter.
B. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Officer
and may be altered or amended only by the Township Council.
C. No action shall be taken on any application for any special exception,
variance or appeal until all application fees, charges and expenses have
been paid in full.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of any provision of this
chapter occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings
by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state the following:
§ 275-230 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-233
C:916
§ 275-234. Causes of action. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Township Council
or, with the approval of the Township Council, an officer of the Township
or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by
serving a copy of the complaint on the Township Council. No such action
may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 275-235. Enforcement remedies. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No.
461]
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provision
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of a provision of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township as
a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
§ 275-233 CHARTER § 275-235
C:917
§ 275-236. Standards and criteria for approval of conditional uses
by Township Council and special exceptions by Zoning Hearing
Board.
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that
there was not such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge,
and, thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgment, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
collected for the violation of the ordinances shall be paid over to the
Township.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
granting to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
A. In evaluating an application before the Township Council for a
conditional use or before the Zoning Hearing Board for a special
exception, the Council and the Board shall require the applicant to
provide reports, maps, plans and other related papers to ensure that
the proposal:
(1) Will be consistent with the community development objectives
articulated in this chapter (pursuant to Section 606 of the
Municipalities Planning Code148).
(2) Will be consistent with the statement of purpose articulated for the
district in which the use is proposed.
(3) Will be consistent with the Middletown Township Comprehensive
Plan and, in particular, the plans for land use, community facilities,
utilities and the map depicting areas of environmental concern.
(4) Will conform to all requirements of Chapter 210, Subdivision and
Land Development, and all other applicable ordinances, codes or
regulations.
(5) Will not adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of
the surrounding area and the Township.
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10606.
§ 275-235 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-236
C:918
(6) Will promote the harmonious and orderly development of the
zoning district involved.
(7) Will be compatible with the character and type of development
existing in the area which surrounds the site in terms of the size,
scale, height and bulk of the proposed uses and the size, shape and
placement of buildings and other structures.
(8) Will not detract from or cause harm to neighboring properties by
creating a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the
community.
(9) Will be compatible with the uses permitted in the surrounding area
in terms of the density and/or intensity of land use.
(10)Will reflect effective site planning and design in terms of energy
efficiency, environmental protection and aesthetic composition.
(11)Will be reflective of sound engineering and land development
design and construction principles, practices and techniques.
(12)Will be consistent with the logical, efficient and cost-effective
extension of public services and utilities and will not adversely
affect the public services and utilities of surrounding properties of
the Township, as a whole, in terms of public water, sewers, police
and fire protection and schools.
(13)Will include proposals for the effective disposal of solid waste.
(14)Will provide safe and efficient access to roads and will not create
traffic congestion, hazardous traffic conditions or excessive traffic
volumes.
(15)Will be developed so as to limit the number of access points along a
major public street and to develop frontage of buildings on access
roads which are parallel or perpendicular to a major public street.
(16)Will provide any improvements needed to guarantee compatibility
with adjoining roads.
(17)Will provide continuity of existing circulation systems including
roads, sidewalks, trails and other walkways.
(18)Will provide adequate off-street parking and loading which will be
minimally visible from adjoining public streets.
(19)Will utilize effective stormwater management techniques and soil
erosion and sedimentation control techniques which are in
character with and complementary to the proposed site grading
and landscaping.
(20)Will provide for adequate environmental controls and performance
standards to minimize noise, vibration, glare, heat, odor, smoke,
§ 275-236 CHARTER § 275-236
C:919
§ 275-237. Procedures for special exceptions and conditional uses.
[Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
dust, fumes, vapors, gases, air emissions, water emissions and
outdoor storage.
(21)Will preserve, to the maximum extent possible, woodlands and
other trees existing at the site.
(22)Will not be disruptive to existing topography, surface water
resources and groundwater resources.
(23)Will include proposals for effective mitigation of potential adverse
environmental impacts through a satisfactory environmental
impact assessment report.
(24)Will provide landscaping to buffer and screen the use from
surrounding properties, to complement buildings and other
structures on the site and to enhance the overall character of the
development.
(25)Will include proposed landscaping, in addition to that required as
stated above, in areas such as the entrance, along property
boundaries, in areas which are highly visible such as along roads,
walks or trails and in other places where the use of trees, shrubs
and ground cover would be functional and appropriate.
(26)Will provide fencing, walls, berming, terraces, walkways and other
site improvement features to complement the proposed
landscaping.
(27)Will provide effective, subdued lighting using light posts and
fixtures complementary to the proposed architecture and the
character of the surrounding properties.
B. The Township Council and the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those already required by this
chapter, as they may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the
Municipalities Planning Code and this chapter and to protect the public
welfare, which conditions and safeguards may relate to, but are not
limited to, the design of buildings, roads and parking areas,
landscaping and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen, lighting,
noise, safety and the prevention of noxious, offensive or hazardous
conditions.
C. Conditional uses or special exceptions related to the Floodplain
Conservation District, Steep Slope Conservation District or other
districts shall also be evaluated in accordance with additional standards
and criteria set forth in the provisions for the respective districts.
D. Special exceptions shall also be evaluated in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXXIV.
§ 275-236 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-237
C:920
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be governed by the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, and
Article XXXIV.
B. In the case of an application for conditional use, the Planning
Commission shall perform a review and provide counsel to the
Township Council concerning the grant of approval or disapproval of
the proposed use. Such review shall be conducted and a written report
submitted to the Township Council within 45 days of the date of the first
Planning Commission meeting following the date of the complete
details of the plan have been filed. The Planning Commission shall
discuss the application at at least one of its regularly scheduled public
meetings during the review period.
C. The Township Council shall, in the case of an application for conditional
use, schedule a hearing for public review and comment pursuant to
public notice as defined in Article II of this chapter. Should the
Township Council deem it necessary, a second public hearing shall be
held, at which time the public record may be enlarged. Within 90 days,
the Township Council, at a regularly scheduled meeting or special
meeting, shall take action to either approve or disapprove the use.
D. The Planning Commission and Township Council shall be responsible
for providing notification to the applicant, no less than 20 days prior to
the occurrence of any hearing at which testimony will be heard and/or
action taken upon approval or disapproval in order that he/she may
present his/her case at such hearing. Subsequent to the receipt of such
notification, the applicant shall be responsible for notifying, no less
than 10 days prior to such hearing, all abutting property owners.
E. Proof of proper notification shall be required as a precondition before
any formal action on the application.
F. Notification of the action taken by the Township Council shall be made,
in writing, to the applicant. In the event of disapproval, it shall be
accompanied by a statement of the reasons therefor. In the event of
disapproval, the applicant may file a new application for conditional use
or for subdivision and/or land development for another use of the
subject property.
G. In the event of conditional use approval, should the applicant fail to
obtain all the necessary final plan approvals and building and related
permits within 12 months of notification or, having obtained the
necessary approvals and permits, fail to commence work thereunder
within six additional months, it shall be conclusively presumed that the
applicant has waived, withdrawn or abandoned his/her appeal or
application, and all provisions, conditional uses(s) and permits granted
to him/her shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the Township
Council. If the Township Council finds that a good reason exists for the
failure to comply with the time periods specified above, an extension
may be granted.
§ 275-237 CHARTER § 275-237
C:921
H. The grant of approval by the Township Council for a conditional use
shall in no way release the applicant from his/her obligation to comply
with the applicable provisions of this chapter, Chapter 210, Subdivision
and Land Development, or any other applicable Township, state and
federal regulations.
I. All notices, hearings and orders shall be made or shall occur in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
§ 275-237 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-237
C:922
ARTICLE XXXVII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 275-238. Creation of Board.
A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby established by the Township Council
in accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,149 as amended. Hereinafter, as used in this
article, the term "Board" shall refer to the Zoning Hearing Board, and
the term "Planning Code" shall refer to the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 275-239. Membership and organization of Board. [Amended
1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
A. The membership of the Board shall consist of five residents of the
Township appointed by the Township Council. Their terms of office shall
be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
shall expire each year; provided, however, that if a three-member Board
is changed to a five-member Board, the members of the existing threemember
Board shall continue in office until their term of office would
expire under their current appointment and Township Council shall
appoint two additional members to the Board with terms scheduled to
expire in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term of the member whose seat was vacated. [Amended
3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 620]
B. The Township Council may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of this section,
an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law
for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers
and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided by law.
Alternates shall hold no other office in the Township, including
membership on the Planning Commission and Code Enforcement
Office. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of
the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor
be compensated pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code unless
designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to this section.
C. Removal of members. Any Board member may be removed for cause by
a majority vote of the Township Council, taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it, in writing.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 275-238 CHARTER § 275-239
C:923
§ 275-240. Functions of Board. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
D. Organization of Board.
(1) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board. As
provided for by the Planning Code, the Board may appoint a
hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on
its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the Board as
provided in § 275-242 below. [Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No.
620]
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board shall adopt rules and forms for its
procedure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held at the call of
the Chairman and at such other times as the Zoning Hearing Board
may determine. Such Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting
Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be open
to the public.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in
the office of the Township Manager and shall be a public record.
(4) Once a year, the Zoning Hearing Board shall submit a report of its
activities to the Township Council.
(5) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of member, a quorum is
not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many
alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be
needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board
shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the
matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until
the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made
on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority
among all alternates.
(6) Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Township Council,
the Board shall employ or contract for secretaries, clerks,
attorneys, consultants and other technical and clerical services.
However, the Solicitor for the Zoning Hearing Board shall be a
different individual and from a different firm than the Solicitor for
the Township Council.
§ 275-239 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-240
C:924
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Challenge to the validity of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear challenges to the validity of
the Zoning Ordinance or Map as follows:
(a) A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge
the validity of the ordinance or map or any provision thereof
which prohibits or restricts the use of development of land in
which he has an interest shall submit the challenge to either
the Zoning Hearing Board or the Township Council.
(b) Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the
land of another by the ordinance or map or any provision
thereof who desire to challenge its validity shall:
[1] Submit their challenge pursuant to the Sections 909.1 and
609.1 of Act 247,150 as amended by Act 170.
(c) In addition to the procedures set forth in Section 916.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code,151 in all such challenges, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall decide all contested questions and
shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact and of
interpretation and submit such findings as part of the record
on appeal to the court.
(2) Substantive challenges to the validity of this chapter, except those
brought before the Board pursuant to Sections 609.1 and
916.1(a)(2) of Act 247,152 as amended by Act 170.
(3) Challenges to the validity of this chapter raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or
adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken
within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance.
(4) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor or the issuance of any cease-and-desist
order.
(5) Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of the Flood
Hazard District provisions of this chapter.
(6) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code.153
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1 and 10609.1.
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
153. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 275-240 CHARTER § 275-240
C:925
§ 275-241. Hearings and decisions. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No.
461]
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the requirements of the Planning Code and any pertinent provisions of this
chapter or the Rules of the Board:
(7) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of this chapter or provision thereof
with reference to sedimentation and soil erosion control and
stormwater management, insofar as the same relate to
development.
(8) Requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of this
chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant, subject to
the standards prescribed by law and contained in § 272-243 below.
(9) Requests for special exceptions where this chapter states that a
special exception may be granted or denied by the Board in
accordance with express standards and criteria contained in this
chapter.
(10) In granting any variance or special exception, the Board shall
comply with the provisions and standards of § 275-243 below and
Article XXXVI.
A. Upon the filing of an appeal with the Board, an application for a special
exception or variance from the terms of this chapter or a challenge, the
Board shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon, subject to
the provisions of the Planning Code, and shall give notice thereof in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection E below.
B. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no
decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board; but the
parties may waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the
decisions or findings of the hearing officer as final. The parties to the
hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by the application
who has made timely appearance or record before the Board and any
other person including civic or community organizations permitted to
appear by the Board.
C. The Chairman, Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties. The parties shall have the right to be represented by
counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present
evidence and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. At
the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
§ 275-240 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-241
C:926
D. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings; and a transcript of the
proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in
evidence shall be made available at cost to any party requesting such
materials.
E. Notice requirements. In any case where the Zoning Hearing Board shall
hold a public hearing, the Board shall, at the minimum, give notice of
such hearing as follows, which notice shall state the time and the place
of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered
at the hearing:
(1) By publishing a notice thereof once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township,
provided that the first publication shall be not more than 30 days or
less than 14 days from the date of the hearing.
(2) By mailing or delivering due notice thereof to the applicant and
other parties in interest, who shall be at least those persons whose
properties adjoin the property in question, to the Township Council,
the Township Manager, the Chairman of the Township Planning
Commission and to every association of residents of the Township
who shall have registered their names and addresses for this
purpose with the Zoning Hearing Board for the current year.
(3) Notice of hearings, both published and written, shall state, in
addition to the time, place and purpose of the hearing, the location
of the lot, tract or structure involved and the nature and extent of
the relief sought and the general nature of the question involved.
Notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted at least one
week prior on the affected tract of land. The hearing shall be held
within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request, unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
F. Notice of decision.
(1) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer, subject to all additional
requirements of the Planning Code. Where the Board has power to
render a decision and the Board or the hearing officer, as the case
may be, fails to render the same within the period required by the
Planning Code, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered
in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing,
to an extension of time.
(2) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or
§ 275-241 CHARTER § 275-241
C:927
§ 275-242. Zoning appeals.
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
(3) Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a special exception or
variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building
permit within one year from the date of authorization thereof. The
opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board shall set forth the date on
which relief granted shall expire.
(a) The applicant shall have the right to seek an extension of the
one-year limitation for a period not to exceed one additional
year by making application to the Zoning Hearing Board at
least 30 days prior to the expiration date set forth in the Zoning
Board opinion or decision. A hearing shall be thereafter
promptly scheduled to hear evidence on the application for an
extension.
(b) The filing of the application and the hearing thereon shall be
advertised and notice given as provided in the Municipalities
Planning Code for other applications before the Zoning
Hearing Board. Applications for a one-year extension shall be
granted unless opposition is registered in person or by letter.
(c) At the time of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider whether the evidence presented demonstrates a
change of circumstances which has occurred since the time
relief was originally granted and whether such change in
circumstances would have an adverse impact on the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of
Middletown. Evidence offered by the applicant at the prior
hearing shall be received into evidence as prima facie proof of
the applicant's right to relief.
(d) In no event shall the Zoning Hearing Board extend the relief
granted more than one time. The relief granted is void, not
voidable, two years beyond the date relief was first granted.
A. Appeals before Zoning Board and to court. All appeals, applications or
challenges which properly come before the Board in accordance with
the requirements of the Planning Code and all appeals to courts shall be
subject to the time limitations and requirements of Article X and any
other applicable provision of said code. Appeals and proceedings to
challenge an ordinance may be filed with the Board, in writing, by the
landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Township or any person
aggrieved. Requests for a variance and for special exception may be
filed with the Board by any landowner or any tenant with the
permission of such landowner.
§ 275-241 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-242
C:928
§ 275-243. Standards for variances and special exceptions.
In any instance where the Zoning Hearing Board is required to consider
a special exception or variance in the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Board shall, among other
things, consider the following standards:
B. Time limitations. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with
the Board later than 30 days after any application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by the appropriate Township
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal
or to limit the approval in any manner, unless such person alleges and
proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest
after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest.
A. In the case of a variance:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such generally created by the provisions of this
chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located;
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property;
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development or adjacent property, not be detrimental to the
public welfare; and
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In the case of a special exception, the Board shall consider all standards
and criteria as set forth in Article XXXIV and the following matters in
determining whether or not the proposed special exception is
appropriate and in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
ordinance:
§ 275-242 CHARTER § 275-243
C:929
(1) The size, scope, extent and character of the exception desired.
(2) The character and type of development in the area surrounding the
location for which the exception is desired.
(3) Whether or not the proposed exception would be an appropriate
use in the area or whether it would be detrimental to the
surrounding area.
(4) The zoning classification of the area affected.
(5) The number, extent and scope of nonconforming uses, if any, in the
area.
(6) The anticipated future development of the area.
(7) The effect, if any, of the proposed exception on other properties in
the area.
(8) Whether or not the proposed exception would affect the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the residents in
the surrounding area.
(9) The effect of the proposed exception on traffic in the area and the
nature of the surrounding traffic conditions, so that appropriate
regulations may be imposed on any proposed uses to provide for
off-street parking either equal to or greater than the off-street
parking facilities required within the area by any other then
applicable ordinance.
(10) Whether the special exception authorized will represent the
minimum modification to use the area requirements to afford
necessary relief.
(11) The effect of the proposed exception upon the logical, efficient and
economical extension of public services and facilities such as public
water, sewers, police, fire protection and schools.
C. In granting any variance or special exception, the Board may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of the Planning Code and Zoning Ordinance, which conditions
and safeguards may relate to, but are not limited to, the harmonious
design of buildings, planting and its maintenance as a sight or sound
screen, lighting, noise, safety and the minimizing of noxious, offensive
or hazardous elements.
D. In the case of a special exception or variance, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to present such evidence as is necessary
to demonstrate that the proposed use or modification complies with the
pertinent criteria and standards set forth in this section.
§ 275-243 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-244
C:930
§ 275-244. Physical requirements for granting special exceptions.
The following are specific physical requirements governing the granting of
special exceptions:
A. Private school, parochial school, school dormitory, church, religious
use, philanthropic use, hospital or sanitarium for human beings not
heretofore erected or established shall provide for adequate off-street
parking in the rear or at the sides of the building to accommodate its
staff, visitors or persons in any way accommodated or using the
grounds and buildings of such institutions.
B. Nonprofit club, lodge, public stable or riding academy in Residential
Districts shall be permitted only under the following limitations: Where
the club or organization proposes the operation of a swimming pool, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall determine whether or not appropriate
arrangements are made for the following items, and if so, shall impose
conditions and restrictions with respect to:
(1) Location of pool and buildings such as club, change or pump house
on tract;
(2) Hours of operation;
(3) Off-street parking facilities;
(4) Lighting;
(5) Amplification system;
(6) Landscaping;
(7) Sanitary and safety regulations and noise control;
(8) Allied activities;
(9) Number of members;
(10) Drainage regulations;
(11) Regulations governing water supply;
(12) Operation of pool including requirements for lifeguard, watchman
or supervision; and
(13) Such other regulations as may be determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
C. With respect to all other clubs, lodges, public stables or riding
academies, the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine whether or not
appropriate arrangements are made for the following items and if so
shall impose conditions and restrictions with respect to:
(1) Location of the buildings;
§ 275-244 CHARTER § 275-244
C:931
(2) Hours of operation;
(3) Off-street parking facilities;
(4) Lighting;
(5) Landscaping;
(6) Sanitary and safety regulations and noise control;
(7) Allied activities;
(8) Drainage regulations;
(9) Screening and planting to avoid unnecessary interference with
enjoyment of adjoining premises; and
(10) Such other regulations as may be determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
D. Public garage, motor vehicle sales, service or repair shop, gasoline
service station and motor vehicle parking lot:
(1) No body and fender vehicle sales, service or repair shop, gasoline
service station and motor vehicle parking lot.
(2) Major repair and sales of automobiles shall not be permitted in
gasoline service stations.
(3) Lights must be shielded so that they do not reflect toward adjacent
residential properties.
(4) If such premises are adjacent to any other premises used or zoned
for residential purposes, any special exception, if granted, shall be
conditioned upon the applicant and/or the owner or owners of such
premises to provide, construct, plant and maintain appropriate
walls, shrubbery, plantings or other landscaping necessary to
provide reasonable, adequate screening along such portions of said
premises as are adjacent to residential areas.
E. Golf courses. Where the applicant seeks the operation of a golf course
as a special exception, such use may be permitted on a tract of land
which complies with the minimum area and other requirements for
such uses in OR Outdoor Recreation Districts, in Articles XVI and XVII,
provided that all of said land is devoted and committed exclusively for
golf purposes, and the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine whether
or not appropriate arrangements are made with respect to:
(1) Location of golf course on tract as well as location of clubhouse and
parking facilities;
(2) Hours of operation;
(3) Off-street parking facilities;
§ 275-244 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-244
C:932
§ 275-245. Fees and charges. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 461]
(4) Outside lighting;
(5) Outside amplification system;
(6) Allied activities;
(7) Number of members;
(8) Drainage regulations; and
(9) Such other regulations as may be determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
A. When any person, firm or corporation shall appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board or shall apply to the Zoning Board for a variance and/or
special exception, each such application and/or appeal, as the case may
be, shall be accompanied by the payment of an application fee, which
shall be payable to the Township of Middletown. Said fee shall be in
accordance with the Township fee schedule and be used by the
Township of Middletown to defray the costs for each hearing held in
connection with the application and/or appeal. The fee for all other
applications to the Zoning Hearing Board relating to zoning, including
challenges to the Zoning Ordinance or Map, shall be governed by the
Township fee schedule.
B. Fees are to be used to defray costs such as:
(1) The appearance fee for a stenographer, which shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by
the Board or shall be paid by the person appealing from the
decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and, in either event,
the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting
such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the
original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
(2) Advertising required by law for hearing or hearings.
(3) Postage and photocopy costs incurred by the Township of
Middletown.
(4) Salaries of Township Council or Zoning Hearing Board members in
attendance at hearing or hearings, as the case may be.
(5) Such other reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the
Township Council or Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be, in
connection with the application or appeal. The costs, however, shall
not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board, expenses
for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or
expert witness costs.
§ 275-244 CHARTER § 275-245
C:933
C. In the event that a hearing on an application or appeal is conducted by
the Township Council or the Zoning Hearing Board on the same date as
another hearing or hearings which are subject to the provisions of this
section and there are costs incurred by the Township which are not
assignable to one particular application or appeal, said common costs
shall be prorated by the Township among the various applicants in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code and other applicable
law.
D. In the event that the costs set forth above exceed the payment made to
the Township as required by this section, said applicant shall, upon
demand by the Township, make payment to the Township of such
additional costs as have been or will be incurred by the Township in
connection with the application or appeal.
E. In the event that the total costs payable to the Township authorized
therein do not exceed payment or payments made by an applicant to the
Township, the balance shall be returned to the applicant at the
conclusion of the application or appeal.
§ 275-245 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-245
C:934
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Amendments
§ 275-246. Authority.
The Township Council may from time to time amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map, by amending
the ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this section. In the case of a
curative amendment submitted by a landowner, the special requirements of
Section 609.1154 and Article X155 of the Planning Code shall apply, as well as
all other applicable provisions of the Planning Code and of this article.
§ 275-247. Amendment procedures. [Amended 1-8-1990 by Ord. No.
461]
A. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Township
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice as
defined by this chapter.
B. At least 30 days prior to the Township Council's hearing on a proposed
zoning amendment, the Council shall submit:
(1) Any amendment other than one prepared by the Township Planning
Commission to the Township Planning Commission in order to
provide the Commission with an opportunity to submit its
recommendations prior to final action;
(2) A copy of any proposed amendment to the County Planning
Department. Whenever the Township Council has adopted a
Comprehensive Plan or any part thereof, the recommendations of
the County Planning Department shall include a specific statement
as to whether or not the proposed action on any zoning amendment
is in accordance with the intent of the formally adopted portion of
said Comprehensive Plan; and
(3) If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice
of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Township along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at
least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
C. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is revised or further revised to include land previously not
affected by it, the Township Council shall hold another public hearing
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1
155. Editor's Note: Said article was repealed 12-21-1988 by P.L. 1329, No. 170; see now 53 P.S.
§ 11001-A.
§ 275-246 CHARTER § 275-247
C:935
§ 275-248. Amendment standards.
D. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance shall be forwarded to the County Planning Department.
A. All amendments should be decided in accordance with the following
standards to ensure that:
(1) The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the article
whereby it is permitted, the overall purpose of the zoning as
contained in Article I and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(2) The proposed use will satisfy all of the relevant provisions and
requirements of Chapter 210, Subdivision and Land Development,
and any other applicable codes, ordinances and/or regulations.
(3) The proposed use and its location are consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) There is a demonstrated need for the proposed use and the use is in
the best overall interest of the Township. (The applicant or
petitioner shall have the burden of proof to so demonstrate.)
(5) That the proposed use will contribute to the maintenance of the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Township.
(6) The proposed use is consistent with the nature of the uses existing
on any immediately adjacent properties and it will not detract from
or cause harm to neighboring properties and will be maintained in
a manner in keeping with the character of the neighborhood.
(7) The proposed use is consistent in concept and design with other
amendments for which approval has been heretofore granted.
(8) The proposed use is consistent with the logical extension of public
services and will not measurably affect the public services and
utilities of the surrounding properties.
(9) If the use is one which traditionally adheres to some unique
location criteria, the site for which the use is proposed is not one
which obviates such criteria.
(10) Any proposed construction will be consistent with good design
principles and sound engineering and land development practices
and is in keeping with the character of any existing construction
within the neighborhood.
(11) The proposed use will provide safe and adequate access to roads
and public services (existing or proposed) and will not result in
excessive traffic volumes or will make any improvements needed to
guarantee compatibility with adjacent roads and public services.
§ 275-247 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-248
C:936
(12) The proposed use has provided for adequate sanitation.
(13) The proposed use will provide for adequate screening as required
under Article XXXIV or otherwise specified by the Township
Council, parking according to Article XXXI, signage according to
Article XXXII and all environmental controls according to Article
XXXIII.
(14) The proposed use will conform with all standards and criteria as set
forth in Article XXXVI regarding conditional uses.
§ 275-248 CHARTER § 275-248
C:937
Appendix
Chapter A281
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television — See Ch. 81.
§ 275-248 MIDDLETOWN CODE § 275-248
C:938
ARTICLE I
Comcast of Southeastern Pennsylvania, LLC Franchise Agreement
[Adopted 8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 750156]
§ A281-1. Grant of franchise.
The Township Council does hereby approve the attached cable franchise
agreement157 and related side letter negotiated with Comcast, including all
of the terms and conditions contained therein, and does hereby authorize
the execution of such agreements.
156. Editor's Note: This ordinance also supersedes former Art. I, Comcast Cablevision of
Southeast Pennsylvania, Inc. Franchise Agreement, adopted 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 645.
157. Editor's Note: The franchise agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ A281-1 CHARTER § A281-1
C:939

ARTICLE II
Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc. Franchise Agreement
[Adopted 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 645]
§ A281-2. Grant of franchise.
The Township Council of the Township of Middletown does hereby approve
and adopt the cable franchise agreement158 and related side letters
negotiated with Verizon, including all of the terms and conditions contained
therein, and does hereby authorize the execution of such agreements.
158. Editor's Note: The franchise agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ A281-2 CHARTER § A281-2
C:941
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1976 Code to 2009 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2009 Code
Ch. I, Administration and Government
Article 1, Officers
101, Township Manager REP
Article 2, Commissions, Boards and
Authorities
201, Township Planning Commission Superseded by Ord. No.
221
202, Sewer Authority Ch. 8, Art. I
Article 3, Fringe Benefits
301, Social Security REP
Article 4, Environmental Advisory Council
401, Environmental Advisory Council
Regulations
Ch. 23
Ch. II, Taxation
Article 1, Mercantile Tax Ch. 215, Art. I
Article 2, Business Privilege Tax Ch. 215, Art. II
Article 3, Enforcement and Collection
Procedures
Ch. 215, Art. III
Article 4, Reality Transfer Tax Ch. 215, Art. IV
Ch. III, Licenses and Permits
Article 1, Business Licenses
101, Peddling Ch. 167
102, Garbage or Refuse Haulers License See Ch. 192, Art. I
Article 2, Permits
201, Highway Construction Permit Ch. 204, Art. II
202 - 210, Reserved
§ A281-2 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DT-1
C:942
Chapter/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2009 Code
211, Erosion, Sediment and Stormwater
Control
Superseded by Ord. No.
654; see Ch. 186
Article 3, Cable Television and
Communications
Ch. 81
Article 4, Cable TV Franchise Ch. A281
Ch. IV, Nuisances
Article 1, Animals Ch. 63
Article 2, Vegetation Ch. 266
Article 3, Littering Ch. 148
Article 4, Motorized Vehicles, Models and
Toys
Superseded by Ord. No.
422; see Ch. 161
Article 5, Firearms Ch. 112
Article 6, Keeping of Animals See Ch. 63
Article 7, Noise Ch. 155
Ch. V, Streets, Sidewalks and Alleys
Article 1, Construction Regulations Ch. 204, Art. I
Article 2, Traffic Regulations Ch. 235
Article 3, Parking Regulations Ch. 235
Ch. VI, Public Utilities and Services
Article 1, Garbage and Refuse
101, Collection and Disposal of Refuse Ch. 192, Art. I
102, Junkyards Ch. 139
Article 2, Sewers
201, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Regulations
Ch. 180, Art. I
202, Connection Fees and Sewer Charges Ch. 180, Art. II
Article 3, Water
301, Connection Requirement for Water
District No. 5
Ch. 242, Art. I
Article 4, Municipal Recycling Program Ch. 192, Art. III
Article 5, Municipal Solid Waste Disposal Ch. 192, Art. II
Article 6, Wastewater Treatment Ch. 180, Art. IV
Ch. VII, Public Safety
Article 1, Building Code Ch. 89, Art. II
Article 2, Plumbing Code Ch. 89, Art. III
Article 3, Fire Prevention Code Ch. 89, Art. IV
§ DT-1 CHARTER § DT-1
C:943
Chapter/Title From 1976 Code Location in 2009 Code
Article 4, Electrical Code Superseded by Ord. No.
653; see Ch. 89, Art. I
Article 5, Firearms REP
Article 6, Holding Tanks Ch. 180, Art. III
Article 7, Automatic Protection Device
Regulations
Ch. 60
Article 8, Township Park and Recreation
Areas
Ch. 161
Ch. VIII, Subdivision and Land Development Ch. 210
Ch. IX, Zoning Ch. 275
Ch. X, Enforcement
Article 1, Procedures and Penalties Ch. 1, Art. I
Article 2, Validity REP
Article 3, Repeal of Inconsistent Ordinances REP
Ch. XI, Health Code
Article 1, Food Establishments Ch. 127
Article 2, Public Bathing Places Ch. 67
Administrative Code Ch. 4
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
696 8-25-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
697 9-8-2008 Street acceptances NCM
698 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
699 11-10-2008 Administration of government
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Chs. 4; 235
700 11-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235
701 11-24-2008 Connection fees and sewer
charges amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
702 1-5-2009 2009 tax rates NCM
§ DT-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
C:944
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
703 4-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235
704 5-11-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
705 7-27-2009 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 89, Art. IV
706 7-27-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 192, Art. III
707 9-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
708 9-28-2009 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
709 12-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
710 1-11-2010 2010 tax rates NCM
711 3-22-2010 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 210
712 5-24-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
713 5-24-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
714 6-28-2010 Bond NCM
715 11-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
716 11-22-2010 Connection fees and sewer
charges amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
717 11-22-2010 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
718 1-3-2011 2011 tax rates NCM
719 6-17-2011 Street vacation NCM
720 7-25-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
721 11-14-2011 General obligation bonds NCM
722 12-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
723 12-12-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
724 1-3-2012 2012 tax rates NCM
725 1-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
726 1-23-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
727 3-26-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
728 4-9-2012 Administration of government
amendment
Ch. 4
729 5-24-2012 Construction codes: adoption
of standards amendment
Ch. 89, Art. I
730 7-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235
731 8-27-2012 Stormwater management Ch. 189
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:945
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
732 10-22-2012 Construction codes: adoption
of standards amendment
Ch. 89, Art. II
733 11-26-2012 Accepting deed of dedication
for parcel of land
NCM
734 12-10-2012 Connection fees and sewer
charges amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
735 1-7-2013 2013 tax rates NCM
736 2-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
737 3-25-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
738 4-22-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
739 8-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235
740 8-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235
741 11-25-2013 Local services tax Ch. 215, Art. V
742 12-9-2013 Connection fees and sewer
charges amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
743 12-23-2013 Land conservation easement
amendment
NCM
744 12-23-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
745 1-6-2014 2014 tax rates NCM
746 2-24-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
747 6-23-2014 Bond NCM
748 7-14-2014 Sewer Authority Articles of
Incorporation amendment
Ch. 8, footnote
only
749 8-11-2014 Bond NCM
750 8-25-2014 Comcast of Southeastern
Pennsylvania, LLC franchise
agreement
Ch. A281, Art. I
751 10-27-2014 Right-of-way and easement
agreement
NCM
752 11-10-2014 Easement agreement NCM
753 11-24-2014 Connection fees and sewer
charges amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
754 1-5-2015 2015 tax rates NCM
755 2-9-2015 Accepting deed of dedication
for land and public
improvements
NCM
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
C:946
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
756 4-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235
757 4-27-2015 Sunoco pipeline easement NCM
758 8-24-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
759 9-14-2015 Authorization to purchase
certain property
NCM
760 11-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
761 11-9-2015 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 198
762 11-23-2015 Sewers: connection fees and
sewer charges amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
763 1-11-2016 2016 tax rates NCM
764 1-11-2016 Amendment to 2015 budget NCM
765 1-11-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
766 2-22-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
767 4-25-2016 Municipal solid waste disposal
amendment
Ch. 192, Art. II
768 9-26-2016 Sunoco pipeline easement NCM
769 9-26-2016 Authorization to purchase
certain property
NCM
770 9-26-2016 Authorizing lease rental debt
for sewer project
NCM
771 9-26-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
772 1-3-2017 2017 tax rates NCM
773 1-3-2017 Budget amendment NCM
774 1-3-2017 Sewers: connection fees and
sewer charges amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
775 2-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 235
776 4-24-2017 Authorization to purchase
certain property
NCM
777 4-24-2017 Acceptance of road right-ofway
NCM
778 7-10-2017 Acceptance of land dedication NCM
779 7-24-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
780 7-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
781 7-24-2017 Acceptance of easement NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:947
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
782 7-24-2017 Transit Revitalization
Investment Area Project Plan
NCM
783 8-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
784 8-28-2017 Granting of easements NCM
785 8-28-2017 Street acceptance NCM
786 8-28-2017 Street acceptance NCM
787 8-28-2017 Street acceptance NCM
788 12-11-2017 Granting of Easements NCM
789 12-11-2017 Sewers: Connection Fees and
Sewer Charges Amendment
Ch. 180, Art. II
790 1-2-2018 2018 Tax Rates NCM
791 3-26-2018 Granting Authority to Acquire
Easements
NCM
792 6-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 235
793 6-11-2018 Accepting Deed of Dedication NCM
794 6-25-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
795 9-10-2018 Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 186; Ch. 275
796 10-22-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
797 10-22-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
798 11-12-2018 Purchase of Land NCM
799 1-7-2019 Tax Levy NCM
800 2-11-2019 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 4
801 2-11-2019 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 4
802 2-11-2019 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 4
803 2-25-2019 Purchase of Property NCM
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
804 6-10-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 20
805 6-10-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275 20
§ DL-1 MIDDLETOWN CODE § DL-1
C:948
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
806 6-10-2019 Bond NCM 20
807 6-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275 20
808 7-8-2019 Project Approval NCM 20
809 9-9-2019 Bond NCM 20
810 2-10-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275 21
811 9-23-2019 Peddling and
Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 167 20
812 10-14-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 235 20
813 12-9-2019 Stormwater
Management
Ch. 198 21
814 12-9-2019 Grading and
Excavating
Amendment
Ch. 186 21
815 1-27-2020 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 21
816 12-9-2019 2020 Tax Rates NCM 21
817 Pending
Adoption
818 6-8-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 235 21
819 Pending
Adoption
820 4-1-2020 2019 Taxation Filing
Extension
NCM 21
821 4-27-2020 2019 Taxation Filing
Extension
NCM 21
822 6-8-2020 Weeds and
Vegetation
Amendment
Ch. 266 21
823 6-8-2020 Tree Maintenance Ch. 220 21
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:949

MIDDLETOWN TOWNSHIP
DELAWARE COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
ORDINANCE NO. 817
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE MIDDLETOWN TOWNSHIP CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF MIDDLETOWN, DELAWARE COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, CHAPTER 275, ZONING,
ARTICLE II TERMINOLOGY, BY DELETING THE EXISTING DEFINITION OF INTERIOR LOT AND
ADDING NEW DEFINITIONS FOR FLAG FRONT LINE, FLAG LOT, INTERIOR LOT, EXISTING INTERIOR
LOT AND PARENT TRACT; AND AMENDING CHAPTER 275, ZONING, ARTICLE XXXIII GENERAL
PROVISIONS BY DELETING SECTION 275-199.D(1), (2), (3) AND (4) RELATING TO COMMON
DRIVEWAYS FOR INTERIOR LOTS IN ITS ENTIRETY AND REPLACING IT WITH A NEW SECTION 275-
199.D (1), (2), (3), (4) RELATING TO EXISTING INTERIOR LOTS AND SECTION 275-199.E (1), (2),
(3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) RELATING TO REGULATIONS FOR FLAG LOTS AND INTERIOR LOTS.
The Council of the Township of Middletown, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, hereby
ENACTS AND ORDAINS the following amendments to the Code of Ordinances of the Township of
Middletown:
Section 1.
The Middletown Township Code of Ordinances, Chapter 275, Zoning, Article II Terminology is
hereby amended by deleting the existing definition of Lot, Interior, and adding definitions for the
following terms:
Flag Front Line: A line which is parallel to the public street from which a flag lot gains access;
extends the full width of such flag lot; and intersects the point nearest such public street at which
the flag lot first achieves a width equal to 75% of the applicable lot width requirement.
Lot, Flag: A lot which is connected to a street by an access strip of required minimum width at
the street line per the applicable zoning district. Minimum lot area and other dimensional
requirements shall be met on that portion of the lot exclusive of the minimum access strip.
Lot, Existing Interior: A lot existing as of the date of this Ordinance with an existing separate Tax
Folio Number, which meets all of the R-1 or R-1A Residential District Zoning regulations except
the minimum lot width at the street line.
Lot, Interior: A lot created through the subdivision process, after the date of this Ordinance,
which does not front on a street and has access to a street only by way of an easement or rightof-way.
Parent Tract: the area of land from which parcels are subdivided.
Section 2.
The Middletown Township Code of Ordinances, Chapter 275, Zoning is hereby amended by
deleting the existing Section 275-199.D (1), (2), (3) and (4) in its entirety and replacing it with 275-
199.D and 275-199.E as follows:
D. The following regulations shall apply to Existing Interior Lots:
For one or two Existing Interior Lots, a common driveway may be provided subject to compliance
with the following requirements:
(1) A private driveway providing public street access to one or two Existing
Interior Lots shall have a recorded easement right-of-way of 50 feet in width and a paved
cartway of not less than 16 feet in width. The paved cartway shall have a minimum
setback of 50 feet from any existing dwelling. The fifty-foot-wide easement shall be
unobstructed by any building.
(2) A private driveway providing access to a public street for the one or two
Existing Interior Lots may also provide access for one lot which must have a minimum lot
width at the street line as specified for the residence zoning district in which the lot is
located.
(3) In order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of persons
residing in dwellings on lots adjacent to a private driveway providing public street access
to an Existing Interior Lot or lots, buffer planting strips shall be provided within the
easement area at appropriate locations to prevent the headlights of motor vehicles using
the private driveway from shining directly on any dwelling or dwellings on any adjacent
lots or lots. The buffer planting area shall be in accordance with Article XXXIV.
(4) If an Existing Interior Lot exceeds the Lot Area required for the residence
zoning district in which the lot is located, the Existing Interior Lot may not be further
subdivided to create any additional Interior Lots and the owner of the Existing Interior Lot
shall record a restriction against further subdivision of the Existing Interior Lot.
E. The following regulations shall apply to Flag Lots and Interior Lots:
(1) Flag lots and Interior Lots shall be permitted only within the R-1 and R-1A residential
districts and shall be subject to all regulations of this section and the applicable district
regulations.
(2) Flag lots and Interior Lots shall be permitted within a subdivision when no other
reasonable alternative can be achieved.
(3) No more than one Flag Lot and one Interior Lot may be created from a Parent Tract.
(4) The access strip serving any Flag Lot shall have a minimum width of 50 feet at the
street line and shall not exceed 300 feet in length, as measured from the street right-ofway to the Flag Front Line.
(5) The Flag Lot access strip shall be excluded from the required minimum lot area (net
lot area) calculation imposed by the district regulations. 
(6) The private driveway providing access to a public street for one Flag Lot may also share
a driveway with any lot which fronts completely on the street. The recorded easement
shall not be less than 25 feet in width and a paved cartway of not less than 12 feet in
width. The paved cartway shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from any existing
dwelling and be a minimum of four feet from a property line. The 25-foot-wide easement
shall be unobstructed by any building or structure.
(7) If a subdivision of a Parent Tract results in the creation of an Interior Lot, the access
easement to the Interior Lot shall be 50 feet in width and must have a paved cartway
which is constructed in accordance with the design standards for streets as set forth in
the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The paved cartway shall
have a minimum setback of 25 feet from any existing dwelling and be a minimum of four
feet from a property line. The 50-foot-wide easement shall be unobstructed by any
building or structure.
Section 3.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any courts of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render this
Ordinance invalid.
Section 4.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby superseded to the extent
of any inconsistency with any provision contained herein.
Section 5.
This Ordinance shall be effective thirty-one (31) days after its enactment.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Council of Middletown Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, this 13th day of July 2020 at a regularly scheduled public meeting.
TOWNSHIP OF MIDDLETOWN
ATTEST: TOWNSHIP COUNCIL
_________________________ By: ____________________________
Vince Visoskas Mark Kirchgasser
Acting Township Manager Chairman of Council

ZONING
275 Attachment 3
Township of Middletown
Appendix A
SU-1-A Mixed Use District
Design Standards
December 23, 2011
Table of Contents
Section
1: Design Standards Introduction
2: Overall Design Goals and Objectives
3: Land Use Plan
4: Architectural Character
5: Building Materials
6: Retail and Supermarket Facades
7: Architectural Design of Parking Structures
8: Sidewalks, Crosswalks & Trails
9: Curbing
10: Landscaping and Buffers
11: Surface Parking Lot Lighting Requirements
12: Baltimore Pike Streetscape Requirements
13: Outdoor Dining
14: Open Space
15: Waste Receptacles and Planters
16: Dumpsters and Enclosures
275 Attachment 3:1 12 - 01 - 2017
MIDDLETOWN CODE
Section 1: Design Standards Introduction
These Design Standards are intended to ensure that mixed use development and redevelopment
within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District is accomplished in a manner that provides for high
quality buildings and other physical features that can become an amenity for Middletown.
Contained within the Design Standards are regulations governing building materials,
landscaping, buffers, open space, lighting, sidewalks and pedestrian amenities which will shape
the form of development.
These standards are intended as a supplement to Ordinance No. 725, governing the SU-1-A
Mixed Use District. The standards are not intended to supersede any existing Building Code or
Fire Code regulations which relate to life/safety issues.
Township Council shall have the right to modify any of the design requirements contained
herein upon demonstration by the applicant that an alternative design provides an equal or
better result.
Section 2: Overall Design Goals and Objectives
The overall Design Goals and Objectives of the SU-1-A Mixed Use District are outlined below:
A. To guide future development and redevelopment within the SU-1-A Mixed Use
District;
B. To protect and preserve historical and cultural resources while integrating these
resources into the neighborhood through adaptive reuse.
C. To encourage mixed uses to maximize opportunities for pedestrian movement to,
from, and within a development.
D. To promote and create livable transportation alternatives.
E. To enhance the community setting through the unified use of materials, landscaping
and lighting.
F. To create a streetscape along Baltimore Pike.
G. To protect and preserve natural open space.
Section 3: Land Use Plan
A. Development within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District shall be generally consistent
with the Land Use Plan attached as Exhibit "A" to these Design Standards. The Land
Use Plan depicts the types of uses permitted within different areas of the SU-1-A
Mixed Use District, the general locations of streets and accessways, the general
traffic circulation pattern, and the potential future connection to adjacent properties.
275 Attachment 3:2 12 - 01 - 2017
ZONING
Section 4: Architectural Character
A. The architectural style of development within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District shall be
designed to be generally consistent with the character of the surrounding community.
B. Architectural diversity is required in order to provide visual interest and some
distinctive character to each building. Diversity should include changes in materials,
colors, proportion, form, and scale.
C. The use of architectural detailing is required to provide scale and interest to the
buildings. Building façade articulation and parapets to screen roof-top elements are
required. Other detail elements such as awnings, railings (except where required by
Code), parapets, balconies, recessed entries and arcades are encouraged.
Section 5: Building Materials
The relationship and use of materials, textures, details, and color of a new building's facade
should be visually compatible with façades of adjacent buildings.
Exterior building materials shall be composed of one (1) dominant facing material and not more
than two (2) additional materials. The dominant material shall comprise sixty (60%) percent or
greater of each building elevation (not including fenestration). The fronts of all buildings and
all sides facing public streets must have an Architectural appearance. On all facades, the
heavier (physically or aesthetically) material shall be located below the lighter material.
A. Exterior building materials may include:
1. Horizontal lap, wood or composition board siding (such as vertical wood board
and batten)
2. Brick
3. Stone (including manufactured stone, cultured stone or cast stone)
4. Pre-cast Masonry
5. Split Faced Block
6. Glass
7. Smooth stucco
8. Architectural metal panels
9. Vinyl Siding (residential buildings only)
275 Attachment 3:3 12 - 01 - 2017
MIDDLETOWN CODE
10. EIFS, limited to 90%
B. Exterior building materials may not include:
1. Un-faced Concrete Block
2. Highly Reflective Glass
3. Textured Exterior Plywood
4. Unfinished Concrete
5. Aluminum Siding
Section 6: Retail and Supermarket Facades
Special attention should be given to the architecture of the buildings to ensure that the buildings
are in keeping with the scale and character of the other buildings within the development.
A. Features such as piers, pilasters, paneling, corbelling and/or other crenellation-type
elements of articulation are encouraged.
B. Other enhancements such as material and color variation, façade articulation in the
form of pilasters, offsets/projections, and recesses shall be required on the fronts of
the buildings and all sides facing public streets.
Section 7: Architectural Design of Parking Structures
A parking structure, being a building or structure of two or more stories used for the parking of
motor vehicles. Special attention should be given to the architecture of parking structures to
ensure that such structures are compatible with adjacent buildings.
A. Parking structures shall have the following minimum dimensional standards:
1. Dimensional standards.
Angle of
Parking Space
Width of
Parking Space
Depth of
Parking Space Aisle Width
Total Parking
Module
60, one-way aisle 8 feet 6 inches 18 feet 6 inches 16 ft. 53 ft.
60, two-way aisle 8 feet 6 inches 19 feet 17 ft. 55 ft.
90, two-way aisle 8 feet 6 inches 18 ft. 24 ft. 60 ft.
2. Columns of a combined dimension of two feet may protrude into the module
dimension.
275 Attachment 3:4 12 - 01 - 2017
ZONING
B. Parking structures shall be compatible in color, form and quality with the
architectural details of adjacent buildings.
C. Parking structures shall conceal views of parked cars from public streets and public
spaces.
D. Signage and light sources internal to the parking structure should not be visible from
outside the parking garage. Lighting, particularly on parking decks, should not
illuminate or produce glare to adjacent properties.
Section 8: Sidewalks, Crosswalks, & Trails
Sidewalks are the principal place of pedestrian movement and provide the means of connecting
uses within a development and along Baltimore Pike. Every development within the SU-1-A
Mixed Use District shall be required to have a sidewalk along the length of its frontage on
Baltimore Pike.
A. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four and one-half (4½) feet in width with a
predominantly textured or broom finish.
B. Whenever a sidewalk is interrupted by a street, road or accessway, a crosswalk shall
be articulated with a minimum width of six (6) feet.
C. Nature trails are a critical means of providing for use of natural open space. Where
existing nature trails exist within undeveloped areas of the SU-1-A Mixed Use
District, such nature trails shall be preserved.
Section 9: Curbing
Curbing is critical for channeling pedestrian and vehicular movement as well as for grading and
stormwater management.
A. Curbing shall be installed and maintained where necessary to protect and channel
pedestrian and vehicular movement, and/or to contain grades and/or direct
stormwater.
B. Curbing shall be provided throughout a mixed use development, along streets and
access drives, and within and around parking areas except where recharge
opportunities exist and will not conflict with safe pedestrian and vehicular movement.
C. Curb cuts shall be installed to promote barrier-free access, and to accommodate
pedestrians with disabilities, in accordance with ADA requirements.
275 Attachment 3:5 12 - 01 - 2017
MIDDLETOWN CODE
Section 10: Landscaping and Buffers
A. Extensive and well designed and maintained landscaping is the first sign of a quality
community and one of the most critical elements in softening the appearance of those
areas where parking, pavements, and service areas predominate.
B. Landscaping shall be used to soften views of buildings, screen sections of buildings,
parking areas, storage areas, service areas, site utilities, and similar spaces.
Landscaping should take into consideration existing and proposed topography and
existing vegetative conditions.
C. In addition to the specific landscaping standards for surface parking lots and streets
contained in these Design Standards, other landscaping, including trees, shrubs and
groundcovers shall be provided along all walkways, at the entrance to the site and
other highly visible locations, at the entrance to buildings, and around structures for
service, storage or maintenance purposes. Trees and shrubs shall be grouped in
accordance with specific needs and objectives.
D. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with an Overall
Landscaping Plan to be submitted as part of a preliminary land development plan
application.
E. Buffer areas shall be required as follows:
1. On parcels on which the existing Franklin Mint buildings are located, a
minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be provided along Baltimore Pike and along
the rear property line.
2. On all other parcels within a Tract, a minimum buffer of 25 feet shall be
provided along Baltimore Pike, Pennell Road, and along the rear property line.
3. Buffer yards shall comply with the following standards:
A. The buffer yard shall be measured from the right-of-way line of
Baltimore Pike and/or Pennell Road. [Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
771]
B. The buffer yard may be part of the required front, or rear yards.
C. All buffer yards shall be planted with trees, shrubs, grasses and/or
ground covers and shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris,
rubbish, weeds and tall grass in conformance with existing regulations;
provided, however, if such land is naturally wooded, it may continue in
its natural state.
D. Except as provided in Subsection E.3.E. of this Section 10, no
structures, manufacturing or processing activity or storage of materials
275 Attachment 3:6 12 - 01 - 2017
ZONING
shall be permitted in the buffer yard. [Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 771]
E. Buffer areas shall be required as follows: [Amended 9-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 771; 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 780]
For the residential portion of the Mint Parcel within the Tract, benches,
retaining walls, lighting standards, sidewalks, fencing, underground
utilities, signs, ground-level parking, interior roads and streets,
including appurtenant structures associated with interior roads and
streets and ground-level parking, such as curbs and curb stops, other
structures associated with the Baltimore Pike Streetscape Requirements
set forth in Section 12 of Appendix A to Chapter 275 shall be
permitted in the buffer yard. Stormwater management structures shall
also be permitted within the required buffer.
For the Pennell Parcel, the Granite Parcel and the nonresidential
portion of the Mint Parcel within the Tract, the following shall be
permitted in the required buffer yard: (i) roads and driveways which
provide direct ingress/egress for the Tract, including appurtenant
structures within such road rights-of-way, such as curbs, sidewalks,
signs, lighting standards and benches, shall be permitted in the buffer
yard; (ii) in the case of buildings occupied by municipal or
governmental uses, driveways which provide supplemental access and
parking areas which provided supplemental parking, including
appurtenant structures such as curbs, sidewalks, signs, lighting
standards, flagpoles and benches; and (iii) stormwater management
structures.
F. Complete plans showing the arrangement of all buffer yards and the
placement, species and size of all plant materials and the placement,
size, materials and types of fences to be placed in such buffer yard
shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plan submission and final
plan submission.
F. Surface Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements
1. All off-street parking areas which provide more than five (5) parking spaces
shall be screened from any abutting property or adjacent roadway. Effective
screens may be accomplished through the use of plant materials, fencing or
walls and/or mounding through the use of an earthen berm(s) forming a
continuous visual screen.
2. The area for fencing, walls or earthen berms shall not extend into clear sight
triangles or block sight distances. No off-street parking facilities shall be
located within twenty (20) feet of the curb/cartway edge of Baltimore Pike and/
or Pennell Road. No off-street parking facilities shall be located within ten (10)
feet of the curb/cartway edge of any interior road or accessway.
275 Attachment 3:7 12 - 01 - 2017
MIDDLETOWN CODE
3. Where the Tract abuts a residential zoning district, no off-street parking
facilities shall be located closer than 20 feet to the property line unless the
parking area is fully screed by landscaping and/ or a fence.
4. When planting screens are employed, a planting strip of at least eight (8) feet in
width shall be provided. Sidewalks shall be permitted within the area of the
planting screen.
5. At all intersections of streets, roads and/or access drives low level landscaping
shall not be greater than twenty-four (24) inches in height and tree canopies
should not extend below nine (9') feet within the clear sight triangle of any
intersecting streets, roadways and/or access drives.
6. Whenever earthen berms are employed the effective height of the continuous
visual buffer shall be no less than five (5) feet in height, except within the clear
sight distance of any intersecting streets, roadways and/or access drives.
7. Off-street surface parking lots shall be landscaped: to reduce wind and air
turbulence, heat and noise and the glare of automobile lights; to reduce the
level of carbon dioxide; to provide shade; to ameliorate stormwater drainage
problems; and to provide for a more attractive setting.
8. Each off-street surface parking area providing access to more than five (5)
parking spaces shall have a minimum of one (1) two to two and one-half (2 to
2½) inches caliper shade tree for every five (5) parking spaces, if there are no
existing shade trees. Shrubs, groundcovers and other plant materials are
encouraged to be used to complement the trees but shall not be the sole
contribution to the landscaping. The landscaping and planting areas shall be
reasonably dispersed throughout the parking lot and around the perimeter of the
parking lot. If there is insufficient room for the placement of the required
number of trees throughout and around the parking lot, the trees may be placed
at alternative locations within the Tract.
9. Landscaped islands within surface parking lots shall be provided to enhance the
appearance of the parking area and to control access and movement. Landscape
islands shall be provided at the end of each parking bay and no more than
twenty (20) consecutive parking stalls are permitted without the installation of
a landscape island. Landscape islands shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in
width and extend the full length of the stalls. All landscape islands within a
parking lot shall be surfaced with groundcovers and/or dwarf shrubs. Grass and
mulch may be used as surface materials along with shrubs and groundcovers.
Shredded hardwood mulch shall only be used beneath the shrubs and
groundcover and to form the plant saucers.
10. Landscape strips may be provided in lieu of interior landscape islands between
bays of either ninety degree (90º) or angle parking. When landscape strips are
used in the design, the length of the end islands shall extend to the full length
275 Attachment 3:8 12 - 01 - 2017
ZONING
of the parking stalls inclusive of the width of the landscape strip. Landscape
strips shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width, exclusive of sidewalks. A
minimum of one (1) tree shall be provided for every sixty (60) feet of length of
the landscape strip. All landscape strips within a parking lot shall include
groundcovers and/or dwarf shrubs. Grass and mulch may be used as surface
materials along with shrubs and groundcovers. Shredded hardwood mulch shall
only be used beneath the shrubs and groundcover and to form the plant saucers.
SECTION 11: SURFACE PARKING LOT LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS
A. All parking lot areas shall be adequately lighted with lighting fixtures of such quality
and type and with such shielding as will not present direct glare to any adjoining lot
or residential area.
B. All driveways providing access to parking areas providing five (5) or more parking
spaces shall be adequately illuminated using the same illumination criteria as
required on the adjacent/bordering street(s), unless adequate illumination is provided
by the parking lot lighting itself.
C. All lighting within parking areas for five (5) or more parking spaces shall be directed
in such a way as not to create a nuisance, and all such lighting shall be arranged so as
to protect the street or highway and adjoining property(ies) from direct glare or
275 Attachment 3:8.1 12 - 01 - 2017
ZONING
hazardous interference of any kind. All lighting sources shall be effectively shielded
and shall be installed and/or aimed so as to shield nearby public or private streets and
neighboring properties from direct glare, light radiation, or light pollution which may
create a safety hazard or a nuisance.
D. All lighting fixtures shall meet IES cut-off criteria, except for decorative lighting,
which shall be full cut-off. No lighting shall be permitted which shines directly into
residential units, or results in glare beyond an angle of 30º from a vertical plane,
measured from the light source.
E. Lamp types and lamp colors shall be consistent with the adjacent street and
pedestrian areas, and shall be consistent with the task and setting.
F. The outdoor pole-mounted illumination for the interior of parking areas providing
twenty (20) or more spaces shall be a design that best satisfies the lighting
illumination levels specified herein, by IES standards, and recommended practices
and also controls glare which might otherwise be visible from adjacent properties or
streets.
G. Illumination levels - All parking lot illumination shall have intensities and uniformity
ratios consistent with the standards in the current edition of the Lighting Handbook
and/or Recommended Practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IES) and as set forth below. "Illumination levels" shall be defined as
maintained horizontal footcandles on the task/ground level area, and average
illumination values shall not exceed minimum values by more than the product of the
minimum value and the specified IES uniformity ratio for the use/task in question.
H. Illumination levels and uniformity ratios for all parking areas are as follows:
Use Maintained
(MFC) Footcandles Uniformity Ratio
Parking: Multi-Family
Residential Vehicular/
Pedestrian Activity
0.2 - 0.6 (min.) 4:1
Parking: Retail Commercial 0.9 (min.) 4:1
Parking: Hotel/Offices/
and Civic/Governmental
0.6 (min.) 4:1
Non-Residential Walk-Ways 0.5 (avg.) 5:1
I. In no case shall illumination exceed 0.2 footcandle measured at the Tract boundary or
at property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided further that the amount of
illumination projected onto a residential zoned property or use shall not exceed 0.1
footcandle at the property line.
J. In no instance shall the height of any light source exceed the following:
275 Attachment 3:9 12 - 01 - 2016
MIDDLETOWN CODE
1. The height of any light source at an off-street parking lot for twenty (20) or
more spaces shall not be more than forty (40) feet.
2. The height of any light source at an off-street parking lot for less than twenty
(20) spaces shall not be more than thirty (30) feet; and
3. The height of any light source at the top (open to the sky) level of any parking
structure shall not be more than sixteen (16) feet.
Section 12: BALTIMORE PIKE STREETSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Street trees, planting strips and other forms of landscaping are required along Baltimore Pike to
promote a cohesive "green" streetscape.
A. Continuous sidewalks and crosswalks shall be provided along Baltimore Pike
frontages.
B. Surface parking lots adjacent to Baltimore Pike shall be screened with hedges, berms
and/or walls.
C. No less than one (1) two to two and one-half (2 to 2½") inch caliper tree shall be
planted for each fifty (50) feet of roadway length.
D. Deciduous trees shall be used as street trees and deciduous and evergreen trees and
shrubs shall be used in other areas.
E. Street trees shall be selected from the approved list from the Pennsylvania
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
F. Street trees shall have enough canopy height to provide clear passage for pedestrians
and shall not interfere with visibility within each clear sight triangle.
G. Benches shall be installed along the Baltimore Pike Streetscape at an interval of no
more than 250 feet on center.
H. Pedestrian-scaled ornamental street lights shall be installed along the Baltimore Pike
Streetscape. Pedestrian-scaled ornamental street lights shall be no greater than 24 feet
in height.
H. All Baltimore Pike Streetscape improvements shall be dedicated to the Township and
shall be owned and maintained by the Township.
Section 13: Outdoor Dining
Outdoor dining areas shall be permitted, subject to the following:
275 Attachment 3:10 12 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
A. Outdoor dining shall be located on a smooth, paved surface (poured-in-place
concrete, brick pavers, other unit pavers) with a maximum gradient cross-slope of
approximately 2 to 3%.
B. Accessory structures such as tables, chairs, umbrellas and waster receptacles shall be
positioned to enable maximum pedestrian circulation and enjoyment, and shall not
block entry/exit doors or pedestrian movement along the building frontage. Serving
stations, busing stations and/or hostess stations shall be positioned and maintained in
a safe and clean manner.
C. At least four feet six inches (4' 6" of clear sidewalk area (clear of tables, chairs,
planters, etc.) shall be maintained for the passage of pedestrians.
D. Convenience stores may have an outdoor seating patio.
Section 14: Open Space
Open Space within the SU-1-A Mixed Use District shall be designed to:
A. Encourage the preservation of natural environmental resources such as woodlands,
wetlands and waterways, and maintain ecological stability by:
1. Encouraging the preservation of land contiguous to floodplains and thus
supplementing existing floodplain district regulations;
2. Limiting the development of natural steep slopes;
3. Encouraging the preservation of open areas for groundwater recharge
(aquifers);
4. Limiting the disruption of existing woodlands;
5. Encouraging the preservation of land surrounding natural resources as open
space.
B. Encourage the linkage of open space land to existing contiguous open space areas;
C. Encourage the preservation of existing view sheds;
D. Encourage the preservation and character of historic resources and surrounding land
as open space;
E. Provide for passive recreation areas to serve the development and the general public.
Passive recreation areas shall create opportunities for quiet enjoyment, closeness to
nature and a high degree of interaction with the natural environment which require no
organization, rules of play, facilities or improvements.
275 Attachment 3:11 12 - 01 - 2016
MIDDLETOWN CODE
F. Land designated as open space may be used for such purposes as:
1. Conservation uses including woodlands and other natural areas such as
grassland, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams and floodplains.
2. Passive recreational uses such as parks and natural trails.
3. Planted areas used for visual screening purposes, noise control and buffering.
4. Historic resources.
5. Stormwater management.
Section 15: Waste Receptacles and Planters
A. Waste receptacles should be placed adjacent to building entrances, in selected
locations along streets, and in other locations determined by the property owners.
B. Waste receptacles shall be a dark color (to reduce their visibility), easy to open and
placed to be convenient to service.
C. Waste receptacles shall be constructed of architectural metal with a powder-coated
paint or anodized finish.
D. Waste receptacles shall be anchored to a concrete pad, the sidewalk, or other hard
surface to aid in their restriction from movement. Waste receptacles may also be
mounted on street light poles.
E. Where planters are used to enhance pedestrian areas such as sidewalks, such planters
shall be a minimum of 30 inches and a maximum of 42 inches in height.
Section 16: Dumpsters and Enclosures
A. Dumpster enclosures shall be architecturally compatible with the buildings on a site.
B. Dumpsters shall be in enclosed areas with convenient vehicular and pedestrian
accessibility.
C. Dumpster enclosures shall not be constructed of chain-link fencing.
275 Attachment 3:12 12 - 01 - 2016
ZONING
Exhibit A
Land Use Plan
[Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 771]
275 Attachment 3:13 12 - 01 - 2016

Appendix ‘A’
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
December 6, 2012
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:1 12 - 01 - 2014
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
Outline of Contents:
1.	 Streetscape and Street Walls
2.	 Vehicular Circulation
3.	 Pedestrian Gathering Areas
4.	 Public Open Space and Amenities
5.	 Building Frontages
6.	 Landscape and Lighting
7.	 Pedestrian Circulation
8.	 Utilities and Stormwater Management
9.	 Roadway Cross-Sections: Boulevard & Two-Way Street
9.1	 Alley Cross-Sections: One-Way and Two-Way Travel
10.	 Site Details: Typical Residential Cluster
10.1	 Site Details: Knee Wall
11.	 Revised Concept Plan
i
Notes:
a. All Public Improvement Enhancements shall be subject to Township review and approval.
b. All Public Improvement Enhancements shall be delineated on Preliminary and Final Subdivision
 and Land Development Plans, and shall be addressed in the Land Development Agreement
 and Public Improvements Security Agreement.
MIDDLETOWN CODE
275 Attachment 4:2 12 - 01 - 2014
1
Legislative Intent:
1.1	 The Streetscape is intended to be formed by
buildings located close to sidewalks.
1.2	 The Streetscape is intended to be enhanced
with such features as Street Trees, Street
Lights, Sidewalks, and like-type amenities.
1.3	 Whenever the Streetscape can not be formed
by Buildings located close to Sidewalks,
a Street Wall solution is intended to form a
Street Edge.
1.4	 Public Improvement Enhancements to the
Streetscape are intended to provide additional
neighborhood connectivity, minimize traffic
impacts, and improve landscape aesthetics.
Design Guidelines:
1.5 A Street Wall with buildings located close to
Sidewalks shall be created.
1.6	 Whenever buildings cannot form the Street
Wall, a combination of piers, fences or walls,
shrubs, and other landscaping shall form the
Street Wall and screen parking.
1.7	 Street Furniture with features similar to the
overall neighborhood character shall be built
and maintained.
1.8	 If a Boulevard Configuration is utilized on
main drives, it shall consist of a variety of plant
materials, maintained to promote visibility.
A Street Wall formed by a combination of Piers, Fences and
Shrubs, where the building is not located close to the sidewalk.
A Boulevard Configuration on a Main Drive, with a variety of
plant materials and directional signage in a central median.
Street Furniture such as Benches and Planters that enhance, and
are consistent with, the overall neighborhood character.
Streetscape with Street Wall formed by Retail Building
located close to the sidewalk.
Streetscape and Street Walls
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:3 12 - 01 - 2014
Legislative Intent:
2.1	 Traffic calming devices are intended to make
a more pedestrian-friendly setting.
2.2	 Off-street parking lots are intended to be
screened from view.
2.3	 Wayfinding signage is intended to aid in
navigation for motorists.
Design Guidelines:
2.4	 Traffic calming devices such as horizontal
and vertical deflections in road geometry,
speed tables, and/or curb bulb-outs shall be
utilized.
2.5	 Off-street parking visible from a street shall
be screened with walls, fences, hedges and
other landscaping at 30 inches in height.
2.6	 Wayfinding Signage shall be installed and
maintained in the R-4 District.
Brick Piers, Fence, and Shrubs as parking lot screening. Wayfinding signage as a navigation aid to motorists.
Speed Table & Crosswalk at Street Intersection as trafficcalming devices.
2
Curb bulb-outs are an effective traffic-calming device, and help
to define on-street parking.
Vehicular Circulation
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
MIDDLETOWN CODE
275 Attachment 4:4 12 - 01 - 2014
Design Guidelines:
3.4	 Install and maintain shade trees, benches,
plantings, and lighting in Greens and Green
Courts to enhance attractiveness and safety.
3.5	 Install and maintain decorative pavers,
benches, sitting walls, shade trees, plantings,
and lighting in Plazas and Pocket Parks to
enhance attractiveness and safety.
3.6 Integrate Pedestrian Gathering Areas with the
sidewalks and trails in the R-4 District.
3.7 Maintain Pedestrian Gathering Areas to
provide year-round attractiveness.
Legislative Intent:
3.1	 Pedestrian Gathering Areas are intended to
provide viable opportunities to celebrate the
public realm.
3.2	 Pedestrian Gathering Areas are intended
to enhance the appearance and pedestrian
function of the R-4 District.
3.3	 Pedestrian Gathering Areas are intended to
provide opportunities for sitting to the maximum
extent possible.
3
Pocket BenchesPark in Sitting as a Pedestrian Plaza, EagleGathering Road Area with brick pavers,
benches, planters, and other plantings.
Plaza as Pedestrian Gathering Area with fountain, benches, and
plantings adjacent to a Green with “bookend” pergolas.
A Green with gazebo, shade trees, ornamental plantings, and
lighting as a Pedestrian Gathering Area.
A Green Court as Pedestrian Gathering Area that provides
central open space in contrast with adjancent homes.
Pedestrian Gathering Areas
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:5 12 - 01 - 2014
Legislative Intent:
4.1	 The spaces between buildings are intended
to be connected to better enable pedestrian
use and visual enjoyment.
4.2	 Open spaces are intended to provide a
distinctive contrast to building clusters.
4.3	 Perpetual maintenance of all Public Open
Space areas and common Amenities is
intended to maintain quality control in the R-4
District.
Design Guidelines:
4.4 The massing of buildings shall be balanced
with useful Public Open Space, in order to
promote the amenities of light, air, and visual
enjoyment.
4.5	 Public Open Spaces, walkways, and view
corridors shall be connected to better enable
spaces to be used, accessed, and/or viewed.
4.6	 Public Open Space and common Amenities,
including areas otherwise kept in a natural
state, shall be cleared of rubbish and debris,
and painted, cleaned, etc.
Attractively designed and maintained Public Open Space area
as a link between buildings.
A well-maintained Green.
Common amenities include benches, tables, gazebos, and the
like.
Common Amenities include areas maintained in a natural state.
4
Public Open Space and Amenities
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
MIDDLETOWN CODE
275 Attachment 4:6 12 - 01 - 2014
Legistlative Intent:
5.1	 Facade articulation, variation in roof lines, and
vertical expression of buildings, is intended
to promote consistency with the scale and
proportion of traditional streetscapes and
neighborhoods.
5.2	 The appearance of Garage Doors is intended
to be minimized by painting them non-white,
preferably dark green, brown, taupe, terra
cotta, black, etc, and recessing them under a
balcony overhang, pent roof, or the like.
Design Guidelines:
5.3	 A primarily vertical expression to buildings
shall be created through the use of facade
articulation in the form of windows, doors,
pilasters, columns, colonnades, and the like.
5.4	 Roof lines of buildings shall be varied through
the use of dormers, gables, and changes in
roof pitch, to the maximum extent possible.
5.5	 Garage doors shall be a non-white color.
5.6	 Plantings, low fences and low walls along
driveways shall be installed and maintained
to beautify the space in front of the frontloaded garages.
Variations in residential design create visual interest along the
Streetscape.
Facade and roof articulation, and variation in building
color & materials create a compelling corner anchor.
Facade articulation and a variety of window styles and roof
pitches create visual interest.
5
Recessed, non-white garage door helps to minimize the
appearance of the front-loaded garage.
Building Frontages
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:7 12 - 01 - 2014
Legislative Intent:
6.1	 Landscape features are intended to be
designed to help achieve a balance between
man-made and natural materials, objects,
and spaces.
6.2	 Street trees, shrubs, groundcovers, and
perennials are intended to provide attractive
layering and color in the R-4 District.
6.3	 Pedestrian-scaled street lights are intended
to provide a safe and attractive complement
to the Streetscape.
6.4	 Building lighting is intended to promote safety
and security, and to complement the facade
design.
Design Guidelines:
6.5	 Building design shall be complemented with
landscape features and materials.
6.6	 A complete expression of design intent shall
be created through the use of continuous
materials and/or the massing of materials.
6.7	 Plant materials shall be selected to be
tolerant of prevailing climatic, hydrologic and
soil conditions.
6.8 Pedestrian-scaled Street Lights shall be
installed and maintained along both sides of
all streets.
6.9	 Building lighting shall promote safety and
security, and complements the architecture.
Pedestrian-scaled, decorative lighting.
Street Trees and Decorative Lighting installed in a green strip
along a residential cartway.
A variety of plantings and landscape features complement the
building design and materials.
Wall lights complement the building architecture by accenting
the piers.
6
Landscape and Lighting
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
MIDDLETOWN CODE
275 Attachment 4:8 12 - 01 - 2014
7
A paved trail in a Common Open Space accommodates strollers
and wheelchairs. Handrails are located adjacent to segments of
sloping trail.
A decorative crosswalk contrasts with the cartway surface in
order to promote visibility.
A sidewalk flanked by street trees and ornamental plantings. A well-maintained sidewalk as part of a network of pedestrian
connections.
Legislative Intent:
7.1	 Development in the R-4 District is intended to
promote and foster pedestrian connectivity
and to encourage walking to the maximum
extent possible.
7.2	 Sidewalks and Crosswalks are intended
to facilitate safe, secure, and convenient
connections between destinations.
7.3	 Public Trails are intended to provide a
recreational amenity and to function as part of
the network of trails in Middletown Township.
Design Guidelines:
7.4	 Sidewalks at 4’-6” shall be built and
maintained
7.5 	 Crosswalks shall be installed where sidewalks
and trails cross all cartways and entrances to
common parking areas.
7.6	 A Trail system shall connect internal
residential and non-residential destinations
and existing Township-owned Open Space
and/or trails on adjacent properties. The Trail
shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width.
7.7	 All sidewalks, trails, pathways, etc. shall be
paved and ADA compliant.
Pedestrian Circulation
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:9 12 - 01 - 2014
Attractively enclosed dumpster area. A covered common mail area with community message board,
bench, and integrated sitting walls.
Parking area surfaced with porous Unit Pavers. Naturalized Stormwater Basin with indigenous plants.
Legislative Intent:
8.1	 Dumpster enclosures and enclosures for
common mailboxes, HVAC Units, Utility
Boxes, and the like, are intended to be
architecturally compatible with the buildings
on a tract.
8.2	 Stormwater Management systems are
intended to be accommodated in context with
the proposed environments of the R-4 District,
and in accordance with the Middletown
Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance, Chapter 198.
Design Guidelines:
8.3	 Accessory structures with architectural
features similar to the overall neighborhood
character shall be built and maintained.
8.4	 Decorative enclosed dumpster areas, and
enclosures for other utilities, shall be installed
and maintained.
8.5	 Common mail areas shall be within an
attractive structure (such as shown above).
8.6 	 “Light imprint” stormwater management
solutions shall be constructed and
maintained, such as through the use of
Porous Asphalt Pavement/Unit Pavers and
naturalized Stormwater Basins.
8
Utilities and Stormwater Management
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
MIDDLETOWN CODE
275 Attachment 4:10 12 - 01 - 2014
9
Roadway Cross-Sections: Street & Boulevard
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:11 12 - 01 - 2014
Alley Cross-Sections: One-Way & Two-Way Travel
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
5'-1 F\\c.c. tof'H.(
i:ø.'Iø"e
ú i.'
Alley Cross Section: One-way Travel Not to Scale
1
5~ r:"c,t, toF",e,
i:ci'to.,e
r
41.1
z. ~ , 1~' "3'
(,1/ '
Alley Cross Section: Two-way Travel Not to Scale
9.1
MIDDLETOWN CODE
275 Attachment 4:12 12 - 01 - 2014
10
Site Details: Typical Residential Cluster
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:13 12 - 01 - 2014
10.1
Site Details: Typical Knee Wall
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
MIDDLETOWN CODE
275 Attachment 4:14 12 - 01 - 2014
Revised Concept Plan (See Attached)
R-4 Campus Mixed Use Development: Design Guidelines
Middletown Township, Delaware County, PA
ZONING
275 Attachment 4:15 12 - 01 - 2014
MIDDLETOWN CODE