Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1 (53 P.S. § 65741.1) of the Second
Class Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for
the Township of Montgomery, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 234, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Montgomery,
which shall be know and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township
of Montgomery," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or
resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect
and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Montgomery, and it is the intention of said Board of
Supervisors that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from
the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Montgomery and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this article shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to November 25, 1991.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
article or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such
right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
article in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this article
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption
of this article are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Legislation relating to civil defense.
R. Legislation relating to noise.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances and
resolutions included in the Code. These changes are made to bring
provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Board of
Supervisors, and it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed
have been previously formally amended to read as such. All such
changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of the Code specified in § 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B, the following sections or chapters were added or
amended: §§ 24-1, 26-6, 30-8, 34-2, 34-3, 34-4A and B, 56-10, 65-7, 69-1, 69-3A(11), (12),
(13), (18), (20), (21), (37), and (39), 69-7B(7), 69-27A and B, 69-28B, C and E, 69-34A, C,
and D, 69-35F, 72-5, 92-7, 107-2, 107-4, 107-5, 128-2, 128-5, 128-7, 155-2, 155-9, 159-5A,
166-10, 170-4, 170-6, 170-7, 170-14 and 174-1, Ch. 183, Ch. 187, §§ 193-1, 193-3, 193-7B,
193-21B, 201-8, 201-13, 205-6, 205-41, 205-58C, 205-82B, 205-87I, 209-18A, 209-31,
209-32B(2) and C, 209-41, 209-61A, 215-2, 215-5, 215-13D, 215-14, 230-5B, 230-6A,
230-12E, 230-16G, 230-17B(2), 230-21E(3) and (4), 230-36A(3), 230-39E, 230-49A(3),
230-70A(4), 230-72I, 230-77C(1), 230-124A, 230-134C, 230-139F, 230-151A and E and
230-183. The following original sections and articles were deleted: Secs. 3 and 6 of Ord.
No. 10; Sec. 7 and Art. IX of Ord. No. 18; Art. XVIII of Ord. No. 17-014. The following were
specifically repealed: Ord. No. 72, adopted 12-8-1980; Ord. No. 96, adopted 11-21-1985;
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Manager/Secretary and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such
copies shall be certified to by the Township Manager/Secretary, as provided
by law, and such certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the
Township Manager/Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate tie intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
Res. No. 1, adopted 8-22-1983. A complete description of each change may be found in
Ord. No. 92-1, on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager/Secretary or someone
authorized and directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Manager/Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent
to the effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors
shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are
printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Manager/Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a notice of the introduction and of the
adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
The enactment and application of this article, coupled with the publication
of the notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $300,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this article and of the Code adopted hereby are severable,
and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Supervisors that this article and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included
therein.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this article and of the Code shall be in force and effect five
days after the date of enactment.
§ 1-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
History of 1962 Codification
On October 1, 1962, the Supervisors of the Township of Montgomery
enacted a consolidation of the general body of Township ordinances,
including the amendment and renumbering of certain existing ordinances
and the repeal of certain other existing ordinances. The consolidation,
which excluded the Township's amusement tax, was enacted by Ordinance
Nos. 1 through 19, which are on file in the office of the Township
Secretary and which are further identified by title as follows:
Ordinance No. 1. An ordinance prohibiting the dumping, storage,
accumulation and burning of rubbish, waste, garbage, ashes, paper and
discarded or refuse materials at or upon public or private property and
fixing the fines for the violation thereof; repeal of former Ordinance Nos.
1 and 53.
Ordinance No. 2. An ordinance prohibiting nuisances, including but not
limited to accumulations of garbage and rubbish, the storage of
abandoned or junked automobiles on private and public property and the
carrying on of any offensive manufacture or business and the existence of
any dangerous structure on public or private ground and fixing the fines
for the violation thereof; repeal of former Ordinance Nos. 2 and 7.
Ordinance No. 3. An ordinance regulating and requiring the licensing of
junk dealers in the Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, and prescribing penalties for violation.
Ordinance No. 4. An ordinance defining and prohibiting disorderly
practices, all unnecessary noises tending to disturb the peace and quiet of
the community and providing penalties and fines therefor; repeal of
former Ordinance Nos. 4 and 68.
Ordinance No. 5. An ordinance limiting the weight of vehicles on
Township roads, except boundary roads, and fixing the fines for violation
thereof and providing for the erection of signs giving notice thereof;
repeal of former Ordinance No. 5.
Ordinance No. 6. Social Security for Township Employees. An ordinance
providing for the entrance into an agreement with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania so that certain Township employees shall be covered by the
Federal Social Security Act and providing for an appropriation from the
general Township treasury and deductions from the employees pay roll
and payment of such sums to the commonwealth as contributions to the
Federal Insurance Plan.
Ordinance No. 7. An ordinance making it unlawful to operate a motor
vehicle in excess of 35 miles per hour on the following Township roads:
Richardson Road, Line Street, Vilsmeier Road and Knapp Road; and
providing penalties for the violation thereof; repeal of former Ordinance
Nos. 24, 38, 46 and 50.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Ordinance No. 8. An ordinance prohibiting leaving outside iceboxes,
refrigerators and similar containers with airtight doors accessible to
children and providing fines for the violation thereof; repeal of former
Ordinance No. 25.
Ordinance No. 9. An ordinance creating and establishing in the Township
of Montgomery a Planning Commission consisting of five members and
appointing the initial members as authorized by the Act of May 1, 1933,
P.L 103, as reenacted and amended.
Ordinance No. 10. An ordinance to protect the public safety by
prohibiting the discharge of firearms, bows and arrows and hunting,
except in accordance with certain regulations; prohibiting the possession
of loaded firearms upon public streets and public property within the
Township of Montgomery and providing penalties for violation; repeal of
former Ordinance Nos. 36, 65 and 72.
Ordinance No. 11. An ordinance prohibiting dogs from running at large
within the Township; authorizing the impounding and destruction of dogs
and providing fines for the violation thereof; repeal of former Ordinance
No. 57.
Ordinance No. 12. An ordinance licensing and regulating the soliciting,
peddling and transient retail business within the Township of
Montgomery; providing for application for license; establishing the
procedure for identification; establishing rules of conduct and providing
for the enforcement thereof and penalties for violations thereof; repeal of
former Ordinance No. 60.
Ordinance No. 13. An ordinance prohibiting parking on either side of
Bethlehem Pike Route 309 within the legal right-of-way thereof and
providing fines and imprisonment for violation of the same.
Ordinance No. 14. An ordinance providing for the adoption of the
National Building Code, Abbreviated Edition, as the Building Code for
Montgomery Township and the adoption of the National Building Code,
Unabridged Edition, as regulations under the Building Code; the repeal of
former Ordinance Nos. 47, 62 and 71, which adopted the prior Building
Code; establishing the office and prescribing the duties of the Building
Inspector or Official; and establishing and promulgating a schedule of
permit fees.
Ordinance No. 15. An ordinance for the protection of public health,
prohibiting the placement of human excrement and other materials
dangerous to public health on the ground or in the ground, providing
regulations for cleaning of cesspools, septic tanks and other receptacles,
and fixing the fines for the violation thereof; repeal of former Ordinance
Nos. 54, 58 and 70.
Ordinance No. 16. An ordinance for the protection of public health,
regulating the construction and operation of sewage disposal systems;
setting minimum requirements for disposal of sewage and fixing fines for
the violation thereof; repeal of former Ordinance No. 17.
§ 1-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 1-15
1:10
Ordinance No. 17. The Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance of 1952,
as amended in 1959; an amendment providing for the reclassification of a
certain district in Montgomery Township from R-1 Residential to R-2
Residential; an amendment to Article IX, Section 902-C-1 and 2,
pertaining to signs permitted in commercial and shopping center districts,
by adding a new Section 9O2-C-5, permitting additional sign area on
commercial and shopping center buildings, amending Section 903-D to
increase the permitted freestanding sign area in LI Limited Industrial
districts and amending Section 9O4-D-2 pertaining to signs obscuring the
view of the highway; an amendment rezoning a certain tract with a
frontage on the southeasterly side of Route 202 and on the northeasterly
side of Route 463 in Montgomery Township from C Commercial to S
Shopping Center District; an amendment to Article l, Section 103,
providing for the repeal of Montgomery Township former Ordinance Nos.
6, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45,
48, 49, 52, 55, 56, 61, 63, 66, 69, 73, 76, 77 and 80.
Ordinance No. 18. An ordinance of the Township of Montgomery,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, regulating the subdivision and
development of land and prohibiting the opening, construction, naming or
dedication for public use or travel of any road, street, lane or alley or any
drainage facilities in connection therewith, except in accordance with
plans submitted to and approved by the Township Supervisors;
prescribing the method of preparing and filing such plans; providing for a
performance bond and the kind and character of improvements to be
made; and providing penalties for violations; repeal of former Ordinance
Nos. 18 and 42.
Ordinance No. 19. An ordinance repealing the following Montgomery
Township Ordinances: former Ordinance No. 3, Road Construction; former
Ordinance Nos. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13, defining and locating certain
roads; and former Ordinance No. 27, organizing the Montgomery
Township Authority.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:11
Chapter 6
(RESERVED)
Chapter 8
CIVIL DEFENSE
§ 8-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Civil
Defense Ordinance of Montgomery Township."
§ 8-2. Intent and purpose.
§ 8-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter:
ATTACK — A direct or indirect assault against Montgomery Township, its
government, its environs or the nation by the forces of a hostile nation or
the agents thereof, including assault by bombing, radiological, chemical or
biological warfare or sabotage.
CIVIL DEFENSE — In its broad meaning, carrying out the basic government
functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety during an
emergency. This shall include plans and preparations for protection from,
and relief, recovery and rehabilitation from, the effects of an attack on the
Township by the forces of an enemy nation or the agents thereof, and it shall
also include such activity in connection with disaster as defined herein. It
A. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an office that will
ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all of the Township's
facilities to combat disaster resulting from enemy actions or other
disasters as defined herein.
B. The Montgomery Township Office of Civil Defense will be the
coordinating agency for all activity in connection with civil defense; it
will be the instrument through which the Township Supervisors may
exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them
in the State Council of Civil Defense Act of 1951, Act of March 19, 1951,
P.L. 28, 71 P.S. § 1689.2
C. This chapter will not relieve any Township department of the moral
responsibilities or authority given to it by local ordinance, nor will it
adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief in
disaster emergencies.
2. Editor's Note: The State Council of Civil Defense Act of 1951, 71 P.S. § 1689, has been
repealed. See now 35 Pa.C.S.A § 7101 et seq.
§ 1-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 8-3
1:12
shall not, however, include an activity that is the primary responsibility of
the military forces of the United States.
CIVIL DEFENSE FORCES — The employees, equipment and facilities of
all Township departments, boards, institutions and commissions and, in
addition, shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities
contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
CIVIL DEFENSE VOLUNTEER — Any person duly registered, identified and
appointed by the Coordinator of the Office of Civil Defense and assigned to
participate in the civil defense activity.
DIRECTOR — The Civil Defense Director of the Montgomery Township
Office of Civil Defense.
DISASTER — Includes but is not limited to actual or threatened enemy
attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic or other
impending or actual calamity endangering or threatening to endanger
health, life or property or constituted government.
REGULATIONS — Includes plans, programs and other emergency
procedures deemed essential to civil defense.
VOLUNTEER — Contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the civil
defense organization without remuneration.
§ 8-4. Organization and appointments.
A. The organization shall consist of the following:
(1) An Office of Civil Defense under the direction of the Board of
Supervisors. There shall be a coordinating head of the Office of
Civil Defense, who shall be known as the Civil Defense Director,
and such deputies, assistants and other employees as are deemed
necessary by the Board of Supervisors for the proper functioning of
the organization.
(2) The employees, equipment and facilities of all Township
departments, boards, institutions and commissions will participate
in the civil defense activity. Duties assigned to the Township
department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the
department.
B. As provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
Board of Supervisors shall recommend to the Governor of the
Commonwealth for his appointment the person to be designated and to
function as Director of the Montgomery Township Office of Civil
Defense. The Director shall be a person well versed and trained in
planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies
which will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the
event of danger from enemy action or disaster as defined in this
chapter.
§ 8-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:13
§ 8-5. Emergency powers and duties.
C. The Director shall designate and appoint deputy directors to assume
the emergency duties of the Director in the event of the Director's
absence or inability to act, in order that there will always and at all
times be a Civil Defense Director in charge of carrying out the powers
and duties set forth in this chapter.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township.
(1) It shall be the sole judgment of the Board of Supervisors of
Montgomery Township when and for what duration to invoke the
emergency powers provided in this chapter. The Township Board of
Supervisors may convene to perform its legislative and
administrative powers as the situation demands and shall receive
reports relative to civil defense activities. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers and
responsibilities of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) During any period when disaster threatens or when the Township
has been struck by disaster, within the definition of this chapter, the
Board of Supervisors may promulgate such regulations as it deems
necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical
resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
(a) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of
vehicles in order to facilitate the work of civil defense forces,
or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical
areas within or without the Township.
(b) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas
deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.
(c) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace,
health and safety.
B. Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be
given widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered
by newspaper and radio. These regulations will have the force of
ordinance, and violations will be subject to the penalties provided in
§ 8-8 of this chapter.
C. Further powers and duties shall include:
(1) Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies
to augment the personnel and facilities of the Township for civil
defense purposes.
(2) Development of the Basic Plan as herein referred to and
coordination of all plans for the immediate use of all the facilities,
equipment, manpower and other resources of the Township for the
§ 8-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 8-5
1:14
§ 8-6. Civil Defense and Disaster Basic Plan.
purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and
property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental
services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety
and welfare.
(3) Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in
control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings
or other property for the civil defense purposes and designating
suitable buildings as public shelters.
(4) Through public informational programs, educating the civilian
population as to actions necessary and required for the protection
of their persons and property in case of enemy attack or disaster, as
defined herein, either impending or present.
(5) Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation
of the civil defense forces and to familiarize residents with civil
defense regulations, procedures and operations.
(6) Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies
engaged in any civil defense activity.
(7) Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the Board
of Supervisors may direct to promote and execute the civil defense
plan.
A. A comprehensive Civil Defense and Disaster Basic Plan shall be adopted
and maintained by resolution of the Board of Supervisors upon
recommendation of the Director. In the preparation of this plan as it
pertains to Township organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and
agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall
be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan
in a current state of readiness at all times. The Basic Plan shall be
considered supplementary to the existing laws governing the Township
and shall have the effect of law whenever a disaster, as defined in this
chapter, has been proclaimed.
B. The Director shall prescribe in the Basic Plan those positions within the
disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of
succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will
designate and keep on file with the Director a current list of three
persons as successors to his position. The list will be in order of
succession and will as nearly as possible designate persons best
capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions.
C. Each service chief and department head assigned responsibility in the
Basic Plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions
assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of
§ 8-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6
1:15
§ 8-7. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority
contained herein or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of
the civil defense organization as herein defined in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued thereunder.
§ 8-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300, and costs of prosecution,
or imprisonment in the Montgomery County Jail for a period of not more
than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.
Chapter 17
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil defense — See Ch. 8.
Pensions — See Ch. 32.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Open burning — See Ch. 193, Art. I
Taxation — See Ch. 209.
assigned Township employees and volunteers. Each chief shall
formulate the operational plan for his service which, when approved,
shall be an annex to and a part of the Basic Plan.
D. Amendments to the Basic Plan shall be submitted to the Township
Board of Supervisors. Such amendments shall take effect 30 days from
the date of approval unless action is taken by the Supervisors
disapproving the Director's submission. In the event that an
amendment is pending at the time that a disaster is proclaimed under
provisions of this chapter, the amendment will be considered approved
immediately and will remain effective unless specifically revoked by the
Supervisors.
E. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not
available within the Township government, the Director is authorized to
seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of
duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the
persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after
the occurrence of a disaster. Such services from persons outside of
government may be accepted by the Township on a volunteer basis.
Such citizens shall be enrolled as civil defense volunteers in
cooperation with the heads of Township departments affected.
§ 8-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 8-8
1:16
§ 17-1. Designation as official fire company.
The Fire Department of Montgomery Township, chartered as a nonprofit
fire company and duly existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, is hereby designated and specified as the official fire company
of and for Montgomery Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, with
the responsibilities for fire protection, fire fighting, fire prevention, and
related activities for and within the boundary lines and limits of the
Township of Montgomery.
§ 17-2. Composition. [Added 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 02-165]
The Montgomery Township Department of Fire (the "Department") shall
consist of such fire companies as the Board of Supervisors may, from time
to time, by ordinance or resolution, receive into the Department; the Fire
Marshal; Deputy Fire Marshals; volunteer fire fighters; full-time and parttime
fire fighters employed by Montgomery Township; the Director of Fire
Services; the Director of Emergency Services; and such other full-time or
part-time Township employees who may be assigned to fire-fighting duties
as a secondary responsibility.
§ 17-3. Appointment and duties of Director of Fire Services. [Added
1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 02-165]
A. There shall be a Director of Fire Services (the "Director") who will be
employed by the Township and appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The Director shall answer to the Township Manager and the Board of
Supervisors for the efficient and effective operation of the Department,
which includes the Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshals, and both
volunteer fire fighters and paid fire fighters and the Director of
Emergency Preparedness.
C. The Director shall be responsible for developing and enforcing standard
operating guidelines based on recognized procedures and practices in
the fire services field.
D. The Director shall coordinate the resources necessary to control largescale
and complex emergencies, when such action is necessary to
protect life and property.
E. The Director, in consultation with the Incident Commander ("Fire
Chief"), shall have the authority to initiate evacuations and exclude the
public from the immediate vicinity of an emergency or place of danger.
F. The Director of Fire Services, the Township Manager and the Board of
Supervisors shall have the authority to suspend from the Department
any volunteer or paid fire fighter charged with an infraction of the
recognized procedures and practices or other rules of the Department.
The Director shall have the authority to issue up to ten-day suspensions
§ 8-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3
1:17
§ 17-4. Administrative provisions. [Added 1-6-2003 by Ord. No.
02-165]
Chapter 20
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITIES
§ 20-1. Intent.
It is the desire of the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township,
Montgomery County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to organize
an Industrial Development Authority in said Montgomery County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, under the Economic Development
Financing Law.3
without the review of the Board of Supervisors. The suspension shall
not exceed 30 days unless sustained by the Township Manager or the
Board of Supervisors. The Director of Fire Services shall report the
cause and circumstances of the action to the Board of Supervisors. The
suspended individual shall have the right of appeal to the Township
Manager and the Board of Supervisors who may sustain, modify or
overturn the disciplinary action.
A. Real estate tax millage, particularly identified for fire services
purposes, shall be utilized by the Township for the costs associated with
the functioning of the Department and for acquisition and maintenance
of equipment and real property necessary for the provision of fire
services in the Township.
B. A budget shall be prepared annually by the Director of Fire Services in
cooperation with the members of the Department (which includes
volunteer fire-fighting companies) and such budget shall be submitted
to the Board of Supervisors for its review and approval.
C. At least annually, or more frequently as required by the Director, the
Township Manager or the Board of Supervisors, the fire company or
companies participating in the Department shall submit a report of
operating and financial activities for the preceding calendar year, the
current year and future years.
D. All monies received by the Township under the Foreign Fire Insurance
Tax Distribution Law shall be distributed as required by state statute
and shall be expended in accordance with the approved budget referred
to in Subsection B.
E. Training requirements and schedules of training shall be formulated in
cooperation between the members of the Department and the Director.
F. Financial and operational, books, records, and reports of any volunteer
fire company or companies participating in the Department shall be
available at the firehouse for inspection by the Township at any time.
§ 17-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 20-2
1:18
§ 20-2. Adoption of Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuit of the desire and intention and in conformity with the terms
and provisions of the Economic Development Financing Law, the proposed
Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto
and made a part hereof.4 The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said
Authority shall be executed by and on behalf of the Board of Supervisors
of Montgomery Township by the Chairman of said Board, the seal of
Montgomery Township shall thereto be affixed and attested to by the
Secretary of said Board. After properly executed, the Articles of
Incorporation shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Chapter 21
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Local Government Investment Trust — See
Ch. 24.
Police Department Mutual Aid
Agreement — See Ch. 37, Art. I.
Sewers — See Ch. 187.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 193.
3. Editor's Note: 73 P.S. § 371 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township's offices.
§ 20-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2
1:19

ARTICLE I
Sewage Treatment Agreement
[Adopted 9-3-1985 by Ord. No. 92]
§ 21-1. Agreement to cooperate.
The Township agrees to be bound by the joint intermunicipal cooperation
agreement, precisely in the form which is attached hereto, incorporated
herein,5 and made a part hereof with the Borough of Ambler, the Township
of Lower Gwynedd and the Lower Gwynedd Township Municipal Authority
to cooperate with respect to construction, expansion, upgrading and
operation of the Ambler Public Sewage Plant, known as the "Ambler Joint
Wastewater Treatment Plant," and now known as "Publicly Owned
Treatment Works," with respect to that portion of the Township of
Montgomery which is now and may hereafter be sewered by the Trewellyn
Interceptor.
§ 21-2. Authorization to participate.
The action taken extends and authorizes Montgomery Township's
participation in this joint intermunicipal cooperation agreement.
§ 21-3. Authorization to execute.
The officers of the Township are authorized to execute this joint
intermunicipal cooperation agreement and affix the Township seal thereto.
5. Editor's Note: This agreement is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-3
1:21

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Agreement
[Adopted 11-21-1985 by Ord. No. 95]
§ 21-4. Approval of agreement.
The intergovernmental cooperation agreement presently on file in the office
of the Township of Montgomery is hereby approved.
§ 21-5. Authorization to execute.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and the Secretary of the
Township of Montgomery are hereby authorized to execute and deliver the
North Penn Area Solid Waste Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement
presently on file in the office of the Township of Montgomery.
§ 21-6. Authorization to execute other documents.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township
of Montgomery are hereby authorized to execute and deliver all other
agreements as are required to fulfill the requirements of Section 5(a) of the
North Penn Area Solid Waste Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement.6
6. Editor's Note: This agreement is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-6
1:23

ARTICLE III
Workers' Compensation Agreement
[Adopted 11-22-1993 by Ord. No. 93-277]
§ 21-7. Authorization.
The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township is hereby authorized to
execute the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement for
the participation of Montgomery Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust, which Agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit A and
is on file for inspection and review at the offices of Montgomery Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. This Agreement may be amended after
the enactment of this article to conform to any requirements imposed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any of its agencies, including the
Department of Labor and Industry Bureau of Workers' Compensation.
§ 21-8. Purpose.
The participation of Montgomery Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust is authorized for the purposes of enabling Montgomery
Township to reduce the cost of workers' compensation claims through the
creation of a group self-insurance fund.
§ 21-9. Authority to pay benefits delegated.
§ 21-10. Conditions on participation.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
Agreement, the following conditions, among others, apply to the
participation of Montgomery Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust:
A. Montgomery Township delegates to the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust the authority to pay workers' compensation
benefits on its behalf in accordance with the Pennsylvania Workers
Compensation Act and the Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act.8
B. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
Bureau of Workers' Compensation has approved the issuance of a
permit to the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust to operate
as a group self-insurance fund subject to certain conditions.
C. As an approved self-insurance fund, the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust will be responsible for the payment of workers
compensation claims on behalf of all the Trust participants.
7. Editor's Note: This article also repealed former Art. III, Workers' Compensation
Agreement, adopted 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 120.
8. Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq. and 77 P.S. § 1201 et seq., respectively.
§ 21-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-10
1:25
§ 21-11. Duration.
Montgomery Township agrees to participate in the Trust for a minimum
period of two years subject to the terms and conditions of the Delaware
Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement. After the expiration of
that minimum two-year period, each participant may withdraw under the
following conditions, subject to the right of arbitration as provided in the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Agreement:
A. That the trust shall consist of at least five homogeneous municipal
participants organized as local government agencies under
Pennsylvania law.
B. That each participant satisfies all eligibility and admission
requirements for membership in the Trust.
C. That each participant pledges and agrees to appropriate funds to pay
all its annual contributions and assessments which are required for the
creation of a fund maintained at a level sufficient to pay all workers'
compensation claims and related expenses incurred by the trust
participants.
D. That each participant agrees to jointly and severally assume and
discharge the workers' compensation liabilities of each and every other
participant in accordance with the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement when required to do so by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry Bureau of Workers'
Compensation.
E. That each participant will institute any and all loss prevention measures
or risk management procedures as may be required for the purpose of
minimizing or eliminating workplace risks to its employees.
F. That each participant cooperate fully with the Trust's service and fiscal
agents, attorneys, claims adjusters and any other agents or employees
of the Trust with respect to the investigation, defense and settlement of
claims.
G. That each participant designate a person to be responsible for all
contacts with the Trust.
H. That each participant provide any information to the Administrator or
Board of Trustees as may be required to effect the purposes and
objectives of the Trust.
I. That each participant comply with all applicable statutes and
regulations governing the payment of workers' compensation claims,
including but not limited to the Pennsylvania Workers Compensation
Act9 and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
9. Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 21-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 21-11
1:26
§ 21-12. When effective.
Participation of Montgomery Township in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust will be effective upon final approval of the Trust permit
application by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry Bureau
of Workers' Compensation or upon any other date determined by the
Department.
§ 21-13. Disposition of funds.
All contributions and assessments paid by Montgomery Township shall be
made with funds appropriated by Montgomery Township for that purpose.
§ 21-14. Organizational structure of Trust.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees, an administrator, a claims administration/loss control
consultant(s) and various service agents appointed by the Board of Trustees
in accordance with the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
Agreement and any bylaws adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 21-15. Source of funds.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers Compensation Trust
Agreement, the funds required for the creation and operation of the Trust
shall be provided by the participating municipalities through annual
appropriations.
A. An opinion is rendered by the Trust-certified actuary that withdrawal
will not result in the number of participants falling below the minimum
required to assure the fiscal and actuarial soundness of the Trust itself.
B. The withdrawing participant is not then in default of its obligation to
pay premiums, contributions or assessments.
C. The withdrawing participant shall pay the full amount of a termination
contribution or any additional assessments, as determined by the Board
of Trustees in accordance with the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement and bylaws.
D. The Board of Trustees shall have received a certification from the Trust
actuary that the withdrawal of the participant will not impair the
actuarial soundness of the Trust and, if any municipal debt has been
incurred by the participants to finance any portion of the Trust
reserves, an opinion is obtained from bond counsel that such
withdrawal will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of any
interest paid and any debt incurred by the participants or any legal
entity created for the purpose of incurring such debt. As used herein,
the term "debt" includes any municipal bonds, certificates, letters of
credit or other instruments of municipal indebtedness.
§ 21-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-16
1:27
§ 21-16. Power to enter into contracts.
The Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust is empowered to enter
into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, for any of its employees.
§ 21-17. Duties of Township.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust, Montgomery Township agrees to:
§ 21-18. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law.
A. Pay all annual contributions or assessments as may be required by the
Board of Trustees.
B. Appoint a representative to sit on the Board of Trustees and designate a
contact person for the purpose of communicating with the trust or its
representatives.
C. Not withdraw from the Trust for a period of two years following its
admission to the Trust, subject to the terms and conditions of the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement.
D. Withdraw from the Trust only upon satisfaction of the conditions set
forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement.
E. Perform all covenants contained in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement and delegate to the Board of Trustees
the powers and authorities enumerated in that Agreement.
F. Comply with all the conditions set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust Agreement governing the handling and payment of
claims, including the defense and settlement thereof.
G. Appropriate the funds needed to pay all contributions and assessments
as may be required by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust Agreement.
H. Cooperate with the Trust, its agents or employees and provide the Trust
with all information it needs for the operation of the Trust, including
any underwriting or claims data which may be requested by the Board
of Trustees or its designee.
§ 21-16 MONTGOMERY CODE § 21-18
1:28
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Utility Alliance as Consultant
[Adopted 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-96]
§ 21-19. Authorization.
The proper officers of the Township of Montgomery are authorized and
directed to execute and deliver an intergovernmental cooperation
agreement dated April 1, 1998, attached hereto and made a part hereof.10
§ 21-20. Conditions, term, purpose, etc.
The conditions, duration and term, purpose and objective, scope and
authority delegated, manner and extent of financing, organizational
structure and manner in which personal property shall be acquired,
managed and disposed of are set forth in the attached agreement.
10.Editor's Note: This agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 21-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-20
1:29

ARTICLE V
Recreation Director
[Adopted 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-100]
§ 21-21. Authorization.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Montgomery Township Board of
Supervisors are hereby authorized to enter into an intermunicipal
agreement with Lower Gwynedd Township for the joint hiring of a
Recreation Director in the form of agreement attached hereto as Exhibit
A.11
§ 21-22. Amendments.
Once the intermunicipal agreement has been executed by both townships,
it shall thereafter be amended only by a written document also executed
by both townships. Amendments to the intermunicipal agreement, including
termination of that agreement, shall not require the passage of another
ordinance, but shall rather be authorized and confirmed by formal
resolution of this Board adopted at a public meeting.
§ 21-23. Disclaimer.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liabilities incurred,
or any permit issued, or any cause or causes of action existing under the
ordinances of the Township prior to the enactment of this article.
§ 21-24. Failure to enforce not a waiver.
The failure of the Township to enforce any provision of this article shall
not constitute a waiver by the Township of its rights of future enforcement
hereunder.
11.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 21-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-24
1:31

ARTICLE VI
Delaware Valley Insurance Trust Agreement
[Adopted 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-117]
§ 21-25. Authorization; documents.
§ 21-26. Purpose.
Participation of Montgomery Township in the Delaware Valley Insurance
Trust is authorized for the following purposes:
§ 21-27. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in the Trust Agreement, the following conditions apply to the
participation of Montgomery Township in the Delaware Valley Insurance
Trust:
A. The Chairman and Secretary of the Township Board of Supervisors are
hereby authorized to execute the agreement listed below and any other
agreements necessary for the participation of Montgomery Township in
the Delaware Valley Insurance Trust:
(1) Delaware Valley Insurance Trust Agreement (hereinafter referred
to as the "trust agreement," a copy of which is attached as Exhibit
A).
B. The documents attached hereto as exhibits are on file for inspection and
review at the Montgomery Township Building, 1001 Stump Road,
Montgomeryville, PA 18936. These documents may be subsequently
modified or amended, but in no event shall such amendments or
modifications materially adversely affect the right of Montgomery
Township to participate in the Delaware Valley Insurance Trust.
A. To provide adequate and affordable insurance coverage to each
participating municipality at the lowest possible cost by the pooling or
sharing of certain liability risks.
B. To reduce the amount and frequency of losses incurred by each
participating municipality covered under the Trust Coverage
Document, which is attached hereto as Exhibit B.
C. To minimize costs incurred by participating municipalities in the
handling and litigation of claims.
D. To protect each participating municipality from the volatility and high
premiums of the commercial insurance markets.
A. That each participating municipality meets the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein.
§ 21-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-27
1:33
§ 21-28. Conditions for withdrawal.
Montgomery Township agrees to participate in the Trust for a minimum
period of two years and thereafter may withdraw under the following
conditions, subject to the right of arbitration, under the Trust Agreement:
B. That each participating municipality agrees to pay all annual premiums,
contributions and assessments when due as provided in the Trust
Agreement.
C. That each participating municipality uses its best efforts to provide
appropriations for the payment of any contributions, premiums and
assessments required by the Trust.
D. That each participating municipality institutes any and all safety
regulations, loss prevention measures or risk management procedures
as may be required for the purpose of minimizing or eliminating
hazards or risks that could contribute to losses.
E. That each participating municipality cooperates fully with the Trust's
service and fiscal agents, attorneys, claims adjusters and any other
agents or employees of the Trust with respect to the investigation,
defense and settlement of claims.
F. That each participating municipality designates a contact person to be
responsible for all contacts with the Trust.
G. That each participating municipality provides any information to the
Administrator or Board of Trustees as may be required to effect the
purpose and objectives of the Trust.
A. An opinion is rendered by the Trust certified actuary that withdrawal
will not result in the number of participants falling below the minimum
required to assure the fiscal and actuarial soundness of the Trust itself.
B. That the withdrawing municipality is not then in default of its obligation
to pay premiums, contributions or assessments.
C. That the withdrawing municipality shall pay the full amount of a
termination premium, as determined by the Board of Trustees in
accordance with the Trust Agreement and bylaws.
D. That the Board of Trustees shall have received a certification from the
Trust actuary that the withdrawal of the municipality will not reduce
the actuarial soundness of the Trust and, if any municipal debt has been
incurred by the participants to finance any portion of the Trust
reserves, an opinion is obtained from bond counsel that such
withdrawal will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of any
interest paid and any debt incurred by the participating municipalities
or any legal entity created for the purpose of incurring such debt.
§ 21-27 MONTGOMERY CODE § 21-29
1:34
§ 21-29. Date of participation.
The effective date of the participation of Montgomery Township in the
Delaware Valley Insurance Trust will be no later than January 1, 2000.
§ 21-30. Delegation of powers to Board of Trustees.
Each participating municipality delegates to the Board of Trustees of the
Delaware Valley Insurance Trust the powers enumerated in the Trust
Agreement.
§ 21-31. Liability risks.
As set forth in the Trust Coverage Document, Montgomery Township shall
be provided coverage for the following liability risks:
§ 21-32. Payment of contributions, premiums and assessments.
All contributions, premiums and assessments paid by Montgomery
Township shall be made with funds appropriated by Montgomery Township
for that purpose. If permitted under state and federal law, Montgomery
Township may incur debt for the purpose of financing any excess insurance
coverage, as set forth in the Trust Agreement.
§ 21-33. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees, an administrator, a claims administrator/loss control consultant
and various service agents appointed by the Board of Trustees in
accordance with the Trust Agreement.
§ 21-34. Annual appropriations.
As set forth in the Trust Agreement, the funds required for the operation
of the Trust shall be provided by the participating municipalities through
annual appropriations.
A. Comprehensive general liability.
B. Crime coverage.
C. Uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage.
D. Police professional/law enforcement liability.
E. Public officials liability.
F. Property coverage.
§ 21-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-35
1:35
§ 21-35. Group insurance and employee benefits.
The Delaware Valley Insurance Trust is empowered to enter into contracts
for policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including social
security for any of its employees.
§ 21-36. Responsibilities of Township.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Insurance Trust,
Montgomery Township agrees to the following:
§ 21-37. Statutory authorization.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provision of Intergovernmental
Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as amended, 5 P.S. § 481 et
seq.12
A. That it will make its initial contribution upon admission to the Trust for
creation of the restricted surplus fund needed to protect participating
municipalities against potentially catastrophic losses.
B. That it will timely pay all annual premiums and assessments as may be
required by the Board of Trustees.
C. That it will appoint a representative to sit on the Board of Trustees and
designate a contact person for the purpose of communicating with the
Trust or its representatives.
D. That it will agree not to withdraw from the Trust for a period of two
years following its admission to the Trust.
E. That it may withdraw from the Trust only upon satisfaction of the
conditions set forth in the Trust Agreement.
F. That it agrees to perform all covenants contained in the Participation
and Trust Agreements and delegate to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the Trust Agreement.
G. That it will comply with all the conditions set forth in the Trust
Coverage Document governing the handling of claims, including the
defense and settlement thereof.
H. That it will appropriate the funds needed to pay all contributions,
premiums and assessments as may be required by the Board of
Trustees in accordance with the Trust Agreement.
I. That it will cooperate with the Trust, its agents or employees and
provide the Trust with all information it needs for the operation of the
Trust, including any underwriting or the claims data which may be
requested by the Board of Trustees or its designee.
12.Editor's Note: 5 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed 1996, Dec. 19, P.L. 1158, No. 177, § 2(a).
See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 21-35 MONTGOMERY CODE § 21-37
1:36
ARTICLE VII
Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust
[Adopted 4-26-2004 by Ord. No. 04-178]
§ 21-38. Authorization; documents.
The Chairman and Secretary of Montgomery Township are hereby
authorized to execute the Trust Agreement and any other agreements
necessary for its participation in the Delaware Valley Health Insurance
Trust. The Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust Agreement is attached
hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. The trust
agreement attached hereto is on file for inspection and review at the
municipal offices of Montgomery Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania. This Trust Agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended but in no event shall such amendments or modifications materially
adversely affect the right of the Montgomery Township to participate in the
Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust.
§ 21-39. Purpose.
The participation of Montgomery Township in the Delaware Valley Health
Insurance Trust is authorized for the purpose of obtaining high quality
health benefits at the most reasonable cost to the Montgomery Township
and its employees.
§ 21-40. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in the Trust Agreement and as otherwise stated herein, the
following conditions apply to the participation of the Montgomery Township
in the Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust:
§ 21-41. Minimum commitment.
Montgomery Township agrees to participate in the Delaware Valley Health
Insurance Trust for a minimum of two years and thereafter may withdraw
A. That each participating municipality must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating municipality agrees to pay all contributions
when due as provided in the Trust Agreement and any bylaws
thereafter adopted by the Trust;
C. That each participating municipality uses its best efforts to provide
appropriations for the payment of any contributions required to achieve
the purposes and objectives of the Trust;
D. That each participating municipality cooperate fully in achieving the
purposes and objectives of the Trust;
E. That each participating municipality comply with all other conditions of
the Agreement.
§ 21-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-41
1:37
for any reason whatsoever, provided that it has fulfilled all its financial
obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
§ 21-42. Effective date.
The effective date of the participation of Montgomery Township in the
Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust will be June 1, 2004.
§ 21-43. Delegation of powers.
Each participating municipality delegates to the Board of Trustees of the
Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust the powers enumerated in the Trust
Agreement.
§ 21-44. Payment of contributions.
All contributions paid by Montgomery Township shall be made with funds
appropriated by Montgomery Township for that purpose.
§ 21-45. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees
and Executive Committee selected by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with the Trust Agreement.
§ 21-46. Annual appropriations.
The participating municipalities through annual appropriations shall
provide the funds required for the operation of the Trust.
§ 21-47. Group insurance and employee benefits.
The Delaware Valley Health Insurance Trust is empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including
social security for any of its employees.
§ 21-48. Agreement to comply.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Health Insurance
Trust, Montgomery Township agrees to comply with all the terms and
conditions in the attached Trust Agreement.13
§ 21-49. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A., § 2301 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: Said Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 21-41 MONTGOMERY CODE § 21-49
1:38
ARTICLE VIII
Alternative TMDL Plan for the Wissahickon Creek Watershed
[Adopted 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16-295; amended in its entirety
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-309]
§ 21-50. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Renewed
Intergovernmental Agreement for the Development of an Alternative TMDL
Plan for the Wissahickon Creek Watershed."
§ 21-51. Legislative intent.
A. Montgomery Township is a second class township.
B. The Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, referred to as the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law provides that local governments
may jointly cooperate in the exercise or in the performance of their
respective governmental functions, powers, or responsibilities.14
C. In 2016, the Wissahickon Creek Watershed Municipalities (including
Abington Township, Ambler Borough, Cheltenham Township, Horsham
Township, Lansdale Borough, Lower Gwynedd Township, Montgomery
Township, North Wales Borough, Philadelphia County, Springfield
Township, Upper Dublin Township, Upper Gwynedd Township, Upper
Moreland Township, Whitemarsh Township, Whitpain Township, and
Worcester Township) and certain wastewater treatment plants,
including Abington Township Wastewater Treatment Plant, Abington
Borough Wastewater Treatment Plant, Upper Gwynedd Township
Wastewater Treatment Plant, Upper Dublin Township Wastewater
Treatment Plant (Bucks County Water & Sewer Authority) entered into
an intermunicipal agreement for the development of an alternative
TMDL plan for the Wissahickon Creek Watershed ("agreement").
D. The term of the agreement was for two years and the agreement stated
funds to be provided by each of the Wissahickon Creek Watershed
Municipalities to fund the work described in the agreement during
those two years.
E. Certain municipalities and authorities who were parties to the
agreement, including Montgomery Township, now desire to enter into a
new intergovernmental agreement (the "renewedy agreement") to
renew the project described in the agreement through March 31, 2020,
and to provide funding for the activities described in the renewed
agreement in the amount of $5,000 in 2018 and $10,000 in 2019.
F. The renewing municipalities and authorities are Abington Township,
Ambler Borough, Cheltenham Township, Lansdale Borough, Lower
Gwynedd Township, Montgomery Township, North Wales Borough,
14.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 21-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-51
1:39
§ 21-52. Goals; objectives; scope of study.
§ 21-53. Renewed agreement terms.
§ 21-54. Authority.
The Chair of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to execute all
documents and perform all necessary actions to cause the Township to
enter into the renewed agreement, the terms of which are officially adopted
through the enactment of this article.
§ 21-55. Repeal; ratification.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith or in conflict
with any of the specific terms enacted hereby, to the extent of said
inconsistencies or conflicts, are hereby specifically repealed. Any other
terms and provisions of the ordinances of the Township that are unaffected
by this article are hereby reaffirmed and ratified.
Philadelphia County, Springfield Township, Upper Dublin Township,
Upper Gwynedd Township, Whitemarsh Township, Whitpain Township,
Abington Township Wastewater Treatment Plant, Ambler Borough
Wastewater Treatment Plant, Upper Gwynedd Township Wastewater
Treatment Plant, Upper Dublin Township Wastewater Treatment Plant
(Bucks County Water & Sewer Authority).
A. The goal of the alternative TMDL plan is to achieve water quality
standards in water bodies throughout the Wissahickon Creek
Watershed.
B. The objectives of the alternative TMDL plan are delineated in the
attached Renewed Agreement's Attachment "A" ["Milestones"].15
A. The terms of the renewed agreement, including (1) intergovernmental
agreement; (2) definitions; (3) guiding principles; (4) goals and
objectives; (5) administrative organization; (6) applicable law; (7)
integration; (8) no oral modification; (9) severability; (10)
representation by counsel; (11) counterparts; and (12) execution by
facsimile or electronic scanning, are set forth in the attached renewed
agreement as Appendix "A" and incorporated in this article as though
set forth in full.16
B. In addition to the required funding under the terms of the renewed
agreement, any additional funds for the implementation and
enforcement of the renewed agreement may be appropriated by the
Board of Supervisors, as it shall determine, in its sole discretion, from
time to time by resolution.
15.Editor's Note: Attachment "A" is on file in the Township offices.
16.Editor's Note: Appendix "A" is on file in the Township offices.
§ 21-51 MONTGOMERY CODE § 21-56
1:40
§ 21-56. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this article
be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of the
article shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and affect,
and for this reason the provisions of this article shall be severable.
§ 21-57. Effective date.
This article shall become effective five days after enactment.
§ 21-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-57
1:41
Chapter 24
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 24-1. Authority to enter trust. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
This Township, by authority granted by 53 P.S. § 65902.1(e)(3),17 shall join
with other municipalities, in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,18 by becoming a settlor of the
Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust and entering into a
declaration of trust, which is adopted by reference with the same effect as
if it had been set out verbatim in this section, and a copy of which shall
be filed with the minutes of Township Supervisors, with authority, from
time to time, to purchase shares of the trust from Township funds and to
redeem some or all of those shares, those actions to be taken by the officials
designated for the purpose of Township Supervisors, from time to time
under general or specific instructions, and the designation of those officials
shall be evidenced by the certification of the Township Secretary.
§ 24-2. Trustees to have custody.
The Trustees of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust are
designated as having official custody of the funds represented by the shares
which are purchased under the authorization contained in this chapter.
§ 24-3. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,19 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set out in the declaration of trust
referred to in § 24-1 of this chapter and in the information statement
presented to this meeting.
B. This Township's participation in the declaration of trust shall be
terminable by the Township at any time by ordinance.
C. The declaration of trust and the purchase of shares are for the purpose
of investing the Township's funds in obligations, which are otherwise
legal investments of the Township, as part of a pooled arrangement
with other governmental units in order to achieve economic and other
advantages of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized by this chapter
except through the purchase of shares from Township funds.
17.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 65902.1 was repealed 11-9-1995 by P.L. 350, No. 60. See
now 53 P.S. § 68204.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 21-57 MONTGOMERY CODE § 24-3
1:42
Chapter 26
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 32. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
§ 26-1. Position created.
The position of Township Manager is hereby created in accordance with
Section 599.1 of the Second Class Township Code, Act of May 1, 1933, P.L.
103, as amended.20
§ 26-2. Appointment; compensation; terms of employment; removal.
The Township Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a
majority of all the members of the Board of Supervisors, which shall fix
the amount of compensation. The Board shall enter into an employment
agreement with the Manager, setting forth the terms and conditions of
employment. The Board may remove the Manager at any time by a majority
of all its members and shall furnish the Manager with a written statement
setting forth the reasons for such action.
§ 26-3. Qualifications.
The Township Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive
and administrative qualifications, with special reference to training and/or
experience in municipal management. The Manager need not be a resident
of the Township or state at the time of appointment.
§ 26-4. Duties and responsibilities.
The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Township. He shall:
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
declaration of trust and in the bylaws provided for in that declaration of
trust.
F. Shares shall be purchased from time to time and shall be redeemed as
necessary to meet the cash needs of the Township, as provided in § 24-1
of this chapter.
A. Be responsible to the Board of Supervisors for carrying out all policies
and programs established by the Board.
20.Editor's Note: Former Section 599.1 was repealed 11-9-1995 by P.L. 350, No. 60. See now
53 P.S. § 66301.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:43
§ 26-5. Relationship to the Board.
It is the intention of this chapter that the Board act as a body in all
administrative matters except those of a ministerial nature performed by
the Chairman of the Board. It is contrary to the spirit of this chapter for
individual members of the Board or for committees of the Board to interfere
with the Manager or any authorized personnel of the Township in the
performance of their duties. The Board and all members thereof shall deal
with administrative matters solely through the Manager. However, nothing
herein shall prevent the Board from establishing a committee of its own
members to review the operations and legislative needs of the Township
departments or from assigning its members to liaison relationships with
boards, commissions and authorities.
B. Direct and supervise the activities of all municipal departments and
functions except as otherwise provided by ordinance or law.
C. Appoint and, when deemed necessary, suspend, remove or otherwise
discipline all Township employees, except department heads, on the
basis of merit system principles. The Manager shall be a participant in
all personnel actions affecting department heads, with the Board
approving such actions. This subsection shall not apply to the Township
Solicitor and the Township Engineer.
D. Make such recommendations to the Board concerning policy
formulation as deemed desirable.
E. Prepare and administer the annual budget.
F. Keep the Board and public informed as to the conduct of Township
affairs.
G. Prepare the agenda and attend all meetings of the Board with the right
to take part in discussion but not to vote.
H. See that all laws with respect to Township matters, as well as all acts of
the Board, are faithfully observed; however, this shall be construed as
in addition to and not in substitution of the enforcement responsibility
of any other officer or employee of the Township.
I. Negotiate contracts for the Township subject to the approval of the
Board and which shall be executed by the officers of the Township.
J. Direct the study of complaints and suggestions received by the
Township; see that proper response is made and that the Board is
informed of such matters.
K. Become familiar with grant and assistance programs available from
other governmental agencies and keep the Board informed as to the
availability of these programs.
L. Perform such other duties as are designated by the Board.
§ 26-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 26-6
1:44
§ 26-6. Bond requirements. [Amended 12-10-1979 by Ord. No. 68A;
amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
The Township Manager shall give bond to the Township in the sum of
$50,000, with sufficient surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of
his duties.
Chapter 30
RECREATION AND PARKS BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 166. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
§ 30-1. Establishment of Board.
There is hereby created, pursuant to Section 2204 of the Second Class
Township Code ("Second Class Township Code") (NOTE: Act of May 1,
1933, P.L. 103, No. 69; reenacted July 10, 1947, P.L. 1481; reenacted and
amended November 9, 1995, P.L. 350, No. 60),21 a board to be known as
the Montgomery Township Advisory Recreation and Parks Board ("Board").
The Board shall be composed of five, seven or nine residents of Montgomery
Township ("Township").
§ 30-2. Appointment and terms of office.
Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Supervisors in accordance
with the following procedures:
§ 30-3. Service without pay; reimbursement for certain expenses.
Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services.
Upon approval of the Supervisors, members of the Board may be
A. Board members shall serve for terms of five years, or until their
successors are appointed, except that members first appointed shall be
appointed so that the terms of not more than two members expire
annually. All persons appointed shall serve their full terms unless they
voluntarily resign or are removed by the Supervisors for dereliction or
neglect of duty. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
B. Whenever possible, due consideration will be given to representation
from various geographic sections within the Township, so that all Board
members shall not be from the same geographic area.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 67204.
§ 26-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:45
reimbursed by the Township for certain expenses incurred in performance
of their duties.
§ 30-4. Advisory role.
The Board is to be advisory and shall coordinate its activities with the
elected officials and other advisory committees of the Township.
§ 30-5. Organization of board; rules for parks and public
amusement; violations and penalties.
§ 30-6. Authority of the Board.
The Board shall assist and advise the Supervisors in the following areas:
A. The members of the Board shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary and
select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one year. The
Board may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of all business
within its jurisdiction.
B. The Supervisors, pursuant to Section 2203 of the Second Class
Township Code,22 may by ordinance regulate the use and enjoyment by
the public of any park or recreation ground owned and operated by the
Township. The Supervisors may also prescribe rules for the use by the
public of parks and recreation grounds and the facilities and
amusements connected therewith and post the rules at conspicuous
places in the parks or recreation grounds.
C. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any
of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the
Supervisors shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be adjudged
guilty of a summary offense punishable by fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, if found in default thereof, be subject to
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 60 days.
Each and every violation shall constitute a separate offense, and the
imposition of one penalty shall not excuse the violation where permitted
to continue. The application of the penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
A. Identifying the recreation and parks needs of the Township.
B. Recommending recreational programs for approval by the Supervisors.
C. Recommending plans, programs, and policies regarding the provision
of recreation and park services.
D. Advising the Supervisors in the acquisition and development of
parklands.
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 67203.
§ 30-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 30-6
1:46
§ 30-7. Reporting.
The Board shall keep minutes of its meetings, which it shall submit to the
Supervisors after every meeting. The Board shall also submit an annual
report to the Supervisors, including an analysis of the adequacy and
effectiveness of community recreation areas, facilities and leadership.
§ 30-8. Annual budget.
The Board, at such times and in the manner as directed by the Supervisors,
shall annually submit for approval to the Supervisors a proposed budget
for the ensuing year, setting forth all proposed expenditures, salaries, and
programs with sufficient justification. The Board shall not in any manner
obligate the Supervisors for the payment of any Township funds until the
same is appropriated by the Supervisors.
Chapter 32
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 17.
Manager — See Ch. 26.
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
E. Undertaking recreation and park tasks as requested by the
Supervisors.
§ 30-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-8
1:47

ARTICLE I
Social Security
[Adopted 10-1-1962 by Ord. No. 6]
§ 32-1. Authorization to extend coverage.
The Township of Montgomery is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to
the State Agency23 a plan or plans and agreement, required under Section
6 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act,24 to extend coverage
to certain employees and officers of the Township of Montgomery and do
all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers
under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 32-2. Payroll deductions; late penalty.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions to be matched by payments by the Township of Montgomery
to be made into the contribution fund of the Social Security Act through
the office of the State Agency and to make charges of this tax to the
fund or funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to certain
employees of the Township of Montgomery. Such payments are to be made
in accordance with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated
by the State Agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments
which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month
until such time as payments are made.
§ 32-3. Applicability.
This social security program shall include all Township employees except:
A. Service performed by an employee in a position covered by a retirement
system on the date the agreement between the Federal Security
Administrator and the commonwealth is made applicable to his
coverage group.
B. Service performed by an employee who is employed to relieve him from
unemployment.
C. Service performed in a hospital, home or other institution by an inmate
thereof.
D. Covered transportation service [as defined in Section 210(1) of the
Social Security Act].25
23.Editor's Note: A preamble to the ordinance which enacted this chapter explained that the
enabling Act designates the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to act as the “State Agency.”
24.Editor's Note: The “enabling Act” refers to Act No. 491 of 1951, which is the enabling Act
provided for in Section 218 of Public law 734, 81st Congress. See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq. For
the Social Security Act, see 42 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq.
§ 32-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:49
§ 32-4. Appropriation of funds; commencement of participation.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the
Township of Montgomery in the necessary amount to pay into the
contribution fund as provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act26 and in
accordance with the plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the
President and Secretary of the Township of Montgomery to enter into an
agreement with the State Agency, which agreement shall be in accordance
with Act No. 491 and with paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act.27 Such
plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of the Township of
Montgomery shall commence as of January 1, 1951.
E. Service (other than agricultural labor or service performed by a
student) excluded from employment by any provision of Section 210(a)
of the Social Security Act, other than paragraph (8) of such section.
F. Services in positions the compensation for which is on a fee basis.
G. Services performed by a student which, if performed in the employ of a
nongovernment employer, would be excluded from employment under
Section 210(a) of the Social Security Act.
H. Services in any class or classes of elective positions.
I. Services in any class or classes of part-time positions.
J. Agricultural labor which, if performed in the employ of a
nongovernment employer, would be excluded from employment under
the Social Security Act.
K. Services of an emergency nature.
26.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
27.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq.
§ 32-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 32-4
1:50
Chapter 34
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 34-1. Establishment.
By the enactment of this chapter, the Supervisors of Montgomery Township
create and establish a Township Planning Commission to be known as the
"Montgomery Township Planning Commission."
§ 34-2. Initial members. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
The initial members of the Montgomery Township Planning Commission are
hereby appointed. The list of initial members is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 34-3. Powers and duties. [Added 2-3-1969 by Ord. No. 9A;
amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
The Montgomery Township Planning Commission shall have the powers
and responsibilities of planning agencies and planning commissions as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247 of 1968
(53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), effective January 1, 1969, as the same shall be
amended from time to time.
§ 34-4. Appointments; terms; vacancies; membership. [Added
2-3-1969 by Ord. No. 9A; amended 5-16-1972 by Ord. No. 9B;
8-11-1975 by Ord. No. 9C; 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; 11-24-2008
by Ord. No. 08-233]
Appointments, terms, vacancies and membership of the Montgomery
Township Planning Commission shall be in accordance with Article II of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 to 11202, as
amended.28 The appointing authority of Montgomery Township shall be its
Board of Supervisors.
§ 34-5. Removal. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-233]
Removal from the Montgomery Township Planning Commission shall be
in accordance with Article II of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 to 11202, as amended.29
28.Editor's Note: For Art. II, see 53 P.S. §§ 10201 through 10212.
29.Editor's Note: For Art. II, see 53 P.S. §§ 10201 through 10212.
§ 32-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-6
1:51
§ 34-6. Conduct of business. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-233]
Conduct of business of the Montgomery Township Planning Commission
shall be in accordance with Article II of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 to 11202, as amended.30
§ 34-7. Planning Department Director. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-233]
For the administration of each planning department, a director of planning
may be appointed in accordance with Article II of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101 to 11202, as amended.31
§ 34-8. Assistance. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-233]
The Montgomery Township Planning Commission, with consent of the Board
of Supervisors of Montgomery Township, may accept and utilize any
available assistance, county, state, federal or otherwise, in accordance with
Article II of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10101
to 11202, as amended.32
§ 34-9. Alternate members. [Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-302]
The Township Board of Supervisors may appoint, by resolution, up to three
Township residents to serve as alternate members. Such alternate member
appointments are subject to the following:
A. The term of office of an alternate member is designated as four years.
B. Alternate members may be appointed to substitute for any absent,
recused, or disqualified Planning Commission member.
C. Alternate members may be designated to cases as needed on a rotating
basis according to declining seniority among the alternates.
D. Alternate members are entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Planning Commission to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Planning Commission members, including
specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the
proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties as otherwise
provided by law.
E. Any alternate member may participate in any proceeding or discussion
of the Planning Commission but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Planning Commission nor be reimbursed unless
designated as a voting alternate member in accord with applicable law.
30.Editor's Note: For Art. II, see 53 P.S. §§ 10201 through 10212.
31.Editor's Note: For Art. II, see 53 P.S. §§ 10201 through 10212.
32.Editor's Note: For Art. II, see 53 P.S. §§ 10201 through 10212.
§ 34-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 34-9
1:52
Chapter 37
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil defense — See Ch. 8.
Intergovernmental cooperative
agreements — See Ch. 21.
Pensions — See Ch. 32.
F. Alternate members will continue to serve on the Planning Commission
for any proceeding in which they were originally appointed until the
Planning Commission reaches a decision on the matter.
G. Alternate members may not serve as members of the Township's Zoning
Hearing Board or as a Township's Zoning Officer.
§ 34-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-9
1:53

ARTICLE I
Mutual Aid Agreement
[Adopted 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 62]
§ 37-1. Township participation in program.
§ 37-2. Organization of Department.
A. The Township of Montgomery hereby agrees to formally join in the
Montgomery County Mutual Aid Program established in accordance
with the Joint Municipal Activities Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, 53 P.S.
§ 481 et seq.,33 for the rendition of emergency police protection in time
of civil disobedience and/or natural disaster.
B. The Township of Montgomery agrees to be bound by the terms of
procedure in existence for said purpose in conformity with the
guidelines set forth herein.
A. The Chief of Police or the commanding officer in his absence shall have
authority to request assistance from other municipalities in the event of
emergency.
B. Only the Chief of Police or, in his absence, the officer in command of the
municipality in which the emergency occurs may request assistance
under this plan.
C. The employing Chief shall initiate the request for assistance through
the Montgomery County Communication Center in accord with the
procedure agreed upon by participating municipalities.
D. The Chief of Police of the requesting municipality shall be the
Commander in Chief of all personnel sent into an emergency.
E. Responding departments shall provide up to 10% of their departmental
strength when possible.
F. The responding police shall have the same authority as that of the
requesting department when acting in response to a request for
assistance pursuant to this agreement.
G. The District Attorney shall assign an Assistant District Attorney to the
requesting Chief to act as legal supervisor.
H. The Sheriff shall immediately dispatch vans for transport of prisoners if
requested by the supervising Chief and shall determine the availability
of adult and juvenile detention facilities.
I. In every instance where aid is requested, personnel supplied will be
relieved of duty not more than eight hours after reporting.
33.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177.
See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-2
1:55
§ 37-3. Finances.
§ 37-4. Term of agreement.
This agreement shall continue in effect until terminated by subsequent
ordinance of the municipality. This agreement is binding on all
municipalities adopting it.
J. The participating Police Chiefs, together with Montgomery County
authorities, may establish procedures under which to implement this
agreement.
A. Montgomery County shall provide insurance to cover liability of the
mutual aid squad and its individual members. Each municipality shall
pay the cost of its own personnel when on duty in an emergency
covered by this agreement.
B. Montgomery County shall supply equipment required by the mutual aid
squad other than the regular issued equipment of each member.
§ 37-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 37-4
1:56
Chapter 43
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 32.
§ 37-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-4
1:57

ARTICLE I
Tax Collector's Salary
[Adopted 3-1-1965 by Ord. No. 27; amended 1-28-1985 by Ord. No.
27A; 1-9-1989 by Ord. No. 27B; 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-193]
§ 43-1. Salary established. [Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-270]
The Montgomery Township Tax Collector shall receive a total annual salary
of $16,735 as compensation for the collection of Township taxes and
streetlight assessments, commencing January 1, 2014.
§ 43-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-1
1:59

ARTICLE II
Supervisors' Salaries
[Adopted 12-23-1985 by Ord. No. 97; amended 6-13-1988 by Ord.
No. 97A]
§ 43-2. Salaries established by population. [Amended 12-11-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-5634]
Each Supervisor of Montgomery Township shall be compensated for
services in the amount of money set opposite each category of Township
population, as set forth herebelow:
Montgomery Township Population Annual Compensation
Not more than 4,999 $1,875
5,000 to 9,999 $2,500
10,000 to 14,999 $3,250
15,000 to 24,999 $4,125
25,000 to 34,999 $4,375
35,000 or more $5,000
§ 43-3. Changes in salary.
The rate of compensation shall be changed to comply with the table set
forth in § 43-2 above immediately upon receipt of a certified copy of the
Montgomery Township population furnished by the United States Bureau of
Census.
§ 43-4. Monthly payments.
Such compensation may be paid in monthly installments of approximately 1/
12 of the annual compensation.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 12-31-1995.
§ 43-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-4
1:61

ARTICLE III
Sewer Authority Board Members' Salary
[Adopted 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 14-282]
§ 43-5. Salary established.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 5610(d), the compensation of each of the Members of the Board of the
Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer Authority is hereby increased from
$50 per meeting to $100 per meeting.
§ 43-6. Timing of increase.
Consistent with the requirements of the above referenced section of the
Municipality Authorities Act, the aforesaid increase in compensation shall
commence at the beginning of the next term of each such Board Member
following the date of this article.
§ 43-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-6
1:63
Chapter 46
SEWER AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental cooperation
agreements — See Ch. 21.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 183.
Sewers — See Ch. 187.
§ 43-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 43-6
1:64
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Sewer Authority
[Adopted 6-3-1963 by Ord. No. 20]
§ 46-1. Intent.
The Supervisors of the Township of Montgomery, County of Montgomery
and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereby signify their intention to
organize a Municipal Sewer Authority under the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, as amended.35
§ 46-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Supervisors of the Township of Montgomery are hereby authorized and
directed to execute on behalf of said Township Articles of Incorporation for
such an Authority in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended, the
Supervisors of the Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an Authority thereunder, do hereby
certify:
1. The name of the Authority is the Montgomery Township Municipal
Sewer Authority.
2. The Authority is formed under the provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.
3. No other Authority organized under the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, as amended, or under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as
amended, is in existence in and for the incorporating municipality except
the Montgomery Township Authority.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of
Montgomery, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of the Supervisors of the Township of
Montgomery, constituting its municipal authorities, are as follows:
A. L. Thomas Box 94, Montgomeryville, Pennsylvania
W. C. Gallagher Route 309, Colmar, Star Route,
Pennsylvania
Marvin A. Latta Upper State Road, North Wales, R.D.,
Pennsylvania
35.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L.
287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:65
6. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Municipal Sewer Authority to be formed hereby are as
follows:
Name Address
Term
of Office
T.F. Harrington Richardson Road, Colmar,
Pennsylvania
5 years
Trevor R. Roberts Spring Lake Farm,
Montgomeryville,
Pennsylvania
4 years
William P. Thomas Richardson Road, Lansdale
M.R., Pennsylvania
3 years
Herman Williams 23 Morningside Drive,
Lansdale, Pennsylvania
2 years
Ernest H. Brenneman Cowpath Road, Lansdale
M.R., Pennsylvania
1 year
All being citizens of the Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
7. The proofs of publication required by the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, as amended, are submitted herewith.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed these Articles
on behalf of the Township of Montgomery and have caused the seal to be
hereunto affixed this 3rd day of June, A.D. 1963.
TOWNSHIP OF MONTGOMERY
By
/s/ A.L. Thomas
________________________________
A.L. Thomas
/s/ W.C. Gallagher
________________________________
W.C. Gallagher
/s/ Marvin A. Latta
________________________________
Marvin A. Latta
Attest:
________________________________
Secretary
(SEAL)
§ 46-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 46-3
1:66
§ 46-3. Publication of notice.
The Secretary of the Supervisors of the Township of Montgomery is hereby
directed to cause a notice of this article to be published as required by
Section 3 of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.36
§ 46-4. Filing of articles.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby directed to file the above
Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication,
with the Secretary of the Commonwealth and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Montgomery
Township Municipal Sewer Authority.
§ 46-5. Initial project; cooperation with other municipalities.
The initial project shall be the acquiring, holding, constructing, improving,
maintaining and operating, owning and leasing, either in the capacity of
lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof, sewage treatment
works and related facilities, including the provision of sewage treatment
facilities in cooperation with the Township of Hatfield and any municipal
authority heretofore organized by said Township.
§ 46-6. Appointment of first members.
The persons named and the terms of office set forth in the Sixth Article
of the Articles of Incorporation, the execution of which is authorized and
directed by § 46-2 hereof, are hereby appointed as the first members of the
Board of the Authority, and their terms of office shall commence on the date
of appointment and shall be computed from January 1, 1964.
36.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L.
287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 46-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-6
1:67

ARTICLE II
Power to Open Streets
[Adopted 1-28-1965 by Ord. No. 25]
§ 46-7. Conditions of entrance.
For the purpose of constructing, extending, installing, maintaining,
safeguarding or repairing its sewer facilities, the Montgomery Township
Municipal Sewer Authority is authorized to enter in, under and upon any
and all streets or other ways now or hereafter in public use within this
Township; subject, however, to the following conditions:
§ 46-8. Right to construct and maintain.
The aforesaid Authority is hereby granted the right and easement to
construct and maintain its sewer facilities under any and all streets or other
ways now or hereafter in public use within this Township.
A. The Authority shall cause as little inconvenience to the public in the use
of such streets and ways as may be reasonably possible and shall
comply with the reasonable requirements of the Board of Township
Supervisors in such regard.
B. Upon completion of any work the Authority shall restore such streets
and ways as nearly as may be possible to the conditions prevailing
before the work began.
C. The Authority shall indemnify the Township and its Board of
Supervisors against all loss and expense by reason of injury to persons
or damage to property resulting from operations of the Authority in
such streets and ways or the maintenance of its facilities thereunder
and, upon request of the Board of Township Supervisors, shall obtain
insurance in reasonable amounts covering such risks.
§ 46-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:69
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 56
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 56-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Montgomery
Township Alarm Systems Ordinance."
§ 56-2. Adoption of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
The Township has adopted Section 7511 (Control of Alarm Devices and
Automatic Dialing Devices) of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, as amended,
to govern false alarms within the Township.37
Chapter 58
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 166. Zoning — See Ch. 230.
37.Editor’s Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7511.
§ 46-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 56-2
1:70
ARTICLE I
Liquor License Procedures
[Adopted 6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 01-142]
§ 58-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township enacts and ordains the
following procedures in accordance with the requirements of Act 141 of the
Liquor Code38 relating to an application for intermunicipal transfers and
economic development liquor licenses.
§ 58-2. Application for license; contents.
A. Any applicant seeking an intermunicipal transfer or economic
development liquor license shall complete the Township's application
form which shall be available from the Township.
B. The Township application may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township.
C. The Township's application shall contain, but is not limited to, a request
for the following information:
(1) Applicant name; address; telephone number; FAX number; e-mail
address.
(2) Applicant's representative or attorney name; address; telephone
number; FAX number; e-mail address.
(3) Location and name of the establishment of the liquor license
proposed to be transferred.
(4) Proposed location of the liquor license to be transferred including
street address, parcel number and block and unit number.
(5) The name of the establishment sought to be licensed.
(6) Type of liquor license proposed to be transferred.
(7) Other locations owned or operated by the applicant which
currently hold liquor licenses, including name, address and liquor
license number of these establishments.
(8) Whether applicant or anyone associated with locations owned or
operated by the applicant which currently hold liquor licenses have
ever been cited with Liquor Law violations.
(9) Whether applicant has been convicted or found guilty of a felony
within the past five years.
(10) Name, address and distance from proposed licensed premises of:
38.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:71
§ 58-3. Hearing.
The Township shall hold a public hearing in conformity with Act 141 and at
the public hearing a court reporter shall be present to make a transcript of
the hearing.
§ 58-4. Application fee.
There shall be a fee accompanying the application to be set by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township as it may pass it from
time to time.
§ 58-5. Right to post property.
The Township shall have the right to post the property upon which the
liquor license is sought but shall not be required to do so.
§ 58-6. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $600
for each count or, in default of payment thereof, imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 30 days, provided that each violation of any
provision of this article shall constitute a separate count.
(a) Nearest licensed establishments.
(b) Nearest schools.
(c) Nearest public playgrounds.
(d) Nearest churches.
(e) Nearest charitable institutions.
(f) Nearest hospitals.
(11) List of existing liquor licenses in Montgomery Township which are
inactive, in safekeeping and/or for sale, including name, address
and telephone number of contact person for each.
(12) Certification by the applicant that the information contained in the
application is true and correct; that the presentation of false
information shall subject the applicant to possible arrest, fines, and
imprisonment; and acknowledgment that submission of false
information may constitute grounds for revocation of the liquor
license.
§ 58-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 58-6
1:72
Chapter 65
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Burning of vegetation — See Ch. 193, Art. I. Nuisances — See Ch. 155.
§ 65-1. Duty to mow grass and weeds.
No person or other legal entity owning or occupying any real property
within the Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
shall permit any grass or weeds (or any vegetation whatsoever not edible
or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose) to exceed a height of 12
inches in the following areas:
§ 65-2. Nuisances.
The growth of grass or weeds or other vegetation above the height of 12
inches within the Township of Montgomery in violation of § 65-1 is hereby
declared a nuisance.
§ 65-3. Notice to cut weeds.
The Township Supervisors or any employee of the Township of Montgomery
designated for the purpose is hereby authorized to give written notice, by
personal service or by mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may
be, of any premises whereon grass or weeds are growing or remaining in
violation of the provisions of § 65-1 of this chapter, directing and requiring
such occupant or owner to remove or cut such grass or weeds so as to
conform to the requirements of this chapter within 10 days after receipt of
such notice.
A. Within an area of 100 feet from any portion of an occupied or
unoccupied building.
B. On any lot within an approved and recorded subdivision where a
building permit has been issued for any lot within the subdivision.
C. At all intersections so as to create a clear sight triangle of at least 75
feet on each street, road, highway or lane.
D. On all utility, authority or governmental rights-of-way.
E. Within an area of twenty-five feet along any street, road, highway or
lane, excepting where land is tilled, in which event the property owner
will cut the weeds and grass from the point at the edge of the highway
where the Pennsylvania Department of Highways or Montgomery
Township Road Crew mows to the edge of the field wherein the crops
are planted.
§ 58-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-4
1:73
§ 65-4. Failure to comply.
In case any person, firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to comply with
such notice within the period of time stated therein, the Township may
remove or cut such grass or weeds and the costs thereof, together with any
additional penalty authorized by law, may be collected by the Township from
such owner or occupant in any manner provided by law.
§ 65-5. Legal proceedings for compliance.
In addition to other penalties provided by this chapter, the Township of
Montgomery may institute proceedings in equity to require owners or
occupants of real estate within the Township of Montgomery to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 65-6. Costs to be lien.
The cost of removal, fine and penalties herein mentioned may be entered by
the Township of Montgomery as a lien against such property in accordance
with existing provisions of law.
§ 65-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $600 for each offense and, in default of payment, may be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each and every day upon
which an owner or occupant of real estate in the Township permits a
violation to exist shall constitute a separate offense without the necessity of
separate notices.
Chapter 69
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 17.
Sewer authority — See Ch. 46.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 72.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 116.
Nuisances — See Ch. 155.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 183.
Sewers — See Ch. 187.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 65-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 65-7
1:74
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 69-1. Adoption of codes by reference.
The following national and international codes are hereby adopted by
reference pursuant to the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66601(e),
and shall govern the design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair,
demolition, removal, maintenance and use of all buildings and structures
within Montgomery Township:
§ 69-2. Conflict with other provisions.
Where any provision or requirement of the statutes or regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is more stringent or more strict than any
provision or requirement of this chapter or any of the aforementioned
codes adopted by reference by this chapter, the applicable provision or
requirement of the statute or regulation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall prevail over any provision or requirement of this chapter
or any of the aforesaid codes.
§ 69-2.1. Adoption of standards by reference.
In addition to the adoption by reference of the aforementioned codes, all
standards referenced within each of said codes are also hereby adopted by
reference, including but not limited to the National Fire Codes, standards,
recommended practices and guides published by the NFPA; the National
Electrical Safety Code (American National Standard); the ADA standards;
the OSHA Safety Standards; and all amendments and revisions made
hereafter to these standards referenced in said codes.
§ 69-2.2. Adoption of rules and regulations; authority.
A. The BOCA National Building Code/1996.
B. The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1996.
C. The International Property Maintenance Code/2003. [Amended
6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04-182]
D. The CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code/1992.
E. The International Plumbing Code/1995.
F. The International Mechanical Code/1996.
G. The National Electric Code/1996.
H. The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code/1994.
A. The Code Enforcement Official of Montgomery Township (hereinafter
"CEO") is hereby authorized to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
§ 69-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-2.2
1:75
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this chapter.
B. The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township, by resolution, may
adopt any such rules, regulations and amendments thereto relating to
any matter pertaining to this chapter which shall be enforced by the
Code Enforcement Office in accordance with Article X of this chapter.
§ 69-2.2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-2.2
1:76
ARTICLE II
BOCA National Building Code/1996
§ 69-3. Insertions and changes to code.
The following insertions and changes are hereby made to the BOCA
National Building Code/1996:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Building Code
of Montgomery Township," and, where the words "this code" appear,
they shall refer to said BOCA National Building Code/1996 and this
chapter.
B. Section 102.4, Referenced standards, shall be amended to add the
following sentence at the end of the paragraph: "The CEO shall make
the final determination."
C. The following provisions shall be added after Section 103.3:
(1) Damages exceeding 25%: If a structure is damaged by fire or any
other cause to an extent in excess of 25% of the physical value of
the structure before the damage was incurred, this code's
requirements for new structures shall apply.
(2) Existing roofs: Repair to existing roofs shall comply with the
requirements of § 1512.0 of this code.
(3) Part change in use: If a portion of a structure is changed in
occupancy or to a new use group and that portion is separated from
the remainder of the structure with the required vertical and
horizontal fire separation assemblies complying with the fire grade
in Table 602, then the construction involved in the change shall be
made to conform to the requirements for the new use and
occupancy, and the existing portion shall be made to comply with
the exitway requirements of this code.
(4) Physical value: In applying the provisions of this section, the
physical value of the structure shall be determined by the CEO and
be based on current replacement costs.
D. Amend Section 107.1, Permit application, by inserting the following at
the end of the sentence: "or use."
E. Section 107.5, Construction documents, is revised to delete therefrom
the requirements for "two copies of specifications and of plans drawn to
scale" and to substitute instead a requirement for "three copies of
specifications and of plans drawn to scale." In all other respects said
Section 107.5 remains unchanged.
F. Section 108.2, Suspension of permit, is hereby amended to read:
§ 69-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3
1:77
108.2 Invalidity of permit: Any permit issued shall become invalid
if the authorized work is not started within six months after issuance
of the permit or if the authorized work is not completed within one
year after the issuance of the permit. It shall be the responsibility of
the holder of the permit to secure reissuance of the permit prior to
continuing the work.
G. Section 108.3 is deleted in its entirety.
H. Section 108.8 is hereby amended to read:
108.8 Posting of permit: A true copy of the building permit shall be
kept on the site of operations and be posted so as to be visible from
the road and be kept undamaged and be replaced if damaged or
destroyed.
I. Section 110.0 shall have the following inserted: "To be reviewed by the
Montgomery Township Historical Society."
J. Section 112.3.1 shall have the following inserted: "Montgomery
Township Fee Schedule."
K. Section 116.4 is deleted in its entirety.
L. Sections 121.1 through 121.5 are hereby amended to read:
121.1 Application for appeal: Any person may appeal to the Board
of Appeals any decision of the Code Enforcement Office involving the
refusal to grant a permit, the rejection of a permit application or the
refusal to grant a modification to the provisions of this code covering
the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection,
alteration or repair of a building or structure, any order or notice
issued by the Code Enforcement Office or the issuance of a building
permit, the grant of a modification to the provisions of this code
covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the
erection, alteration or repair of a building or structure by the Code
Enforcement Office to issue any order or notice. The application for
an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the Township Manager within
10 days after the date of the refusal or rejection of a permit or the
application for a permit or the issuance of any order or notice by the
Building Official or the refusal of the Building Official to grant a
modification to the provisions of this code covering the manner of
construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration or
repair of building or structures or the refusal of the Code
Enforcement Office to issue any order or notice when requested, in
writing, to do so.
121.2 Membership of the Board: The Board of Appeals shall
consist of three members of the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery
Township.
§ 69-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-3
1:78
121.3 Notice of meeting: The Board of Appeals shall meet within 30
days following the filing of the appeal to decide the appeal. Ten days'
prior notice of the hearing date shall be given by ordinary mail to the
appellant, and, if the appellant is not the owner of the subject
premises involved in the appeal, then 10 days' prior notice of the
hearing shall also be given to the owner of the subject property by
ordinary mail.
121.4 Public hearings: All hearings shall be public, and the
appellant, his attorney or other representative, the representative
from the Code Enforcement Office and any other person whose
interest may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and an opportunity to examine and crossexamine
witnesses and to present witnesses.
121.5 Quorum: Three members of the Board of Supervisors shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of any business by the Board of
Appeals, and any matter presented to the Board of Appeals may be
decided if a quorum is present by a majority of the members of the
Board of Appeals then in attendance.
M. Sections 121.2.1, 121.2.2, 121.2.3 and 121.2.4, inclusive, are deleted in
their entirety.
N. Section 904.2 is amended to change the reference from 12,000 square
feet to 5,000 square feet and delete all exceptions.
O. Section 904.4 is amended to change the reference from 20,000 square
feet to 5,000 square feet.
P. Section 904.6 is amended to delete the word "not" after the word "shall"
in the third line.
Q. Section 904.7, Subdivision 1, is amended to insert 5,000 square feet in
place of 12,000 square feet. Subparagraph 2 is amended to insert 5,000
square feet in place of 24,000 square feet. Delete the exception and add
new exception: "..... unless constructed as Type 1B, 1C, 2A, 2B or 2C
from Table 503 and in accordance with Table 602."
R. Section 904.8 is amended to delete the exception.
S. Section 904.9 is amended to delete the exception.
T. Section 916.6 is amended to read:
916.6 Hose thread: A five-inch Stortz connection only shall be used
unless otherwise approved by the CEO or Fire Chief.
U. Section 924.1 is amended to add Subdivision 3 to read: "A Knox Box
shall be located upon all buildings with a key for entry for both
sprinkled and unsprinkled buildings, upon existing, reoccupied,
renovated or new structures."
§ 69-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3.1
1:79
§ 69-3.1. Additions to code.
The following provisions are hereby added to this code:
A. Permits required by other jurisdictions: All permits or certifications
required by federal or state laws or regulations regarding hazardous or
dangerous industry, trade, occupation or use which involve the
transportation, storage or handling of explosives, flammable,
combustible, toxic, bacterial, radioactive, nuclear, chemical or other
substances involving fire or life or health hazards shall be secured by
the applicant and evidence of the same shall be submitted to
Montgomery Township prior to the issuance of any permit by the Code
Enforcement Office.
B. Nuisances declared: Any building or structure or any part thereof, or
the service equipment of any building or structure, erected, altered,
reconstructed, repaired, removed or added to or maintained contrary to
any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and is abatable as such pursuant to the Second Class
Township Code, as amended.
C. Flood damage control regulations:
(1) Scope: In order to prevent excess damage to buildings and
structures due to flooding conditions, the following provisions shall
apply to all proposed construction or development located in the FP
Floodplain Conservation District, as defined in Article IV, § 230-12,
of the Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
(2) New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least 1 1/2
feet above the flood elevation base, as defined herein.
(3) Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if
the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the base
flood elevation.
(4) Substantial improvements, modifications, alterations,
reconstruction or improvements of any kind to nonresidential
structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to the elevations
required above.
(5) Existing structures located in a designated floodway shall not be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion
or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements.
(6) Structures located within the Floodplain Conservation District may
be rebuilt if destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided that
§ 69-3.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-3.1
1:80
the reconstruction will not result in an increase in the flood
elevation base, as referenced in the Flood Insurance Study,
Montgomery Township.
(7) If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor 1 1/2
feet above the base flood elevation, the following requirements
apply:
(a) Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to
provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall
extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points. From nonresidential structures, fill shall be placed to
provide access acceptable for the intended use. At-grade
access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet beyond the building
line, shall be provided to a minimum of 25% of the perimeter of
a nonresidential structure.
(b) Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only.
(c) Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or setting.
(d) Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical or two
horizontal, unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes
are submitted to and approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(e) Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties.
(8) Any additions permitted to nonconforming structures or new
structures permitted by special exception or variance shall be
constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing, consideration shall be
given to their effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
(9) All structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or other
movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and
decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and
other restricted sections of the watercourse.
(10) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the
flood elevation base shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation.
(11) Where located at or below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without incurring structural damage to the building.
§ 69-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3.1
1:81
(b) Plywood shall be of an exterior or marine grade and of a waterresistant
or waterproof variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have
sufficient wet strength and be so installed as to survive
inundation.
(d) Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other
components shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
(12) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(13) All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric airconditioning
and ventilating systems and other electrical
equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above
the flood elevation base.
(14)No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation
less than three feet above the flood elevation base.
(15) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(16)Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or
apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the flood
elevation base.
(17) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for
the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
(18) Where located at or below the flood elevation base:
§ 69-3.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-3.1
1:82
(a) Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation (i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
(b) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
sealed with a marine or water-resistant quality or similar
product.
(c) Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving inundation
(i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
(19)No materials that are buoyant, flammable or explosive or that, in
time of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life
shall be stored below the flood elevation base, per Article IV,
§ 230-12, of the Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance.
(20) If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements
stated in this code would result in an exceptional hardship for a
landowner, the Township Board of Supervisors may, upon request,
grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
(21) Relief issued shall conform to the following general guidelines:
(a) Any new residential structure or substantial improvements or a
structure which cannot be elevated to 1 1/2 feet above the
flood elevation base shall be elevated to the maximum extent
possible.
(b) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement to
the existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50%
of its market value, which cannot be elevated and/or
floodproofed to the flood elevation base, shall be elevated to
the maximum extent possible and floodproofed for the
remaining height to the flood elevation base in accordance
with the requirements established for the W3-W4 classes in the
publication referenced in § 2601.1, Subdivision 3, of this code.
(22) Requests for relief from the strict application of the provisions of
this code may be granted by the Township Board of Supervisors in
accordance with the following procedures and criteria:
(a) No relief shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway that would cause any
increase in the flood elevation base.
(b) If granted, relief shall involve only the least modification
necessary.
(c) In granting relief, the Board may attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the
objectives of this code.
§ 69-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3.1
1:83
(d) Whenever a relief is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
[1] The granting of relief may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
[2] Such relief may increase the risks to life and property.
(e) In reviewing any request for relief, the Board shall consider but
not be limited to the following:
[1] That there is good sufficient cause.
[2] That failure to grant the relief would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
[3] That the granting of the relief will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense or create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with any other
applicable local or state ordinances and regulations.
[4] That the granting of relief will not result in any adverse
impact on adjacent landowners, either upstream or
downstream.
(f) The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a complete
record of all requests for relief and related actions related to
the Floodplain Conservation District. In addition, a report of all
requests for relief granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
D. Supplementary administrative provisions for activities within the
Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) Plan requirements. In addition to the permit application
requirements normally required under the Montgomery Township
Zoning Ordinance (Article IV, Chapter 230, of the Code of the
Township of Montgomery) as amended, the CEO shall require the
following specific information to be included as part of the
application for a building permit:
(a) For structures to be elevated:
[1] A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
[2] A determination of elevations of the existing ground,
proposed finished ground and lowest floors certified by a
registered professional surveyor.
§ 69-3.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-3.1
1:84
[3] Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed
structure, including details of proposed fills, pile
structures, retaining walls, foundations, erosion protection
measures, etc. When required by the CEO, these plans
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
[4] Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities
(including sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from
flooding to an elevation at least 1 1/2 feet above the flood
elevation base at the building site.
(b) For structures to be floodproofed (nonresidential only):
[1] Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures;
prepared by a registered professional engineer or
architect, and showing the size of the proposed structure
and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
[2] A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed
finished ground, lowest floors and floodproofing limits,
certified by a registered professional surveyor.
[3] A certificate prepared by the registered professional
engineer or architect who prepared the plans in
Subsection D(1)(b)[1] above that the structure in question,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is
designed so that:
[a] Below an elevation 1 1/2 feet above the flood elevation
base the structure is watertight with walls
impermeable to the passage of water.
[b] The structures will withstand the hydrostatic,
hydrodynamic buoyant impact and other forces
resulting from the flood depths, velocities, pressures
and other forces associated with the flood base.
(c) For structures to be floodproofed in accordance with the
W3-W4 class requirements in the Office of the Chief of
Engineers, United States Army, Publications Number EP 1165
2 314, June 1972, and as subsequently amended:
[1] Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures,
prepared by a registered professional engineer or
architect, and showing the size of the proposed structure
and its relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
[2] A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed
finished ground, lowest floors and floodproofing limits,
certified by a registered professional surveyor.
§ 69-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3.1
1:85
[3] A certificate prepared by the registered professional
engineer or architect who prepared the plans in
Subsection D(1)(c)[1] above that the structure in question,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is
designed to satisfy the floodproofing requirements of the
W3-W4 classes in the above referenced publications.
(2) Review by technical agencies. A copy of all applications and plans
for construction or development in the Floodplain Conservation
District to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the
CEO to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Montgomery County Conservation District, the Township Engineer
and appropriate municipal agencies for review and comment prior
to the issuance of a building permit. The recommendations of all
technical review agencies shall be considered by the CEO for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
(3) Other permit issuance requirements. Prior to the issuance of any
building permit the CEO shall review the application for a permit to
determine if all other necessary governmental permits have been
obtained, including those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act,39 the Dam Safety and Encroachment Act,40
the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, P.L. 851, No. 166 of
1978,41 the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act, P.L. 864,
No. 167 of 1978,42 and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334, and as each is
amended. No permit shall be issued until this determination has
been made.
(4) Inspection and revocation. During the construction period, the CEO
or other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
Township laws and ordinances.
(5) In the discharge of his duties, the CEO shall have the authority to
enter any building, structure, premises or development in the
identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials,
at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(6) In the event that the CEO discovers that the work does not comply
with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances,
or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by
the applicant, the CEO may revoke the building permit and report
such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action it
considers necessary.
39.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
41.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 69-3.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-3.1
1:86
(7) A written record of all such inspections and violations of this
chapter shall be maintained.
(8) For purposes of implementation of these provisions, start of
construction shall be considered as defined in Article 27 of this
code.
(9) General definitions. The following definitions shall be used in
making reasonable interpretations of the provisions contained in
this section of the chapter:
FLOOD BASE — The flood which has been selected to serve as
the basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this
and other ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this
code, the one-hundred-year flood, as referenced in the current
Montgomery Township Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance
Administration.
FLOOD ELEVATION BASE — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation, as referenced in the Montgomery Township Flood
Insurance Study, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, within the
approximated floodplain, alluvial soils floodplain or areas
determined to be floodplain as documented by the Township
Engineer. The one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be
established as a point on the boundary of the approximated
floodplain nearest the construction site in question.
BUILDING — A constructed edifice designed to stand more or less
permanently enclosing a space of land, usually covered by a roof
and more or less completely enclosed by walls and serving as any
residential or nonresidential use, gas or liquid storage tank, shelter
for animals or other useful structure distinguished from structures
not designed for occupancy (such as fences or monuments) and
from structures not intended for use in one place (such as boats
and trailers), even though subject to occupancy of which at least
51% of actual cash value (less land value) is located above ground
(see "structure" definition).
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building
or structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets and other
paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas.
§ 69-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3.1
1:87
FLOOD PLAIN (or FLOODPLAIN) — That area defined in Article IV
of the Township Zoning Ordinance as the Floodplain Conservation
District; the floodplain definition contained therein (§ 230-5) is
made part of this code by reference.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents. Such measures are set forth in the floodproofing
regulations published by the Office of the Chief Engineers, United
States Army Publication No. EP 1165 2 314 (June 1972, and as
subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures for all new
construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
satisfy the requirements of the completely dry spaces (W1) and
essentially dry spaces (W2) classes referenced in these regulations.
In said publication, where reference is made to "below" (or above)
the BFD (base flood datum), it shall be interpreted as meaning
below (or above) the base flood elevation. Said regulations are
contained in the Building Code of Montgomery Township, as
amended.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that has one chance in
100 or a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
one year. For the purposes of this code, the one-hundred-year flood
(base flood), as defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, in the Flood Insurance
Study, Montgomery Township.
FLOOD ELEVATION REGULATORY — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground
or attached to the ground, including but not limited to buildings,
sheds, mobile homes and other similar entities.
Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall
begin within six months after the date of issuance of the
building permit or the permit shall expire unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the CEO. Construction and/
or development shall be considered to have started with the
preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation
for basements, footings, piers or foundations, erection of
temporary forms, the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes
or electrical and other services lines from the street.
(a)
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant at least 30 days prior to the date of
expiration which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the approval of such a request.
(b)
§ 69-3.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-3.1
1:88
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS —
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the structure, either:
[1] Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and was being restored
before the damage occurred.
[2]
(a)
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
[1]
Any alteration of a structure listed on a National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
[2]
(b)
E. False alarms: The provisions related to false alarms set forth in § 56-9 of
the Code of the Township of Montgomery, as amended, are incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 69-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3.1
1:89

ARTICLE III
CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code
§ 69-4. Insertions and changes to code.
The following insertions and changes are hereby made to the CABO One
and Two Family Dwelling Code/1992:
§ 69-5. Additions to code.
The following provisions are hereby added to this code and incorporated by
reference into the BOCA National Building Code/1996:
A. Section R-106 is deleted in its entirety.
B. Section R-107 is hereby amended to add the following sentence:
"Appeals shall be taken to the Board of Appeals pursuant to Sections
121.1 through 121.5 of the BOCA Basic Building Code/1996, as
amended by this chapter."
A. In all dwelling units, there shall be installed smoke detectors.
B. In all dwelling units, smoke detectors shall be wired directly to the
building electric power supply and be of a battery-operated type
approved by the Fire Marshal or Code Official.
C. Location of smoke detectors shall be installed as follows:
(1) At least one smoke detector shall be installed on each floor level
and immediately adjacent to each sleeping area in each and every
dwelling unit located in every building.
(2) In addition, where a common hall exists serving more than one
dwelling unit, there shall be at least one smoke detector in each
hallway and, if access or egress to such hall or hallway is obtained
by a stairway, the smoke detector shall be located in the hallway at
the top of the stairway leading to the hallway.
(3) In addition to the requirements above, at least one smoke detector
shall be installed at the head (top) of each stairway leading up to a
dwelling unit in such manner so as to assure that rising smoke is
not obstructed in reaching the smoke detector and the smoke
detector intercepts rising smoke before it reaches the dwelling
unit.
D. No building permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or
repair of, or addition to, any building which contains or which is
designed to contain a dwelling unit or dwelling units unless smoke
detectors are provided for as required by this chapter; nor shall any
occupancy permit be issued for the occupancy of any building or
structure containing one or more dwelling units unless said building or
structure is in compliance with this chapter; nor shall an occupancy
permit be issued upon the change in ownership, occupancy or use of
§ 69-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:91
any building or structure which contains one or more dwelling units
unless smoke detectors, as required by this chapter, are installed and
are in proper working conditions prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit.
E. No building shall be erected on any lot or parcel of ground in
Montgomery Township which is unimproved for real estate purposes
prior to the application for a building permit where said lot or piece of
ground contains thereon any drainage ditch or watercourse unless the
applicant for a building permit shall first tender to Montgomery
Township a deed of dedication, dedicating to Montgomery Township a
permanent perpetual right-of-way or easement in, through and under
said ditch or watercourse of the full width of the drainage ditch or
watercourse plus 15 feet on either side of a drainage ditch or
watercourse that flows only in direct response to precipitation, and that
receives little or no water from springs or other sources, and the
channel is at all times above the water table; or 50 feet in width on
either side of a stream to allow the Township to maintain, repair or pipe
such stream, drainage ditch or watercourse if the Township should so
desire.
F. All residential buildings having fossil fuel heating, fireplaces, etc., shall
be equipped with an AC/DC carbon monoxide detector at all floor levels,
including basement.
§ 69-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-5
1:92
ARTICLE IV
National Electric Code
§ 69-6. Insertions and changes to code.
Article 27 of the BOCA Basic Building Code/1996 is incorporated herein
by reference as part of the Electric Code of Montgomery Township. All
references to the term "Building Official" shall be amended to read "Code
Enforcement Official or his assistant or designee," and, where the words
"NFPA 70" appear, it shall read instead "the Electric Code of Montgomery
Township." The National Electric Code/1996 and Article 27 of the BOCA
Basic Building Code, together with the provisions of this Article IV of this
chapter shall collectively comprise and be referred to as the Electric Code
of Montgomery Township.
§ 69-7. Additions to code.
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the National
Electric Code/1996 or Article 27 of the BOCA National Building Code/
1996 or in any of the codes and ordinances of Montgomery Township, in
no event and under no circumstance shall the use of aluminum
conductors be permitted in any way in any building heretofore or
hereinafter erected in Montgomery Township, except as follows:
(1) Service conductor: Aluminum service conductors shall be
permitted to extend from a point of contact with the local utility
company through exterior meter sockets to a point inside the
building or structure at the line side of the service disconnect.
Service conductors may enter the building or structure either
underground or on the exterior of the building or structure.
(2) Aluminum conductors may be extended from the service panel to
locations of wiring systems, provided that the following procedures
are followed:
(a) All aluminum conductors shall be a minimum of number six
stranded A.W.G. (American Wire Guide).
(b) Aluminum conductors are to be terminated only at an
accessible point with no splices between the service panel and
the termination point.
(c) All aluminum conductors are to have an oxide-inhibiting joint
compound applied to all termination points and splices.
(d) Terminal lugs or aluminum to copper pigtails shall be
connected to aluminum conductors by compression-type
fittings on all conductors larger than or equal to number six
A.W.G. (American Wire Guide). However, aluminum conductors
smaller than or equal to 0000 A.W.G. may be connected by
other than compression-type fittings at meter sockets and line
side service disconnects, for one-hundred-ampere, one-
§ 69-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-7
1:93
hundred-fifty-ampere and two-hundred-ampere services,
where space does not permit the use of compression-type
fittings.
(e) Twist-on wire nut connectors shall not be permitted on any
aluminum conductors.
(f) Aluminum and copper conductors shall not be in contact with
each other at any point in the electrical system.
(g) Aluminum lugs shall be connected to aluminum bussbars with
aluminum bolts and heavy flat aluminum washers, or with steel
bolts and heavy flat cadmium washers and ball valve spring
washers. Connections of aluminum terminal lugs to copper
bussbars shall be made with steel bolts, heavy flat cadmiumplated
washers and ball valve spring washers. Aluminum lug
connections to equipment pads having copper studs shall
employ flat cadmium-plated washers and ball valve spring
washers.
(h) Equipment. Meter socket load centers, distribution panels,
breakers and all other equipment used with aluminum
conductors shall be Underwriter Laboratory Listed AL/CU.
(i) Aluminum conductors shall not be used for exterior grounding
connectors.
(j) Aluminum termination shall be made only under
manufacturer's instruction on all appliances. In no case shall
aluminum wire terminate on a range; instead, aluminum feed
shall terminate to range receptacle devices, suitable for
aluminum connection, and then an appliance cord shall be
used.
B. Metal raceways shall be provided Type NM cable at the following
locations in all new residential dwellings: exposed basement walls, hotwater
heaters, garbage disposal units and oil burners.
C. No electrical wiring system may be used or electric current supplied to
any lot, piece of ground, building or structure in Montgomery Township
until an authorized underwriter company provides proof that the
electrical plans have been approved and issues a certificate of
inspection following construction. This is in addition to and not in lieu of
a permit from Montgomery Township. The Board of Supervisors of
Montgomery Township shall, from time to time, by resolution, adopt a
list of authorized underwriting companies to make inspections and
issue certificates regarding electric wiring systems in Montgomery
Township. Such designated underwriting companies shall be, and are
hereby designated as, the sole persons or entities to make inspections
of and issue certificates for electrical wiring and equipment and
apparatus and the manner of installation thereof in or on any lot, piece
of ground, building or structure or to service any lot, piece of ground,
§ 69-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-7
1:94
building or structure in Montgomery Township. [Amended 5-13-2002
by Ord. No. 02-157; 11-28-2005 by Ord. No. 05-205]
D. Romex (NM) cable shall not be used in any occupancy type other than
residential.
§ 69-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-7
1:95

ARTICLE V
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
§ 69-8. Insertions and changes to code.
The following insertions and changes are hereby made to the BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code/1996:
§ 69-9. Additions to code.
The following provisions are hereby added to this code:
A. Wherever the words "municipality" or "jurisdiction" are used in this
code, said words shall be held to mean Montgomery Township.
B. Wherever the term "Corporation Counsel" is used in this code, the
words shall be held to mean the Solicitor for Montgomery Township.
C. Whenever the words "Fire Official" are used in this code, the words
shall be held to mean the Fire Marshal, Code Enforcement Official or
Deputy Fire Marshal, unless the plain meaning of the sentence, phrase,
clause or paragraph in which it appears is to the contrary.
D. The storage of Class I, IA, IB and IC liquids, as such liquids are defined
in Article 28 of this code, in outside aboveground storage tanks is
prohibited in all areas of Montgomery Township except those areas
presently zoned LI, Limited Industrial.
E. The storage of liquified petroleum gases is prohibited in all areas of
Montgomery Township except those areas in Montgomery Township
zoned LI, Limited Industrial.
F. Article 31, § F-3103.4, of this code is hereby deleted and the following is
substituted in its place:
F-3103.4 Insurance: The permittee shall furnish to Montgomery
Township a liability policy of insurance issued by a liability insurance
company authorized to do business in Pennsylvania and acceptable to
Montgomery Township. Said policy of insurance shall name the
permittee and Montgomery Township as insured under said policy.
Said policy of insurance shall be in an amount not less than
$5,000,000 for personal injury liability (including death) of any one or
more persons and property damage liability of not less than
$5,000,000 for property damage to any one or more persons arising
out of an accident or occurrence and caused by reason of the
permittee's display or use of fireworks or firework apparatus or
arising from any acts with regards to the use or display of fireworks
by the permittee, Montgomery Township or its officers, agents,
servants, workmen, employees or any subcontractor of the permittee
or of Montgomery Township.
§ 69-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-9
1:97
A. This code shall be enforced by the CEO and/or Fire Marshal for the
Township of Montgomery with the final authority vested in the CEO.
B. This code and the provisions set forth under Article V of this chapter
shall collectively be known as the "Fire Prevention Code of Montgomery
Township."
C. Wherever violations of the Fire Code of Montgomery Township are
discovered by a Fire Marshal, the Fire Marshal shall report such
findings to the CEO for review. A record and form system shall be
devised and implemented by the CEO so that uniform procedures and
forms are used by all personnel in fire prevention, including all Deputy
Fire Marshals.
D. The Office of Code Enforcement shall, monthly, compile a written report
to the Township Manager. Such a report shall contain a list of all
prosecutions instituted under the Fire Prevention Code and shall
contain such statistics as are necessary. The Fire Marshal shall also
recommend at the time of his/her monthly report, or sooner, if
necessary, any amendments to the Fire Prevention Code which, in the
judgment of the Fire Marshal, shall be desirable or necessary.
E. The Fire Marshal and/or CEO are hereby authorized to institute
prosecutions against any and all persons for any violation of the Fire
Prevention Code.
F. The Fire Marshal and/or CEO shall enforce all ordinances relating to
the following subjects:
(1) Inspection of properties to determine the existence of any potential
fire hazards.
(2) The abatement of existing fire hazards.
(3) The investigation of the cause, origin or circumstances of any fires.
(4) The control or use of flammable liquids and flammable substances.
G. By way of implementing the requirement for numbering buildings
under Chapter 22 of the Code of Montgomery Township, the owner of
every building in Montgomery Township shall cause the street number
of such building to be posted conspicuously on the street side of the
building at a point no less than five feet from the ground level and no
higher than eight feet from the ground level immediately below the
numbers posted. The numbers posted shall be posted in such a manner
that they will be readily visible and legible from the adjacent street,
road or highway. Such numbers shall be at least four inches in height. In
lieu of posting such numbers on the street side of the building, the
owner of the building may post the numbers on a gate post or a post to
the right of the driveway as the driveway is viewed from the adjacent
street, road or highway. The numbers so posted shall be no less than
three feet nor more than five feet from the ground immediately
§ 69-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-9
1:98
underneath the place where the numbers are posted. All apartment
buildings and multiple dwelling buildings shall be uniformly marked,
numbered or lettered or otherwise identified so that such markings,
number or letters or identification are readily visible to the operators
of fire equipment from the roads, streets and highways immediately
adjacent to the apartment building or multiple-dwelling building.
H. Fire lanes are hereby established around the entire perimeter of all
buildings having a business occupancy, mercantile occupancy,
industrial occupancy or storage occupancy. Said fire lanes shall be a
width of 20 feet measuring from the outside walls of such building, and,
in a case of buildings that have curbs which separate the outside walls
of such buildings from the driveways or parking areas, the twenty-foot
width of such fire lanes, on the lots on which such buildings are located,
shall be measured from the outer edge of curbs. Parking of motor
vehicles, as parking is defined in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code,
shall be absolutely prohibited at all times in such fire lanes. If the
building is fully sprinklered, then the fire lanes can be removed.
I. All permits required to be issued under the Fire Prevention Code will be
issued by the Office of Code Enforcement and will be issued within 90
days after application has been made for such permit and the fees for
such permit have been paid to Montgomery Township.
J. Appeals; additional materials for permits.
(1) Whenever the Fire Marshal/CEO shall approve or disapprove an
application or shall grant or refuse to issue an order to eliminate a
dangerous or hazardous condition under § F-105.1 of this code or
when it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not apply or
that the true intent and meaning of this code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted by the Fire Marshal and/or
CEO, the applicant or person against whom such order has been
issued or to whom such application has been disapproved or whose
permit has been refused or the person who shall request the
issuance of an order to eliminate a dangerous or hazardous
condition may appeal such action or inaction to the Board of
Supervisors of Montgomery Township. All appeals to the Board
shall be filed, in writing, with the Township Manager within 10 days
from the date of the decision or action complained of and, in the
case of permits, within 10 days from the date of the decision or
action complained of and, in the case of permits, within 10 days
from the date of issuance of a permit or within 10 days from the
date when a permit should have been issued.
(2) The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township and the CEO
shall act as a committee to determine or specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition
to those now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code. The CEO
§ 69-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-9
1:99
shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in his office and
distribute copies to interested parties.
K. The maintenance of any condition or building or structure or lot or
piece of ground in violation of any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is
abatable as such pursuant to the Second Class Township Code.
L. The following provisions shall supplement Article 31 of this code:
(1) At least 15 days in advance of the date of the display or discharge of
fireworks, the permittee shall notify, in writing, the organized
volunteer fire company in Montgomery Township nearest to the
proposed display and/or discharge site of the fireworks and shall
arrange with said fire company for emergency fire protection and
apparatus to be at the site of said display or discharge during all
times of said display or discharge of fireworks.
(2) The permittee shall have available and in good operating order at
the site of the display and/or discharge of the fireworks such
portable fire-extinguishing equipment of the type, size and capacity
as required by the Office of Code Enforcement.
(3) Before commencing any display or discharge of fireworks, the
permittee shall wet down and keep wet all dry grass, weeds and
vegetation in the display and discharge site as well as at the
fireworks impact site.
(4) No permit shall be issued for the display or discharge of fireworks
where the density of buildings or the conditions of vegetation at the
display, discharge or impact site would present an unreasonable
risk of fire.
M. The following provisions supplement Article 20 of this code:
(1) Carnivals, circuses, traveling shows, exhibitions, fiestas and
festivals are defined as any temporary or traveling show or exhibit
held in any building, tent enclosure or on any lot where the
following forms of amusement or entertainment are or may be
conducted: riding devices such as Ferris wheels, merry-gocarousels,
whips, roller coasters or similar devices, illusions shows,
animal acts, trapeze acts, feats of daring, clowns, mechanical
shows, freak shows, sideshows, funhouses or active games of skill
such as ball-throwing pitch-till-you-win games, swinging ball
games, hoop-throwing games or games of like character.
(2) No person shall hold or conduct a carnival, circus, traveling show,
exhibition, fiesta or festival in Montgomery Township unless such
person shall first obtain a permit from Montgomery Township.
(3) No such permit shall be issued by Montgomery Township unless the
applicant first shall:
§ 69-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-9
1:100
(a) Furnish Montgomery Township with information, in writing, as
to the proposed date and place of the event; the organization,
society or club, if any, for whose benefit the event is to be held;
the nature of the structures and the devices to be used; the
nature of entertainment to be given or permitted; and the
location, by Tax Map parcel number, of the place where the
event is to be held.
(b) Pay a permit fee to Montgomery Township as set forth in the
Montgomery Township Fee Schedule.43
(4) Conditions.
(a) Any person permitted to conduct such an event in Montgomery
Township shall, as a condition to retention of his/her permit:
[1] Close the event not later than 12:00 midnight.
[2] Comply with all the requirements of all Montgomery
Township codes and ordinances and the Statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[3] Take all necessary action which is required to prevent the
use of loud or noisy devices or activities or the occurrence
of any disorderly conduct by patrons or employees of the
permittee.
(b) Failure of the permittee to comply with these conditions shall
result in immediate revocation of the permit previously issued.
(5) Each permittee, as a condition for the issuance of any permit, shall
first supply Montgomery Township with a valid, prepaid policy of
liability insurance, insuring the permittee and Montgomery
Township against bodily injury liability, including death, in an
aggregate amount of $1,000,000 and property damage liability in
an aggregate amount of $1,000,000.
N. The following provisions further supplement Article 20 of this code as
follows:
(1) Flammable and combustible liquids and gases: For motor vehicles,
marine vessels, farm equipment and all mechanical devices on
display and which are located in any tent or air-supported structure
or enclosure which contains fuel tanks for flammable and/or
combustible liquid or gas fuel, the fuel tanks thereof shall be
maintained between 1/3 and 1/2 full of fuel. All caps on the filler
pipe on every such fuel tank or the aperture through which fuel is
introduced into any such fuel tank shall contain caps or other
devices of a locking type, which devices shall require a key for
locking and a key for the unlocking thereof, and said caps on filler
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. A236, Fees.
§ 69-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-9
1:101
pipes or on the apertures through which fuel is introduced into
the fuel tank shall be kept locked at all times while the fuel tank
is located within any tent or air-supported structure or enclosure.
Liquid petroleum, gas, propane gas and all cylinders which contain
flammable gas shall not be located at any time within any tent
or air-supported structure. No open flame, the fuel for which is
supplied by any gaseous or liquid substance, shall be permitted at
any time within any tent or air-supported structure or enclosure.
(2) Electrical safety: The electrical systems of all motor vehicles,
marine vessels, farm equipment and all mechanical equipment,
when on display, whether within or without any tent or airsupported
structure or enclosure, shall be de-energized. The deenergization
shall be accomplished by removing the battery or
batteries of the motor vehicle, marine vessel, farm equipment or
mechanical equipment or removing the battery cables of the motor
vehicle, marine vessel, farm equipment or mechanical equipment.
All electrical equipment used or exhibited within Montgomery
Township in any tent or air-supported structure or enclosure must
be approved and bear the Underwriter's Laboratory seal and be
installed and maintained at all times in accordance with the
Electric Code of Montgomery Township.
(3) Each tent or air-supported structure or enclosure and all
decorative material contained in any of such and all materials used
for table coverings in any such tent or air-supported structure or
enclosure shall be made of fire-retardant material having a fire
rating of two hours. Each tent or air-supported structure or
enclosure shall contain fire extinguishers, and the fire
extinguishers shall be so located that there is no more than 75 feet
travel distance to a fire extinguisher from any point within the tent
or air-supported structure or enclosure. Portable fire extinguishers
shall be rated at the minimum 2A-type extinguisher. Where a tent
or air-supported structure or enclosure is over 3,500 square feet in
area, fire hose lines of at least one-inch diameter and of sufficient
length to reach any point in the tent or air-supported structure or
enclosure shall be provided at a point outside of the tent or airsupported
structure or enclosure but within 10 feet of the outside
edge of the tent or air-supported structure or enclosure. Such hose
lines shall be equipped with a nozzle and shall be attached to an
adequate supply of water with adequate water pressure for a oneinch
hose. Generators and transformer wagons shall be provided
with extinguishers of an at least 10BC minimum rating.
Conspicuous no-smoking signs shall be posted at the main entrance
of tents or air-supported structures or enclosures and within the
same. The owners and operators of tents or air-supported
structures shall enforce the prohibition against smoking within any
tent or air-supported structure or enclosure.
§ 69-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-9
1:102
(4) Lighting: Emergency lighting systems are required and shall be
provided by the owner or operator of all tents or air-supported
structures or enclosures which have a seating capacity in excess of
500 or more persons, and all tents or air-supported structures or
enclosures which contain more than 15,000 square feet of fabric or
plastic material, regardless of the seating capacity thereof, shall
contain emergency lighting systems.
(5) Parking: No motor vehicle, marine vessel, farm equipment or any
other type of equipment which contains any liquid fuel tank or gas
fuel tank or gas cylinder shall be parked within 100 feet of any tent,
stake lines or within 100 feet of any air-supported structure or
enclosure, except that electrical generators shall not be subject to
this prohibition.
O. The following provisions supplement Article 3 of this code:
(1) Portable heaters and portable cooking appliances: Portable heaters
and portable cooking appliances are prohibited. All portable
heaters and cooking appliances shall have a seal of approval from a
recognized testing agency such as Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc.
Use of open flame, or non-explosion-proof electrical portable
heaters and cooking appliances shall be prohibited in certain
occupancies defined as:
(a) Theaters, nightclub, exhibition halls, churches, schools and
like occupancies when open to the public.
(b) Those areas of commercial and industrial occupancies where
flammable and/or combustible vapors dusts and/or liquids are
used or introduced.
(c) Storage areas of commercial and industrial occupancies where
combustible materials such as paper, cardboard and fabrics
are warehoused.
(d) Occupancies where the manufacture of paint, varnish,
ammunition, celluloid, matches and like products are
performed or introduced.
(e) Individual rooms for let in hotels, motels and dormitories,
except for office and other nonpublic areas.
§ 69-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-9
1:103

ARTICLE VI
BOCA International Plumbing Code
§ 69-10. Insertions and changes to code.
The following insertions and changes are hereby made to the BOCA
International Plumbing Code/1995:
§ 69-11. Additions to code.
The following provisions are hereby added to this code:
A. Section 101.1 shall be amended to insert the name "Montgomery
Township" as [name of jurisdiction].
B. As to all references within this code concerning fees, the reference
should be to the Montgomery Township Fee Schedule.44
C. Section 109.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety, beginning with 109.1 and
ending with 109.7. The procedure for appeal shall be the same as
provided under Sections 121.1 through 121.5 of the BOCA National
Building Code/1996, as amended by this chapter.
A. Licensing. The following licensing authorities are the only recognized
agencies of Montgomery Township for the licensing of master,
journeyman and apprentice plumbers in obtaining permits and yearly
registration in Montgomery Township: Philadelphia, Abington and
Lower Bucks Regional Cooperation Council Plumbing Examiner.
B. No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the
practice of plumbing in Montgomery Township unless licensed under
the provisions of this chapter. No individual firm, partnership or
corporation shall engage in the installation, repairing or altering of
plumbing unless performed under the direct supervision of a licensed
master plumber, licensed pursuant to this chapter.
C. No permit shall be issued unless detailed plans showing the proposed
work have been submitted to the Plumbing Inspector, and he has
determined from examination of such plans and specifications that the
work will conform to the provisions of this chapter. If an applicant is
denied a permit, he may submit revised plans and specifications
without payment of an additional fee. If, in the course of the work, it
becomes necessary to make any change in the plans or specifications
for which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications
shall be submitted and a supplementary permit, subject to the same
conditions applicable to the original application for permit, shall be
issued to encompass such change.
D. Repair involving only the working parts of a faucet or valve; the removal
of pipe stoppages; repairing of leaks; or replacement of defective
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Fees.
§ 69-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-11
1:105
faucets or valves may be made without a permit, provided that no
changes are made in the piping to the fixtures.
E. It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and to make the inspections and tests required thereunder. After proper
identification, the Plumbing Inspector has the right to enter any
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting any
plumbing system in order to protect the public health.
F. Grease traps shall be sized according to Table 1004.3.1 and be utilized
in smaller food preparation uses such as convenience stores or
delicatessens where cooking is not done on site. In all other uses, such
as restaurants, supermarkets, schools, hotels with kitchens and other
food preparation areas, a grease intercepter shall be used and sized in
accordance with the directions of the Montgomery Township Sewer
Authority Engineer. Fees for this review will be assessed and added to
the normal plumbing permit fee to be paid by the applicant. Strip center
and/or single space built buildings shall reserve sufficient area and
piping to effectively control grease flow in the event that a food use
tenant may occupy one or more locations.
G. Facilities of twenty-five-pound grease capacity or more must submit
quarterly reports of disposal to the Department of Code Enforcement.
H. Underground sewer pipe shall have a maximum SDR of 35 and shall
conform to ASTM D3034. Pipe joints shall be made and joined with an
integral bell, bell and spigot rubber-gasketed joint. Each integral bell
joint shall consist of a formed bell complete with a single rubber gasket.
Gaskets shall conform to ASTM F477. The underground sewer pipe
shall be installed from the Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer
Authority's six-inch PVC SDR 35 lateral to within five feet of the
building entry which shall then be converted to Schedule 40 PVC. All
changes in pipe size, direction or connection shall be through standard
PVC fittings as defined in ASTM D1784. [Amended 6-2-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-76]
I. Venting shall be at least every 40 feet and made with a Tee Wye fitting
towards the eight-inch sewer main and brought up to grade with the
first vent within 10 feet of the Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer
Authority's six-inch lateral. [Amended 6-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-76]
J. Attached is a typical lateral connection detail.45 [Added 6-2-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-76]
K. A hole in the basement wall shall be provided and be large enough to
accept the four-inch Schedule 40 building drain with a compression link
seal used to seal the opening after installation of the building drain
pipe. The backfill under and around the pipe on the outside of the
building shall be adequately compacted. [Added 6-2-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-76]
45.Editor's Note: Said detail is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 69-11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 69-11
1:106
L. The building lateral shall be TV-inspected by the Authority from inside
the building to the eight-inch sewer main in the street or right-of-way
prior to issuance of use and occupancy permits by the Township. The
lateral must be installed a minimum of 30 days before the TV inspection
can be conducted. [Added 6-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-76]
§ 69-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-11
1:107

ARTICLE VII
2003 International Property Maintenance Code
[Amended 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 04-182]
§ 69-12. Insertions and changes to code.
The following sections of the 2003 International Property Maintenance
Code are hereby amended as follows:
§ 69-13. (Reserved)
A. Amend Section 101.1 by inserting “Montgomery Township;”
B. Amend Section 102.3 by deleting “International Zoning Code” and
replacing it with “Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance;”
C. Amend Section 103.5 by inserting “Montgomery Township Fee
Schedule;”
D. Amend Section 106.4 by inserting “The minimum penalty shall be in the
amount of $100 with a maximum penalty of $1,000;”
E. Amend Section 111.1 by deleting “board of appeals” and inserting
“Building Code Board of Appeals;”
F. Delete Section 111.2 in its entirety;
G. Amend Section 302.4 by inserting “12 inches;”
H. Amend Section 304.3 by inserting “The municipality shall be the only
entity authorized to assign street numbers;”
I. Amend Section 304.14 by inserting “April 1 to November 1;”
J. Amend Section 602.3 by inserting “September 1 to May 1;” and
K. Amend Section 602.4 by inserting “September 1 to May 1.”
§ 69-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-13
1:109

ARTICLE VIII
International Mechanical Code
§ 69-14. Insertions and changes to code.
The following insertions and changes are hereby made to the International
Mechanical Code/1996:
§ 69-15. Additions to code.
The following provisions are hereby added to this code:
A. Section 106.5, Fees, shall be amended to refer to the Montgomery
Township Fee Schedule as periodically changed by resolution of the
Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors.
B. Section 109, Appeals Board, shall hereafter be referred to as the
Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors.
A. AC and/or DC carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in all
residential uses containing oil, gas, Lp or any fossil-fuel-burning
heating device, appliance, etc. The locations shall be adjacent to the
heating device and one on each living or sleeping level of home, or in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
B. All metal duct work return or supply shall be equipped with a flex collar
between the vertical and horizontal run as close to the furnace plumen
as possible for reducing sound transmission through vibration.
C. Mechanical equipment below grade shall be installed a minimum of
four inches above slab.
§ 69-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-15
1:111

ARTICLE IX
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code
§ 69-16. Additions to code.
The following provisions are hereby added to the NFPA 101 Life Safety
Code/1994:
A. Merchandise display and/or storage, particularly that area involving the
sale of lumber, piping, etc., shall be protected as follows:
(1) Height: zero to four feet from floor, first tier lumber, stacked not
more than 40 inches, high-banding not required.
(2) Height: four to eight feet from floor, second tier lumber shall be
protected from roll out, if not banded; utilizing vertical uprights
and/or chains securely fastened from third tier and fastened to
front of stack on second tier beams with latching device.
(3) Height: eight feet and above, all stack shall be banded and at no
time shall unbanded lumber be placed above this level.
(4) Piping shall not be stored parallel to walkways unbanded or
without roll-out protection.
B. Merchandise stored as top stock for the purpose of restocking bottom
shelves shall not be stored greater than two cartons high unless
protected from crushing, tilting or from possibly falling off due to
restocking of opposite side shelving stock by mechanical loading
equipment. Stacking in excess of two containers high may be approved
if pelletized in addition to shrink-wrapped.
C. Displays shall not utilize the stacking of merchandise in excess of six
feet high without additional precautions being made for stock falling
over.
D. Displays requiring electrical power which are accessible to customer
reach shall be protected with ground fault devices at each location.
Example: lighting, fans, appliances, medicine cabinets, fountains,
whirlpools, manufacturer displays, etc.
E. If material handling devices are used during business hours in areas
accessible to the public, the equipment shall give off visual and audible
signals while in motion automatically while placed in moving gear and
not be manually controlled by operators. A sign shall be displayed in the
vicinity of the public entrance, clearly marking and displayed as
follows:
This premises employs the use of mechanical material-handling
equipment. While in motion, vehicle has an audible and visual signal.
Please use caution when approaching aisle intersection if sound or
visual signal is seen or heard. Do not walk beneath equipment in
uplift position.
§ 69-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-16
1:113

ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 69-17. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The provisions and requirements of the codes being adopted by reference
herein, the insertions, changes and additions to said codes adopted by this
chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Article I,
§ 69-2.2, of this chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Office
of Montgomery Township who shall have the power to determine in each
instance whether a violation has occurred. Any person who shall violate
or permit the violation of any provision of this chapter or the rules and
regulations or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
pursuant to this chapter or the rules and regulations shall, upon conviction
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000
with costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine and
costs, be sentenced to undergo imprisonment to the extent allowed by law
for the punishment of summary criminal offenses. A separate offense under
this chapter shall be deemed to occur for each day or portion thereof in
which a violation is found to exist or for each section of the chapter which
is found to have been violated. All fines and penalties collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 69-18. Proceedings in equity.
In addition to the penalty provisions herein above, the Office of Code
Enforcement may institute proceedings in equity to compel compliance with
this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder.
§ 69-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-18
1:115

ARTICLE XI
Severability, Repealer and When Effective
§ 69-19. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, word, phrase, clause or provision
of this chapter shall be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as
a whole or any part thereof. It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors
of Montgomery Township that the remainder of this chapter which is not
declared invalid would have been adopted as if such invalid section,
paragraph, subsection, word, phrase, clause or provision had not been
included therein or enacted as part of this chapter.
§ 69-20. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 91 (former Chapter 69 of the Code of the Township of
Montgomery) and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 69-21. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days after the date of enactment
and shall apply to all design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair,
demolition, removal, maintenance and use of buildings and structures
within Montgomery Township for which no permits have been issued as of
that effective date.
§ 69-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-21
1:117
Chapter 72
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
§ 72-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 72-2. Assignment of numbers.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the Township shall assign
street or road numbers to all buildings in the Township which have
heretofore not been numbered and shall give notice to the registered owner
and to the occupant of each building of the number so assigned, provided
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve such owner and
occupant of the duty to ascertain such assigned street number.
§ 72-3. Displaying of numbers.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Includes all principal buildings, such as but not limited to
single- and multiple-family dwellings, places of business, public service
facilities, churches and other institutions, but shall not include
accessory buildings on the same lot as and occupied by the same person
as a principal building on such lot.
B. The word "shall" is construed as mandatory.
A. Within 60 days from the effective date hereof, every owner and
occupant of every building in the Township shall display the street
number of the building so that it can be read during daylight hours from
the road or street by persons of normal vision.
B. Street numbers shall be so located and maintained so as to be
conspicuous and readily observable from the street. Street numbers
may be displayed upon the building itself, a mailbox or a sign or other
suitable marker specially constructed for the purpose, provided that the
street numbers at all times are not obstructed from plain view from the
street. Street numbers for buildings located on corner lots shall face
onto the street which has been assigned to the building for numbering
purposes by the Township.
§ 69-21 MONTGOMERY CODE § 72-4
1:118
§ 72-4. New construction.
In all cases of new construction, the Zoning Officer shall assign a street
number at the time the building permit is issued, and such number shall be
displayed within 30 days after construction is commenced or within 30 days
before the building is ready for occupancy, whichever date shall be earlier.
§ 72-5. Identification emblems on certain properties, buildings or
structures containing truss construction. [Added 3-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 04-18846]
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply for the section:
TRUSS CONSTRUCTION — A combination of members, such as beams,
bars and ties, usually arranged in triangular units to form a rigid
framework for supporting loads over a span of structural members that
connect together to span the space between the walls of the building to
support a vertical load.
TRUSS EMBLEM — A sign consisting of an isosceles triangle not less
than 12 inches horizontally by six inches vertically made of reflective
material with white as the background and red lettering containing the
following: "F" to signify a building or structure having a floor with truss
construction; "R" to signify a building or structure having a roof with
truss construction; or "FR" to signify a building or structure having both
a floor and roof with truss construction.
B. Identification of truss construction:
(1) Except as provided in Subsection C below, the owner of a building
or a structure containing truss construction in any form or manner
shall install and maintain a truss emblem to the left of the main
entrance and at a height of not less than five feet above the floor
level. The truss emblem required under this section may be
purchased from the Township at a cost determined from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) The owner, developer, and/or homeowners' association of a
residential subdivision, residential condominium, or apartment
complex shall install and maintain a truss emblem within the public
right-of-way or upon the common element/area (in the case of a
private street or condominium) at each entrance to such
subdivision or condominium.
C. Exemption. Except for a nonresidential building or structure, the owner
of a building or a structure within a residential subdivision, residential
condominium, or apartment complex referred to in Subsection B(2)
above shall be exempt from installing and maintaining a truss emblem.
The owner of any other single-family dwelling unit or semidetached
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 72-5, Violations and penalties, as
§ 72-6, which follows this section.
§ 72-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-5
1:119
§ 72-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any owner or occupant who shall fail to display a street number as in this
chapter is provided shall be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
and shall, upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each offense and costs or, in
default of payment thereof, to imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 30 days. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed for each day that a violation exists. Such fines shall be
collected and distributed as like fines are now collected by law.
Chapter 77
COLLECTION BINS
§ 77-1. Permit required. [Amended 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-188]
No property owner shall place or allow any person to place any collection
bins within the Township of Montgomery without first having obtained a
permit as herein provided.
§ 77-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLECTION BIN or BINS — Any receptacle, container or device intended
for the purpose of collection or seeking collections or donations of articles
of clothes, toys or other like items.
§ 77-3. Permit application; term of permit.
dwelling containing not more than two dwelling units shall also be
exempt from installing and maintaining a truss emblem.
D. Fire Marshal approval. The owner and/or developer of any building or
structure required to have a truss emblem under this section shall
submit a plan for such truss emblem as to design and location for the
prior written approval of the Township Fire Marshal.
E. Retroactive compliance required. The provisions of this section shall
apply to the owners of existing buildings or structures having truss
construction, but such owners shall have one year from the effective
date of this section to comply.
A. Every person desiring to place any collection bins within the Township
of Montgomery shall first make application to the Montgomery
Township Code Enforcement Office, Cowpath Road, Montgomeryville,
Pennsylvania, for a permit. If such person shall also be required to
obtain a permit from any commonwealth or county officer, he shall, on
§ 72-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 77-3
1:120
§ 77-4. Fees.
No permit shall be issued under this chapter until a fee is paid to
Montgomery Township for transmittal to the Township Treasurer for the
general use of the Township. The fee shall be set by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors from time to time.
§ 77-5. Fee exemption.
Any person, charitable corporation or organization possessing a federal taxexempt
status shall be required to apply for the permit but shall not be
required to pay a fee.
§ 77-6. Location.
making such application, exhibit a valid commonwealth and/or county
permit. Said application shall be upon a form provided by the
Montgomery Township Code Enforcement Office and shall contain at
least the following information verified by oath or affirmation:
(1) The full name of the applicant, local address and telephone number,
if any.
(2) Permanent address and telephone number.
(3) The address at which the applicant will receive notice under this
chapter.
(4) The name of the organization for which the collections are made.
(5) The nature of the purpose of the donations and method for
distribution of the items collected.
(6) Dates and locations within the Township where the collection bins
are to be located.
(7) Method and schedule of collections and emptying of bins, including
name, address and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for collections.
B. Attached to the application shall be a signed statement by the property
owner involved granting permission for the placement of the collection
bins, specifying the number of bins permitted and indicating by way of a
sketch drawing the permitted location.
C. Permits will be issued for a period of one year.
A. The placement of collection bins shall be limited to C, S, LI and RS
Zoning Districts.
B. The collection bins shall be placed on the property in a location agreed
upon by both the applicant and property owner.
§ 77-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-6
1:121
§ 77-7. Suspension or revocation of permits.
Any permit issued for the purpose of placing collection bins may be denied,
suspended or revoked at any time upon proof that:
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties.
C. The collection bins shall not be placed within any right-of-way or be in
violation of any setback requirements for structures under Chapter
230, Zoning, of the Code of Montgomery Township.
D. The collection bins shall not be placed within any designated parking
spaces, obstruct any walkways, obstruct any clear sight distances at
intersections or be placed within any green space area as defined by
Chapter 230, Zoning.
E. All collection bins shall have the name and telephone number of both
the permittee and the person or company responsible for emptying the
bins printed or posted on the bins.
A. The application for the permit contains false information;
B. The permittee has been convicted of a crime of fraud or a felony or a
crime involving moral turpitude;
C. The permittee has failed to comply with any rules of conduct prescribed
in this chapter; or
D. Clothing or other articles or objects are left outside of the bins.
A. Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, of not more than
$600 and, in default of payment of said fine, shall be imprisoned in the
county prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. In addition to any other legal remedies available to the Township in the
event that collection bins are located within the Township without a
permit or are left in place after a permit has been denied, suspended or
revoked, the Township may confiscate the collection bins and cause it or
them to be removed to a place of storage. All costs of removal and
storage shall be the responsibility of the permittee or the person or
entity owning or leasing the collection bins or the person or entity at
whose direction the bins were placed within the Township.
§ 77-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 77-8
1:122
Chapter 80
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Truss construction emblems — See Ch. 72,
§ 72-5.
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 201.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 80-1. Election to enforce the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 80-2. Adoption of the building code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained within Title 34 Pa. Code,
Chapters 401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code.
§ 80-3. Administration and enforcement provisions.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this municipality shall
be undertaken, as determined by the governing body having jurisdiction, in
accordance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
§ 80-4. Building Code Board of Appeals.
A Building Code Board of Appeals (hereinafter "Appeals Board") is hereby
established by separate resolution in conformity with the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103; Section 501(c) and Title 34 Pa. Code, § 403.121.
The Appeals Board shall hear and rule on appeals, requests for variances
and requests for extensions of time.
§ 80-5. Effect on existing ordinances.
A. All ordinances and/or resolutions or parts thereof which have
previously been adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999,
and which are equal to or exceed the requirements of the code shall
remain in full force and effect until such time as the provisions of these
ordinances fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the
code, as amended from time to time.
§ 77-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:123
§ 80-6. Changes to the code.
This code may be changed and/or modified by the governing body of this
municipality, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,
Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, Section 503.
§ 80-7. Fee schedule.
A fee schedule for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant
to this chapter and the code shall be established by the governing body of
this municipality by resolution from time to time.
§ 80-8. Changes to the amendable sections of Title 34, Part XIV,
Chapter 403, Administration.
In accordance with Section 403.102(1) of Title 34, Part XIV, Chapter 403,
the following are amended:
B. All ordinances and/or resolutions or parts thereof which have
previously been adopted by this municipality that are in effect as of the
effective date of this chapter and whose requirements are less than the
minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to conform
with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All other ordinances, resolutions, regulations and policies of this
municipality not governed by the code shall remain in full force and
effect.
A. Section 403.43(g): Delete the words "five years" and replace with the
words "one year."
B. Section 403.62(c)(1)(xvii) is deleted in its entirety.
C. Section 403.64(d): Delete numbers 1 through 4 and replace with the
following;
(1) Foundation inspection.
(2) Wall form inspection.
(3) Backfill inspection.
(4) Slab inspection.
(5) Plumbing, mechanical and electrical system inspection.
(6) Frame and masonry inspection.
(7) Wallboard inspection.
(8) Insulation inspection.
§ 80-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 80-9
1:124
§ 80-9. Liability.
The Building Code Official, Construction Code Official, member of the
Building Code Board of Appeals, employee and/or appointed individual,
agent or firm charged with the enforcement of the code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by the code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby
be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or
by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit
instituted against an officer, agent or employee because of an act performed
by that officer, agent or employee in the lawful discharge of duties under
the provisions of the Code shall be defended by the legal representative of
the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Building
Code Official, Construction Code Official, member of the Building Code
Board of Appeals, employee and/or appointed individual, agent or firm
charged with the enforcement of the code shall not be liable for the cost
in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of the code.
§ 80-10. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All other ordinances and/or resolutions or parts thereof which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 80-11. Repealer.
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 80-10 of this
chapter, nor shall any just or legal right of remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 80-12. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be July 7, 2004.
Chapter 82
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 80.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Towing contractors — See Ch. 220.
§ 80-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-1
1:125
§ 82-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer of the Township of Montgomery Township, or his or her duly
appointed Deputy, and shall include the duly appointed Building Inspector,
Deputy Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal, the Director
of Public Works, Zoning Officer and the Township Engineer.
COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — The erection, alteration,
repair, renovation, rehabilitation, demolition or removal of any commercial
building or structure and the excavation, filling, grading and landscaping of
lots zoned for commercial use in connection therewith.
COMMERCIAL CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or written or
contained in one or more documents, between a commercial contractor and
an owner for the performance of work, including all labor services and
materials to be furnished and performed thereunder.
COMMERCIAL CONTRACTING ACTIVITIES — Activities that a commercial
contractor performs in the course of his or her business.
COMMERCIAL CONTRACTOR — Any person who, as a prime contractor
or as a subcontractor, engages in commercial construction activities in
Montgomery Township, including, without limitation, mechanical,
electrical, blasting, specialty, elevator, roofing, plumbing, and earth
disturbance and grading contractors. The term shall not include any bona
fide employee of an owner of the premises where work is to be performed.
Contractors identified in the Pennsylvania Home Improvement Consumer
Protection Act of 2008 are not considered a commercial contractor, unless
they are performing this work on a nonresidential-type property, including
but not limited to commercial, industrial, business, retail, medical, assisted
living, apartments, etc.
HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTOR — As used in this chapter, shall
have the same definition as this term has in the Pennsylvania Home
Improvement Consumer Protection Act, Act of October 17, 2008, P.L. 1645,
No. 132, as amended.47
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in any building, structure or lot.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, trust, association,
owner, contractor, salesman or other legal entity.
§ 82-2. Compliance with regulations.
No person may act as a commercial contractor or engage in commercial
construction activities in the Montgomery Township or hold themselves out
47.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 517.1 et seq.
§ 82-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 82-2
1:126
to the public as doing such business or solicit such business in Montgomery
Township, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 82-3. Administration, enforcement and certificate of insurance.
§ 82-4. Registration fee.
No commercial contractor shall be registered and no license shall become
effective until the commercial contractor pays to the Township a
registration and license fee in an amount established from time to time
by resolution. All commercial contractors who are in good standing may
be issued an annual renewal license on a calendar-year basis beginning
January 1 of each year upon application and the payment of a license
renewal fee as established by the Township fee schedule.
§ 82-5. Registration; license required.
A. It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or other authorized
Township representative to administer and provide for the enforcement
of all the provisions of this chapter and specifically to register and issue
a license to any persons who are found to be duly qualified under and
who comply with the provisions of this chapter, and to deny to register
and issue a license to or suspend or revoke a previously issued
registration and license to any person who does not so qualify or so
comply.
B. A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the Township prior to the
issuance of any license, evidencing the contractor's insurance coverage
of the type and in the amounts specified herein. Said certificate shall
contain a provision that the coverage provided shall not be reduced,
terminated, cancelled or nonrenewed without 30 days' prior written
notice to the Township.
A. Except as otherwise specifically exempted by the provisions of this
chapter, no person shall act in the capacity of a contractor unless
authorized to do so by a valid registration and license issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Township may issue
a registration card or other indicia of registration, to be supplied by the
Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized Township representative
upon request.
B. All contractors that seek to perform home improvement contracts in the
Montgomery Township shall, prior to receiving a building or other
permit, provide proof that said contractor is registered with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as required by the Act of October 17,
2008, P.L. 1645, No. 132, as amended, known as the Home
Improvement Consumer Protection Act.48 Registration under Act 132
does not affect the responsibilities or authority under Act 45 of 1999,
known as the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,49 or the
48.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 517.1 et seq.
§ 82-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-5
1:127
§ 82-6. Exceptions to registration requirements.
The following persons are not required to register with the Township as a
commercial contractor:
§ 82-7. Issuance, refusal and renewal of registration; insurance.
requirements under Section 302(e) of the act of June 2, 1915 (P.L.
736, No. 338), known as the Workers' Compensation Act,50 regarding
workers' compensation. Act 132 does not affect existing licensing
standards in effect with respect to electricians and plumbers and other
trades, where licensing is conditioned on requirements of testing or
possession of certificates obtained through specific training in
electricity or other trades.
A. An individual who performs labor or services for a commercial
contractor for wages or salary.
B. Residential contractors who perform residential construction activities,
except new construction.
C. Individuals who perform labor or services for a residential contractor
for wages or salary.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized Township
representative shall act upon all commercial contractor license
applications for registration within 14 days of receipt of a full and
complete application. If an application is denied, the applicant shall be
so notified in writing. The notification shall set forth the reason for the
denial.
B. An applicant for any registration required by the provisions of this
chapter shall file a written application on a form supplied by the
Township, which shall be signed and under oath. The application shall
require among other items the names of the business, the business
street addresses and trade names of the applicant together with a
certificate of insurance written for not less than any limit of coverage
specified under this chapter. The commercial contractor shall take out
and maintain at his own expense, during the life of the registration, the
following insurance or its equivalent: [Amended 3-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-288]
(1) Commercial general liability insurance for bodily injury, personal
injury and property damage including loss of use, with minimum
limits of $500,000 each occurrence; $500,000 personal and
advertising injury; $500,000 general aggregate; and $500,000
products/completed operations aggregate.
(a) This insurance shall include coverage for all of the following:
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
50.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 82-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 82-7
1:128
[1] Liability arising from premises and operations;
[2] Liability arising from the actions of independent
contractors;
[3] Liability arising from products and completed operations;
[4] Contractual liability;
[5] Liability arising from the explosion, collapse, or
underground (XCU) hazards; and
[6] Montgomery Township and its elected and appointed
officials, officers, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on a primary and noncontributory basis with
respect to operations performed by the contractor or on
contractor's behalf for which Montgomery Township has
issued a permit, license or authorization.
(2) Business auto liability insurance with a minimum limit of $500,000
per accident and including coverage for all of the following:
(a) Liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of
any auto (if no owned autos, then hired and non-owned autos);
and
(b) Automobile contractual liability.
(3) Workers compensation insurance with statutory benefits as
required by Pennsylvania law; employers liability insurance with
minimum limits of $100,000 each accident for bodily injury by
accident; $100,000 each employee for bodily injury by disease; and
$500,000 policy limit for bodily injury by disease.
(4) If the applicant does not meet the insurance requirements herein,
the applicant shall forward a written request to the Township for a
waiver in writing of the insurance requirement(s) not met or
approval in writing of alternate insurance coverage, self-insurance,
or group self-insurance arrangements. If the Township denies the
request for said waiver, the applicant must comply with the
insurance requirements as specified herein.
C. Any applicant for any registration shall comply with the statutory
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pertaining to the
Worker's Compensation Law.51
D. Every registered contractor shall, within 10 days after a change in
control of ownership or management, or change of address or trade
name, notify the Code Enforcement Office and/or Township of such
change or changes.
51.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 82-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-7
1:129
§ 82-8. Grounds for revocation or suspension of registration and
license.
§ 82-9. Standards for registration and license issuance or
continuance.
For the protection of the residents and business owners of Montgomery
Township, no registration or license shall be issued or continued if already
issued in the event that:
E. The registration and license of all commercial contractors shall expire
on January 1 following the date of issue unless prior thereto the
registration is revoked or suspended. Upon payment of the annual
registration fee, as prescribed herein, prior to the expiration date, a
registration and license may be renewed for another year, and the
authority to engage in construction activities shall continue during said
renewal year unless and until it is revoked or suspended by the Board of
Supervisors of Montgomery Township.
F. No building permits shall be issued until all commercial contractors and
commercial subcontractors working on the proposed structure are
registered in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized Township
representative may, upon approval of the Board of Supervisors, suspend
or revoke any registration and license issued under the provisions of
this chapter where it is found that the contractor has violated any
provision of this chapter or is performing or attempting to perform any
act prohibited by this chapter, or violates any provision of any
ordinance of the Montgomery Township or law of the United States of
America or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. A violation of any condition of a commercial construction activity permit
issued by the Montgomery Township shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the registration and license.
C. Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter upon the part of
any director, manager, partner, officer, salesman, agent or employee of
a contractor shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the
registration of the commercial contractor unless it shall appear to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors and Code Enforcement Officer
that the individuals engaged in the management of the contractor:
(1) Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct; or
(2) Were, following the exercise of due diligence, unable to prevent the
violation.
A. The commercial contractor or the management personnel of the
commercial contractor's company has demonstrated a lack of ability or
willingness to comply with and/or abide by the provisions of any
§ 82-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 82-9
1:130
§ 82-10. Hearing.
§ 82-11. Registration limitations and nonapplicability.
The registration of a commercial contractor and the issuance of a license
pursuant to this chapter shall not authorize the commercial contractor to
perform any particular type of construction activity, which is limited to
qualified registration holders under other provisions of state or local law;
and no other permit or approval for construction activities issued by the
Township shall entitle a contractor to perform construction activities unless
and until the provisions of this chapter are complied with.
§ 82-12. Violations and penalties.
ordinance of Montgomery Township or statute of the United States of
America or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The business transactions of the commercial contractor demonstrate a
practice of failure to perform commercial contracts or the manipulation
of assets or accounts, or fraud or bad faith.
A. The Board of Supervisors may suspend or revoke any registration and
license following a hearing. At least 10 days prior to the date set for the
hearing, the Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized Township
representative shall notify the commercial contractor in writing of any
charge made, and afford said contractor an opportunity to be heard in
person and by counsel in reference thereto. Such written notice shall be
served by delivery of the same to the commercial contractor in person
or by certified mail to the business address of record of such contractor.
The hearing on such charges shall be at such time and place as the
Board of Supervisors shall prescribe.
B. If the Board of Supervisors shall determine that the contractor is guilty
of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance
of Montgomery Township, the contractor's registration and license may
be revoked or suspended for such period of time as shall be determined
by the Board of Supervisors.
C. If a person is refused a registration and license, the person may, within
10 days from the date the notice of refusal is mailed, request a hearing.
Said hearing must be held within 60 days from the date of the request
and the Board of Supervisors must render its decision within 20 days
following the hearing.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provisions of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall
serve a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
For purposes of this section, the doing of any act or thing prohibited by
§ 82-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-12
1:131
Chapter 83
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disturbing the peace — See Ch. 86.
Noise — See Ch. 151.
Obscenity — See Ch. 159.
Pool and billiard rooms — See Ch. 174.
§ 83-1. Scope.
§ 83-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense including the
future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
any provision of this chapter, or the failure to do any act or thing as to
which any provision of this chapter creates any affirmative duty, shall
constitute a violation of this chapter punishable as herein stated.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Montgomery Township, pay the fine
prescribed by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, incurred by Montgomery Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager or Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, who shall follow
the enforcement procedure set forth in the appropriate Montgomery
Township ordinance.
A. Juvenile delinquency poses a serious hazard to the public peace, safety,
health, welfare and quality of life and the people have a right to the
safety and security of their persons and property and should be ensured
that right.
B. Now, therefore, it is the policy of Montgomery Township that juvenile
delinquency shall be prevented such that the public's right to personal
safety and security of their property shall not be jeopardized.
C. This chapter shall apply to the control and regulation of children in
public places and establishments open for the use of the public, within
the boundaries of Montgomery Township.
§ 82-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 83-2
1:132
singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
CHILD — A natural person being under the age of 18 years of age on the
date of the occurrence. The term "juvenile" may be used interchangeably
with "child" in this chapter and also refers to a person under 18 years of
age.
CUSTODIAN — Any person over the age of 18 years old, having a duty to
provide for the care, protection, maintenance or support of a child, or any
person acting in loco parentis of a child.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business, to which the
general public has access by a right, perceived right or custom or invitation,
carried on for profit, or any other place devoted to business, commerce,
amusement or entertainment of or for the general public.
GUARDIAN — A person, other than the parent, having a duty to provide
care, protection, maintenance or support of a child.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting business in any establishment; and
whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "operator," as
applies to associations or partnerships or corporations, shall include the
members or partners or officers thereof.
PARENT — A natural parent or adoptive parent or court-appointed/
approved foster parent, or state/county agency authorized or other persons
having a duty to provide for the care, protection, maintenance or support of
a child.
POLICE OFFICER — A duly appointed and sworn member of the
Montgomery Township Police Department, having been vested with the
powers of a police officer as permitted by law.
PREVAILING TIME — Eastern standard time (EST) or Eastern daylight
saving time (EDT), whichever is in use by custom, rule, regulation or law, as
expressed in either a.m./p.m. terms or the twenty-four-hour clock (military
time).
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, highway, park, sidewalk, playground
or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort
for business entertainment or other lawful purpose. A "public place" shall
include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling
alley, cafe, theater, drug store, poolroom, shopping center parking lot,
Township park, (or contiguous grounds) golf course, school property, and
any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general
public. It shall also include the front, back or immediate surrounding area
of these defined public places.
REMAIN — To occupy, loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or hang out in or
upon.
§ 83-3. Unlawful activities; curfew standards.
§ 83-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-3
1:133
§ 83-4. Exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 16 to remain in any
public place or establishment (as defined in § 83-2) after 10:30 p.m.
(2230 hours), prevailing time, and before 5: 00 a.m. (0500 hours) the
following day, prevailing time.
B. It shall be unlawful for any child 16 or 17 years of age to remain in any
public place or establishment (as defined in § 83-2) after 12:00 midnight
(2400 hours), prevailing time, and before 5:00 a.m. (0500 hours) the
following day, prevailing time.
C. The provisions in § 83-3A and B of this section shall not apply if any of
the exceptions stated in § 83-4 of this chapter exist.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense as per the penalties listed in § 83-8 of this chapter.
A. Any child found in apparent violation of this chapter, meeting any one of
the following listed exceptions, shall be exempt from the provisions of
§ 83-3 (where applicable) and § 83-8 of this chapter.
(1) Whenever the child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or
custodian.
(2) Whenever an emergency activity is authorized by the parent,
guardian or custodian of said child, as long as the special
conditions listed in § 83-4B are met.
(3) Whenever the child is engaged in employment activities as long as
the special conditions listed in § 83-4B are met.
(4) Whenever attending special activities/functions, as authorized by a
parent, guardian or custodian, as long as the special conditions
listed in § 83-4B are met.
B. The following special conditions, where applicable, must be met by the
child and parent, guardian or custodian, or employer or other person(s)
as authorized in any federal, state and local statute or ordinance in
order to qualify to the exceptions listed in § 83-4A.
(1) When a child is found in apparent violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, while carrying a written permission of the parent,
guardian or custodian, stating the date, time, and reason to exempt
said child from the provisions of § 83-8 of this chapter.
(2) When a child is found in apparent violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, while carrying actual written authorization from an
employer or other person(s) as authorized by any federal, state,
and local statute or ordinance indicating that said child is
necessary to the function of that said business during the time
frame regulated by this chapter.
§ 83-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 83-4
1:134
§ 83-5. Responsibilities of parent, guardian or custodian.
§ 83-6. Responsibility of operator.
(3) When a child is found in apparent violation of this chapter during
any officially declared national, state or local state of emergency
when said child is supporting relief efforts of the state of
emergency.
(4) When the child is in accordance with any provision as authorized by
any federal, state, and local statute or ordinance.
(5) When advance notice is given to the Montgomery Township Police
Department in writing, by any agency of any governmental body,
indicating the names and addresses of any children residing within
the jurisdiction of the Montgomery Township Police Department
who may be found in violation of any provision of this chapter
during the activity time specified in that advance notice.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense subject to the provisions of § 83-8 of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or custodian to allow or
permit any child under 16 years of age to remain in any public place or
establishment (as defined in § 83-2) after 10:30 p.m. (2230 hours),
prevailing time, and before 5:00 a.m. (0500 hours) the following day,
prevailing time.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or custodian to allow or
permit any child 16 or 17 years of age to remain in any public place or
establishment (as defined in § 83-2) after 12:00 midnight (2400 hours),
prevailing time, and before 5:00 a.m. (0500 hours) the following day,
prevailing time.
C. The provisions of § 83-5 A and B of this section shall not apply if any of
the exceptions stated in § 83-4 exist.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense as per the penalties listed in § 83-8 of this chapter.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the parent, guardian or custodian to
immediately take custody of his/her child upon notice of a violation by
the Montgomery Township police.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator to allow or to permit any child
under 16 years of age to remain in any public place or establishment (as
defined in § 83-2) after 10:30 p.m. (2230 hours), prevailing time, and
before 5:00 a.m. (0500 hours), prevailing time.
B. It shall be unlawful for any operator to allow or to permit any child 16 or
17 years of age to remain in any public place or establishment (as
§ 83-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-6
1:135
§ 83-7. Enforcement procedures.
§ 83-8. Violations and penalties.
Not withstanding the provisions of § 83-7 of this chapter, the following
penalties, as appropriate, shall be imposed for any violation of any provision
of this chapter:
defined in § 83-2) after 12:00 midnight (2400 hrs.), prevailing time and
before 5:00 a.m. (0500 hours), prevailing time.
C. The provisions of § 83-6A and B of this section shall not apply if any
exceptions stated in § 83-4 exist.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense as per the penalties stated in § 83-8 of this chapter.
A. A police officer enforcing any provisions of this chapter may employ any
one or all of the following provisions of this section:
(1) A police officer shall stop and identify any person(s) suspected of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) A Police Department representative may, either by oral
communication or by written communication, notify the parent,
guardian or custodian of said child found in violation of any
provision of this chapter.
(3) A police officer shall detain any child found in violation of any
provision of this chapter and, once identified, shall release said
child to the custody of said child's parent, guardian or custodian.
(4) If a parent, guardian or custodian cannot be located, then the
police officer shall transfer custody of the child as specified in the
current applicable Pennsylvania state statutes and/or appropriate
Montgomery Township Police Department regulations relating to
shelter care.
B. A record of any violation by any person of any provisions of this chapter
shall be maintained by the Montgomery Township Police Department.
A. A child offender's first violation shall result in a written warning.
B. A child offender's second violation shall constitute a summary offense,
and a fine of $25 plus court costs shall be imposed.
C. A child offender's third and any subsequent offense shall be a summary
offense, and the fine shall then be increased by $25 plus court costs,
until the maximum fine of $200 plus court costs is imposed, after which
the fine shall be $200 plus court costs.
D. A parent, guardian or custodian's first offense shall result in a written
warning.
§ 83-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 83-8
1:136
§ 83-9. Determination of age by police officers.
§ 83-10. Severability.
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this
chapter. If any provision, including any exception, part, phrase or term, or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby
and, the validity of this chapter in any and all other respects shall not be
affected thereby.
Chapter 86
DISTURBING THE PEACE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 83.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 88.
Firearms and hunting — See Ch. 107.
Noise — See Ch. 151.
Obscenity — See Ch. 159.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 170.
Temporary retail businesses — See Ch. 215.
E. A parent, guardian or custodian's second violation shall be a summary
offense, and a fine of $50 plus court costs shall be imposed.
F. A parent, guardian or custodian's third and any other subsequent
violation shall be a summary offense, and the fine shall then be
increased by $50 plus court costs, until the maximum fine of $200 plus
court costs is imposed, after which the fine shall be $200 plus court
costs.
G. An operator's first offense shall result in a written warning.
H. An operator's second offense shall be a summary offense, and a fine of
$50 plus court costs shall be imposed.
I. An operator's third violation and any subsequent violation shall be a
summary offense, and the fine shall then be increased by $50 plus court
costs, until the maximum fine of $200 plus court costs is imposed, after
which the fine shall be $200 plus court costs.
A. Any police officer enforcing any provisions of this chapter may require
positive proof of age by any person(s) in apparent violation of any
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any police officer enforcing any provisions of this chapter, where
positive proof of age had not been furnished by any alleged violator, the
police officer shall use his/her discretion in determining age, and, until
positive proof has been furnished, the officer's judgment/discretion
shall prevail.
§ 83-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-10
1:137
§ 86-1. Disturbing the peace prohibited.
§ 86-2. Electronic equipment violations; exception.
§ 86-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be liable
to a fine not to exceed $500, such fine or penalty to be collected as fines or
penalties are now collectible by law.
A. "Disturbing the peace" within the meaning of this chapter shall
constitute the making, causing or permitting to be made or caused to be
made anywhere within the Township of Montgomery of any loud,
boisterous or unseemly noise or unnecessary noises, clamor, din or
other sounds tending to disturb the peace and quiet of the community,
and the carrying on of any business, trade, transportation, recreation or
amusement at any time, in any place or in any manner which causes any
unnecessary noise or disturbances, and all such noises and
disturbances are hereby prohibited.
B. All noises or other sounds shall be considered to be unnecessary and to
constitute disturbing the peace even though they are not louder than
customary and are unavoidable sounds or noises attendant upon the
operation or performance of business, trade, transportation, recreation
or amusement, if they are made between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. prevailing local time, in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 50 yards from the building, structure, vehicle or
area from which the sound or sounds are emanating.
C. Except in cases of emergency, no person shall carry on an activity at any
time or in any manner which causes unnecessary annoyance or disturbs
the peace and quiet of the immediate neighborhood.
A. The following are electronic equipment violations: the operation of any
radios, televisions, stereo equipment, amplification equipment, public
address systems, electronic microphone or electronic amplification
system, or other electronic or mechanical equipment, or the singing,
shouting or playing of musical instruments, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing local time, in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 50 yards from the building, structure,
vehicle or area from which the sound or sounds are emanating.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to equipment being
utilized for agricultural purposes.
§ 83-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 86-3
1:138
Chapter 88
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disturbing the peace — See Ch. 86.
Noise — See Ch. 151.
Nuisances — See Ch. 155.
§ 88-1. Digging or defecation to be nuisance.
Any animal which scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn, tree, shrub,
plant, building or any other public or private property, other than the
property of the owner or person in charge or control of such animal, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 88-2. Owners not to permit nuisances.
No person having possession, custody or control of any animals shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance upon any gutter, street, driveway, curb or sidewalk in the
Township or upon the floors or stairways of any building or place frequented
by the public or used in common by the tenants or upon the outside walls,
walkways, driveways, curbs or stairways of any building abutting on a
public street or park or upon the grounds of any public park or public area
or upon any private property other than the property of the owner of such
animal.
§ 88-3. Responsibility of owners to clean nuisances.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal
which commits a nuisance in any area other than the private property of the
owner of such dog or other animal, as prohibited in § 88-2, shall be required
to immediately remove said feces from such surface and carry the feces in
a nonleaking container.
§ 88-4. Disturbing noise prohibited.
It shall be illegal within the Township of Montgomery for any person or
persons to own, possess, harbor or control any dog or animal which makes
any noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 15 minutes or
makes such noise intermittently for 30 minutes or more to the disturbance
of any person any time of the day or night, regardless of whether the animal
or dog is physically situated in or upon private property, said noise being a
nuisance, provided that at the time the animal or dog is making such noise
no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in
or upon which the animal or dog is situated nor is there any other legitimate
cause which justifiably provoked the animal or dog.
§ 86-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-5
1:139
§ 88-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 88-1, 88-2 and 88-3 shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind persons or to a dog used to assist any other
physically handicapped person.
§ 88-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for a
term not less than five days nor more than 90 days.
Chapter 92
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 201.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 92-1. Driveway access. [Amended 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-2006]
Driveway access to state or county highways shall be subject to the
standards and permitting process of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation regarding access to and occupancy of highways by
driveways and local roads (Pennsylvania Code section Title 67, Chapter 441,
as amended). Driveway access to Township roads shall be subject to the
Township's standards set forth herein and elsewhere in the Code, as well
as the Township's permitting process. All driveways shall be subject to the
standards, requirements and processing of this section.
§ 92-2. Location and design. [Amended 4-10-2006 by Ord. No.
06-2006]
Driveways shall be so located as to provide adequate sight distance at
intersections with streets. The stopping area measured 20 feet behind the
curbline or edge of pavement shall be provided and shall not exceed a grade
of 4%.
A. Driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a manner
as not to interfere or be inconsistent with design, maintenance and
drainage of the highway.
B. Driveways should be located in such a manner that they will not cause
the following:
§ 88-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 92-2
1:140
(1) Interference to the traveling public.
(2) A hazard to the free movement of normal highway traffic.
(3) Areas of undue traffic congestion on the highway.
C. Distance from street intersection. Driveways shall be located as far
from the street intersections as is reasonably possible but not less than
the following distances:
(1) Individual residential lots: 50 feet.
(2) Multifamily residential and nonresidential lots: 100 feet.
D. Number of driveways. All residential properties shall be limited to one
curb cut. The following standards shall apply to nonresidential
properties:
(1) Properties with frontage of 100 feet or less shall be limited to one
curb cut.
(2) Not more than two curb cuts may be permitted for any single
property, tract or lot.
(3) More than two curb cuts per street frontage may be permitted only
if anticipated traffic volumes warrant more than two and when
supported by a traffic study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer.
E. Choice of streets. When streets of different classes are involved, the
driveway shall provide access to the street of lesser classification.
F. Pavement widths and grade. Driveway paving widths and grades shall
be as follows:
Land Use
Minimum
Paving
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Paving
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Radius at
Curb
(feet)
Maximum
Grade
Single-family
residential
10 20 5 10%
Multifamily
residential
one-way
12 15 10 9%
Multifamily
residential
two-way
24 28 10 9%
Commercial
and
industrial
(two-way)
low volume
20 24 15 7%
§ 92-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-2
1:141
§ 92-3. Construction standards for residential units. [Amended
6-4-1990 by Ord. No. 69B; 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-206]
§ 92-4. Inspections.
Land Use
Minimum
Paving
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Paving
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Radius at
Curb
(feet)
Maximum
Grade
Commercial
and
industrial
(two-way)
medium
volume
28 28 15 7%
Commercial
and
industrial
(two-way)
high volume
PennDOT
standards
shall be used
PennDOT
standards
shall be
used
PennDOT
standards
shall
PennDOT
standards
shall be used
G. Parking areas. Regardless of the driveway classification, all driveways
shall be provided with a parking area within which the grade shall not
exceed 6%.
H. Clear site triangles. Clear sight triangles shall be provided where
driveways intersect streets. The dimensional standards shall be
determined by the classification of street which the driveway intersects.
I. Entrance to the street shall be at a horizontal angle ranging between
75° to 105° with the intersecting street.
A. Single-family residential lots. The driveway and parking area shall have
a thickness of not less than six inches, and the base of which shall
consist of four inches of base course of 2A modified stone, as
compacted, and a surface which shall be two inches of compacted
thickness of ID-2A wearing course. The paving shall be constructed
both as to materials and workmanship in accordance with specifications
and standards promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation now in force or hereafter revised and on an approved
firm subgrade.
B. Multifamily residential and nonresidential lots. The driveway and
parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
set forth in the Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter 205).
§ 92-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 92-4
1:142
§ 92-5. Applicability.
All new driveways constructed after the date of this chapter shall be
constructed in accordance with the foregoing chapter. This chapter is not
intended to include reconstruction of existing driveways at their present
locations on the date of the enactment of this chapter.
§ 92-6. Exceptions. [Added 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 69A]
Where the Supervisors determine that the literal application of any of
these standards in any case would cause an undue hardship or be plainly
unreasonable and unnecessary, they may grant such reasonable exceptions
as, in their opinion, will not be contrary to the public interest.
§ 92-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and all
costs of prosecution for every offense and, in default of payment thereof, to
be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 107
FIREARMS AND HUNTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disturbing the peace — See Ch. 86.
§ 107-1. Findings.
Due to the density of population within the Township, it is the considered
opinion of the Supervisors that the use of firearms and bows and arrows
within the Township be prohibited and regulated under certain permitted
circumstances.
A. The construction of all driveways and parking areas will be subject to
the inspection and approval of the Township. The Township shall be
notified a minimum of 48 hours in advance of construction.
B. Failure to follow these rules and regulations will prevent use and
occupancy of the structure until it can be proven that the driveway was
constructed properly.
§ 92-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-2
1:143
§ 107-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions. [Amended
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful to discharge
firearms of any kind or description while hunting or at any other time,
including but not limited to rifles, pistols, revolvers, shotguns, air rifles, BB
guns or spring-power, high-velocity, high-intensity or muzzle-load types of
firearms within the limits of the Township. This section shall not apply to
the discharge of firearms in self-defense or by police officers in the course
of their duties.52
§ 107-3. Exception for target practice.
Said prohibitions shall not apply to target practice conducted on a site and
under the supervision of an adult or a responsible person over 21 years of
age, provided that a target is composed of a structure or natural barrier
so formed or constructed as to arrest absolutely the flight of the projectile,
thereby preventing the same from traveling the ground or space beyond
such structure or barrier. The site and supervision shall be approved, in
writing, by the Chief of Police of said Township. Said approval, when
granted, shall be subject to withdrawal at any time by the Chief of Police
if he deems that the conditions imposed herein are being violated or that
the target practice is being conducted in a dangerous manner; however, no
approval shall be longer than one year unless renewed in writing.
§ 107-4. Exception for hunting. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Said prohibitions shall not prohibit the use of shotguns or bows and arrows
used in the hunting of wild game during season within undeveloped farm
areas of the Township where a discharged projectile could not endanger life
or property and when used in accordance with the rules, regulations and
statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.53
§ 107-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution for each violation
thereof and be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days in default of
payment of such fine.
52.Editor's Note: Original Section 3 of Ord. No. 10, which prohibited the discharge of bows,
was deleted 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1.
53.Editor's Note: Original Section 6 of Ord. No. 10, which prohibited the possession of loaded
firearms in public, was superseded by statute and deleted 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1.
§ 107-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 107-5
1:144
Chapter 116
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Nuisances — See Ch. 155.
§ 107-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-5
1:145

ARTICLE I
Recovery of Cleanup Expenses
[Adopted 11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 118]
§ 116-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Any person or persons, corporation, partnership or other
entity engaged in the buying, selling, storing, transferring, transporting
and/or manufacturing of properties, merchandise, chemicals, fuels, waste
products or any other goods or services for compensation.
DANGEROUS INCIDENT — Any incident which creates a dangerous
condition requiring immediate and emergency action in order to prevent
injury to persons or damage to property, which necessitates either or both
of the responses set forth hereinbelow:
HAZARDOUS ACCIDENT — Any incident that occurs from the storage,
transportation, use and/or manufacturing of any substance potentially
dangerous to the public health and welfare at large which necessitates
either or both of the responses set forth hereinbelow:
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE — Bridges, state highways, Township streets,
any navigable waterways or other roadways or watercourses owned by a
governmental unit or other privately owned street, parking lot or accessway
to which the public has access.
§ 116-2. Responsibility for accidents.
The intervention of the Montgomery Township Police Department or
any of the emergency agencies or services which may service
Montgomery Township, including but not limited to fire companies or
rescue squads operating in Montgomery Township.
A.
The need for cleanup and/or abatement measures to be performed by
Township employees or the need for any responsive action resulting in
expense to the Township.
B.
The intervention of the Montgomery Township Police Department or
any of the emergency agencies or services which may service
Montgomery Township, including but not limited to fire companies or
rescue squads operating in Montgomery Township.
A.
The need for cleanup and/or abatement measures to be performed by
Township employees or the need for any responsive action resulting in
expense to the Township.
B.
A. The business on whose premises a hazardous accident occurs shall bear
all costs which occur as a direct or consequential result of such
hazardous accident. In the event that a hazardous accident occurs
during transportation on a public thoroughfare or in delivery to an
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:147
§ 116-3. Costs for emergency responses.
entity other than a business as defined in § 116-1 hereinabove, the
entity who owns or has custody and/or control of the vehicle or
substance involved in the hazardous accident shall bear all costs that
occur as a direct or consequential result of such accident. Nothing
contained herein shall prevent such business or entity from recovering
any costs from a third party whose negligence may have caused such
hazardous accident.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of any official of Montgomery Township, to clean up or abate the
effects of any hazardous accident, the Township may take such action
as deemed necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup
or abatement. The business or entity described in Subsection A
hereinabove shall be liable to the Township for all costs incurred as a
result of such supervision or verification.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, costs of a hazardous accident shall
include but are not limited to the following: expenses incurred by
police, fire, and/or emergency medical services; actual labor costs of
Township personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead;
costs of consultants or others preparing reports concerning the
hazardous accident; costs of equipment operations; costs of materials
obtained directly by the Township; costs of any contractual labor and
materials for cleanup and/or abatement; costs of the Township Solicitor
and Township Engineer connected with the hazardous accident; costs
to replace or repair any damage caused to equipment utilized by the
Township or any other service agency which responded to the accident.
D. The costs resulting from the hazardous accident shall be paid directly to
the Township within 30 days from the date on which the Township
issues an invoice or other appropriate demand for such costs. Interest
shall accrue on any unpaid invoice at the rate of 1 1/2% per month
commencing after the expiration of the thirty-day grace period.
A. Any entity who owns or has custody or has control of any motor vehicle
or other instrumentality that creates a dangerous incident as defined by
this chapter or any entity who owns or has custody or has control of any
real property upon which a dangerous incident as defined in this
chapter takes place shall bear all costs of any emergency response that
arises as a direct or consequential result of such incident. Nothing
contained herein shall prevent such entity from recovering any costs
from a third party whose negligence may have caused such dangerous
incident.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of any official of Montgomery Township, to clean up or abate the
effects of any dangerous incident, the Township may take such action as
deemed necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or
abatement. The entity described in Subsection A hereinabove shall be
§ 116-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 116-3
1:148
liable to the Township for all costs incurred as a result of such
supervision or verification.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, costs of a dangerous incident shall
include but are not limited to the following: expenses incurred by
police, fire and/or emergency medical services; actual labor costs of
Township personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead;
costs of consultants or others preparing reports concerning the
dangerous incident; costs of equipment operations; costs of materials
obtained directly by the Township; costs of any contractual labor and
materials for clean up and/or abatement; costs of the Township Solicitor
and Township Engineer connected with the dangerous incident; costs to
replace or repair any damage caused to equipment utilized by the
Township or any other service agency which responded to the incident.
D. The costs resulting from the dangerous incident shall be paid directly to
the Township within 30 days from the date on which the Township
issues an invoice or other appropriate demand for such costs. Interest
shall accrue on any unpaid invoice at the rate of 1 1/2% per month
commencing after the expiration of the thirty-day grace period.
§ 116-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:149
Chapter 121
INSURANCE
§ 116-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 116-3
1:150
ARTICLE I
Payment of Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-21]
§ 121-1. Designation of officer.
The Treasurer of the Township of Montgomery or such official's designee is
hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out
all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 121-2. Municipal certificate required. [Amended 3-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-45]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Montgomery (hereinafter "the municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500 unless the insurance company, association or exchange is furnished
with a certificate pursuant to this article and unless there is compliance
with the procedure set forth in this article and Act 93 of 1994, 40 P.S. § 638,
as may be amended.
§ 121-3. Procedures for payment and transfer of proceeds.
[Amended 3-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-45]
Where, pursuant to Act 93 of 1994, 40 P.S. § 638, as amended, the Municipal
Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against the subject real property,
the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss as agreed upon by the named insured and the
insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire policies covering the building or other structure, the following
procedures must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for
each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this subsection to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less,
the amount transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000; or
B. If at the time of a loss report, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insuring
agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified
in the estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-3
1:151
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured if the municipality has not commenced to remove, repair
or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent, when transferring the
proceeds, to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and, if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer
the remaining funds to the named insured.
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To the extent
that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 121-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 121-4
1:152
§ 121-4. Adoption of additional procedures. [Amended 3-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-45]
The Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 93 of 1994 and this article and may by
resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 93 of 1994 and this article, including but
not limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections
and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 121-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
§ 121-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-5
1:153
Chapter 128
JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 155.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 193.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Any discarded material or article such as is not ordinarily disposed
of as rubbish or refuse, and shall include but not be limited to scrap metal
and scrapped motor vehicles or any parts thereof, and shall not include any
garbage or other organic waste or any paper or rubbish.
§ 128-2. License required; fee; renewal. [Amended 6-22-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1]
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in the Township of
Montgomery without first having obtained a license from the Supervisors,
for which license the fee shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors from time to time, to be paid each and every calendar year,
such fee to be for the use of the Township. Such license shall be renewed
annually on or before the first day of January of each year, provided that in
any case where a junk dealer's business shall be established in the Township
on or after the first day of July in any year, the license fee payable by such
junk dealer for the remainder of such year shall be at 1/2 the yearly rate.
§ 128-3. Issuance, contents and posting of license.
The license provided for in § 128-2 of this chapter shall be issued by
the Supervisors after application shall have been made therefor by the
person desiring to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the
person to whom such license is issued, and it shall define the premises
from which such business is to be conducted. Such license shall be posted
conspicuously upon the premises licensed thereunder.
§ 128-4. Restrictions on place of business.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the Township of Montgomery for
the purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk nor shall any such person
engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the place
designated upon his license.
§ 121-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 128-5
1:154
§ 128-5. Transferability of license; fee. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-1]
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person
to another person except when the ownership of a licensed premises shall
change. In any such case, the new owner shall apply for a transfer of such
license to him and shall pay a transfer fee as set by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors from time to time.
§ 128-6. Maintenance of premises.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in the following manner:
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste and no paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable articles or materials shall be stored in such premises.
C. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
D. Such premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be
done therein in connection with the storage, processing and
transporting or removal of junk at any time before 7:00 a.m. or after
6:00 p.m. on any day with the exception that emergency calls due to
highway accidents might be serviced at any time.
E. No junk shall be placed, parked or located upon such premises in the
area of the front yard as that term is defined and limited in the
respective zoning district in which the premises is located under the
provisions of the Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance of 1952, as
amended in 1959 and thereafter;54 and no junk shall be placed, parked
or located within 25 feet of any side or rear boundary line of said
premises or within 50 feet of said side or rear boundary line if the
boundary adjoins a property either zoned or used for residential
purposes.
F. There shall be erected and maintained on all of such premises along all
boundary lines thereof a fence at least six feet in height of a link-type or
similar metal construction, and said fence shall be maintained in good
repair. If any boundary line of such premises adjoins a residentially
zoned property or a property devoted to residential use, there shall be
planted and maintained a row of evergreens such as arborvitae or a
plant similar thereto all along said property line, and said plants shall
be at least four feet in height when planted and be maintained at this
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 128-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-6
1:155
§ 128-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any person found violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $600 and the costs of prosecution for each violation
thereof and be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days in default of
payment of such fine. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed for each day that said violation exists.
Chapter 151
NOISE
Chapter 155
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 128.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 183.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 193.
minimum height and be planted no greater than eight feet from center
to center. In the case of existing junk dealers, the required fence and
evergreen planting shall be erected, planted and completed within six
months of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 128-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 128-7
1:156
ARTICLE I
Accumulations
[Adopted 10-1-1962 by Ord. No. 2]
§ 155-1. Prohibited acts.
No person, partnership, association or corporation shall continue, maintain,
establish or carry on any of the following prohibited acts or activities on
any public or private property in Montgomery Township if the same are
determined to be and constitute nuisances in fact:
§ 155-2. Notice to abate; violations and penalties. [Amended
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
If the Zoning Officer of Montgomery Township determines that any person,
partnership, association or corporation is carrying on any of the above
prohibited activities so as to constitute a nuisance in fact in the Township,
the Zoning Officer shall cause written notice to be sent to the violator to
voluntarily abate and remove the nuisance. If the violator has not abated
or removed the nuisance within five days after the receipt of said written
notice, the Board of Supervisors of the Township or its duly authorized
agent may remove such nuisance. Any person convicted before a District
Justice in Montgomery Township in a summary proceeding of maintaining a
nuisance in fact prohibited by this article shall pay the cost of the removal
of such nuisance, plus the costs of prosecution and a fine of not more
than $600 for each violation thereof and be subject to imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days in default of payment of such fine, provided that each
day's violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a
separate violation.
A. The storage, accumulation and depositing of any abandoned or junked
automobiles or parts thereof.
B. The storage, accumulation and depositing of any abandoned or used
building materials of any kind.
C. The conducting of any piggery where garbage is fed to pigs in any
manner.
D. The appearance of any sewage, toilet, kitchen and laundry wastes on
the surface of the ground or in or reaching to any creeks, streams or
bodies of water or sources of water supply.
E. The conducting of any noxious or offensive manufacture or business by
reason of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination or noise.
F. The maintenance of any dangerous structure, including buildings or
parts of buildings in a state of dilapidation or disrepair.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:157

ARTICLE II
Vermin
[Adopted 7-6-1987 by Ord. No. 99]
§ 155-3. Prohibited conditions.
No person or other legal entity owning or occupying any real property
within the Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
shall permit any buildings and housing or parts of buildings and housing
constructed, erected, altered, designed or used in whole or in part for
human habitation and the land appurtenant thereto to remain in such
a state or condition, which may be the result of but not limited to
construction, alteration, repairs, occupation, maintenance, sanitation,
lighting, ventilation, water supply, toilet facilities, drainage or use thereof,
so as to result in the enticement of rats, mice and other vermin to occupy
or inhabit such premises. This article shall not apply to unimproved real
property which exists in its natural state or condition.
§ 155-4. Inspections.
The Township Supervisors or any employee of the Township of Montgomery
designated for the purpose is hereby authorized to inspect all buildings and
land appurtenant thereto in order to determine whether the condition of
such premises is in compliance with the provisions of § 155-3 of this article.
§ 155-5. Notice to abate.
The Township Supervisors or any employee of the Township of Montgomery
designated for the purpose is hereby authorized to give written notice, by
personal service or by mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may
be, on any premises whereon conditions exist in violation of the provisions
of § 155-3 of this article, directing and requiring such owner or occupant
to remove or correct such condition so as to conform to the requirements
within 10 days after receipt of such notice.
§ 155-6. Action by Township; recovery of costs.
In case any person, firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to comply with
such notice within the period of time stated therein, the Township may
remove or correct such condition, and the costs thereof, together with any
additional penalty authorized by law, may be collected by the Township from
such owner or occupant in any manner provided by law. The Township may
also take appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to prevent
the occupancy of such buildings, housing or structure maintained in such a
condition as to violate § 155-3 of this article.
§ 155-7. Proceedings to require compliance.
In addition to other penalties provided by this article, the Township of
Montgomery may institute proceedings in equity to require owners or
§ 155-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-7
1:159
occupants of real estate within the Township of Montgomery to comply with
the provisions of this article.
§ 155-8. Costs of correction to be lien.
The cost of removal, correction, fine and penalties herein mentioned may be
entered by the Township of Montgomery as a lien against such property in
accordance with existing provisions of law.
§ 155-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more
than $600 for each offense and, in default of payment, may be imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each and every day upon which an
owner or occupant of real estate in the Township permits a violation to exist
shall constitute a separate offense without the necessity of separate notices.
§ 155-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 155-9
1:160
Chapter 159
OBSCENITY
§ 159-1. Short title.
This chapter is titled the "Obscenity Ordinance."
§ 159-2. Policy and purpose.
It is the policy and purpose of this chapter to regulate obscene matter in
Montgomery Township and to provide penalties and enforcement methods
for violations of the Obscenity Ordinance. It is expressly stated that the
Obscenity Ordinance strictly applies only to those matters and acts
prohibited by it, and it is not the intention of the Obscenity Ordinance
to abridge any right given or protected by the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Constitution of the United States of
America.
§ 159-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT POPULACE — All persons 18 years of age or older at the time of the
alleged dissemination of obscene matter.
COMMUNITY — The adult populace in general throughout the Township
of Montgomery on or about the time of the alleged dissemination of the
obscene matter.
CONTEMPORARY COMMUNITY STANDARDS — The general conscience,
tolerance, customs, habits, practices, morality or social mores of the
community adult populace as a whole, in existence on or prior to the time of
the alleged dissemination of the obscene matter.
DISSEMINATION —
"Dissemination" means any exhibition, sale, delivery, transfer, offer,
agreement or providing to another of or any offering or agreeing to
exhibit, sell, deliver, transfer or provide to another of or having in
his possession with intent to exhibit, sell, deliver, transfer, or provide
to another any representation, portrayal, depiction or embodiment of
the obscene matter, including but not limited to any obscene writing,
movie, picture, videotape, act, dance, show, depiction, performance,
device, record, recording tape, theatrical or other stage play or other
obscene material which may be shown, displayed, exhibited, sold,
delivered, transferred or provided to another.
A.
"Dissemination" does not mean possession of obscene material by an
individual for purely private noncommercial use in any private dwelling.
B.
§ 155-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-3
1:161
OBSCENE — Matter is "obscene" if it meets each of the three following
definitions:
PRURIENT INTEREST — A great or consuming interest in nudity, sexual
acts, excrement, violence connected with sexual acts, genitals, sexual
devices and other similar matters or objects.
§ 159-4. Dissemination of obscene materials prohibited.
No person or persons belonging to or employed by an entity or group may
knowingly and intentionally disseminate obscene matter in the Township of
Montgomery.
§ 159-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 159-6. Proof and evidence.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest.
A.
The work depicts or describes, in patently offensive way, sexual conduct
which either:
Represents or describes ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted;
or
(1)
Represents or describes masturbation, excretory functions or lewd
exhibition of genitals.
(2)
B.
The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
social value.
C.
A. Violation of § 159-4 of the Obscenity Ordinance shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $600 for each count or, in default of payment
thereof, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30
days. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
B. A count shall consist of each separate act of dissemination and may
consist of each separate group of matter identifiable by title, brand or
the like, but shall not consist of separate items therein.
A. In any hearing conducted pursuant to the Obscenity Ordinance, the
prosecution may offer proof of any one or more of the following facts,
circumstances or conditions which will create a rebuttable
presumption, if accepted as testimony or evidence, that the person
charged with allegedly disseminating or participating in disseminating
the allegedly obscene matter knew the nature of its contents.
(1) The matter in question has been determined to be obscene by any
one or more of the following courts: Montgomery County Court,
Pennsylvania Superior Court, United States District Court in and
§ 159-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 159-6
1:162
for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, any United States Court of
Appeals or the United States Supreme Court.
(2) Any adversary hearing before any District Justice or Judge of the
Court of Common Pleas has determined or decreed the matter in
question is in fact obscene.
(3) Any Montgomery County Court, Pennsylvania State Court or
United States District Court in Pennsylvania has issued a
temporary or permanent injunction against the matter in question,
and thereafter, the defendant or his employee, agent or place of
business disseminates the material in question or material so
enjoined.
(4) The Montgomery County District Attorney, the Pennsylvania
Attorney General or their employed lawyer assistants acting in
behalf or at the behest of such District Attorney or Attorney
General, having previously viewed, heard or read the matter in
question in its entirety, have determined the same to be obscene
within the meaning of this section and have given oral notice or
served written notice of such determination upon the defendant or
his place of business or his employee or agent, by personal service
or certified or registered mail, or publication for at least three days
in a newspaper or general circulation in the Township of
Montgomery or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(5) The defendant, his agent or employee or place of business has
advertised or caused to be advertised the matter in question by
name, title, description or in conjunction with other obscene
matter, either orally or in writing or picture, whether locally,
nationally or merely on or near the premises where the matter in
question is located, found or disseminated.
(6) The defendant or his agent, employee or place(s) of business have
displayed or directed attention to the matter in question in a
manner whereby such object stands out or apart from other matter
within the vicinity in the place of business or depiction or display.
This special display or direction of attention includes but is not
limited to placing such object on special, isolated from other
displays on or in a display case or shelf, within three feet of any
cash register at the premises or in unusually large volume or in
several volumes where fewer roughly similar items are located or
are customarily displayed; or referring to such object in public
presence or view or hearing by any employee or posted notice or
review in print or picture within or in the vicinity of such place of
business or similar such noticeable displays or direction of
attention to such object or material in the premises or vicinity
thereof by defendant, his employee, agent or business.
(7) Direct or circumstantial evidence that the defendant or his agent(s)
or employee(s) have read, viewed, listened to or discussed the
§ 159-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-6
1:163
§ 159-7. Seizure of obscene materials authorized.
Every person who is authorized to arrest any person for a violation of this
chapter is equally authorized to seize any obscene matter found in that
person's possession or control and to deliver the same to the court before
whom the person so arrested is required to be taken, or it may be taken
upon order of that court to an appropriate and secure law enforcement
evidence storage room.
§ 159-8. Suppression of evidence seized.
§ 159-9. Destruction of obscene matter.
contents of or promoted the reading, sale or discussion of the
particular matter in question, whether publicly or privately, within
or without the business context or premises, or orally or in writing
or by any other communicative act.
(8) Exhibition of allegedly obscene films, shows or other portrayals at
the place of business or at any public or private location where
persons other than the defendant in his privacy are allowed, invited
or solicited.
B. In any prosecution for a violation of the Obscenity Ordinance, it shall be
relevant on the issue of knowledge, in addition to the rebuttable
presumptions listed under Subsection A above, to prove the
advertising, publicity, promotion, method of handling or labeling of the
matter, including but not limited to any statement on the cover or back
of any book, magazine, writing, film or other allegedly obscene material
or wrapping or packing thereof.
C. Testimony on the question of obscenity need not be that of expert
witnesses.
A. A person aggrieved of a search and seizure may move for the return of
the property and to suppress its use as evidence.
B. Such motion shall be written and shall be served personally upon the
prosecuting attorney or his authorized representative or assistant.
C. Hearing upon such motion shall be had one working day after service,
Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays excepted, by the court to which the
seized matter had been delivered or to which delivery was tendered.
D. That court shall render its decision within two working days from the
suppression hearing unless it makes specific written findings that
additional time is required for submission and consideration of legal
memoranda, in which instance the court shall render its consideration
as soon as possible.
E. If the motion to suppress is granted, the property shall be returned
unless otherwise subject to lawful detention.
§ 159-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 159-9
1:164
§ 159-10. Hearings.
Hearings under the Obscenity Ordinance shall be held before a District
Justice.
Chapter 166
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 30.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 58.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Disturbing the peace — See Ch. 86.
Firearms and hunting — See Ch. 107.
§ 166-1. Hours. [Amended 8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-18; 2-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-294]
A. Obscene matter and advertisements for matter represented to be
obscene are contraband and lawfully in the possession of a law
enforcement agency or prosecutor and may be destroyed.
B. Obscene matter and advertisements may be destroyed after meeting all
of the following conditions:
(1) Upon final judgment of conviction of the defendant, subject to the
right of appeal and preservation of the evidence during the time
allowed for appeal and final determination thereof; and
(2) Upon five days' written notice personally served upon the
defendant or his attorney or posted at the last known address of the
defendant if personal service cannot be made either.
C. Copies, photographs, reproductions or the like may be retained by law
enforcement agencies for law enforcement purposes or for study by
commissions, agencies or other associations, groups or entities
sanctioned, approved or established by federal, state or local
government, court or grand jury or other such entity.
A. All Township parks, with the exception of the Township's Bark Parks,
shall be open only from sunrise to one hour after sunset, except where
the park is illuminated at nighttime, in which case the illuminated
portion of the park shall be open until 11:00 p.m.
B. The Township's Bark Parks shall be open only from 8:00 a.m. to one
hour after sunset.
§ 159-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:165
§ 166-2. Permitted use.
The parks are open for use only by residents of Montgomery Township and
their accompanied guests. Visibly intoxicated persons are excluded at all
times.
§ 166-3. Alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, custody
or control within the parks any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever;
the bringing, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverage of any kind
within the parks is unlawful.
§ 166-4. Destruction of property.
It shall be unlawful to damage, destroy, remove, deface or vandalize any
trees or shrubs or any other property of the Township within the parks.
§ 166-5. Fires.
All fires are prohibited except cooking fires in fireplaces, grills or other
equipment furnished for cooking purposes in designated areas when under
adult supervision. All such fires must be completely extinguished before
leaving. Fires are not permitted when there is a danger of spread because
of wind or dry conditions, and, in all cases, use of fires shall be subject to
the Montgomery Township Fire Code.55
§ 166-6. Smoking.
Smokers are warned to use care in the use and disposal of matches,
cigarettes, cigars and pipes. Any damage caused by negligent smokers shall
be treated as a violation of park rules, and the responsible party shall
be subject to both fines and assessments for any damage caused to park
property.
C. Special permission for use following one hour after sunset may be
obtained upon application made at the Township Administration
Building, at least five days in advance, to the Township's Park and
Recreation Board, but in no case shall the park be open after 10:00
p.m., excepting where the designated park is illuminated, in which case
the park shall not be open after 11:00 p.m.
D. In the event that as a result of further development of park and park
areas there are park areas which are partially illuminated, the
illuminated portion of the park shall be opened until 11:00 p.m., but the
nonilluminated area of the park shall be closed one hour after sunset.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 166-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 166-7
1:166
§ 166-7. Motor vehicles and trailers.
Automobiles, trucks, vans and trailers are prohibited except in the parking
area designated unless special permission is obtained upon application
made to the Montgomery Township Park and Recreation Board.
§ 166-8. Groups.
Use of the parks by groups in excess of 25 in number is prohibited except
with special permission upon application made to the Montgomery
Township Park and Recreation Board.
§ 166-9. Prohibited acts. [Amended 8-20-1990 by Ord. No. 53B;
7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 97-80; 6-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-98; 1-5-2015
by Ord. No. 15-285]
The following are not allowed within the parks at any time or under any
circumstances:
A. Hunting and trapping.
B. Discharging firearms, except in lawful self-defense or by police officers
in the course of their duties.
C. Carrying or discharging air rifles, bows and arrows, slingshots, rockets
and fireworks of any kind.
D. Throwing of rocks, stones or other missiles.
E. Disorderly conduct, disturbing the peace, profane or obscene language
and fighting.
F. The use of golf clubs and golf balls, except in Windlestrae Park,
provided that the golf clubs and golf balls are used only in the areas
defined and designated at the site for driving of golf balls and only at
the hours fixed by the Township Park and Recreation Board and
confirmed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
G. Dumping of trash, tin cans, garbage, litter or junk other than in trash
receptacles.
H. All motorized vehicles (such as defined in but not limited to those
defined in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code) are prohibited within
the Township parks except while being operated upon designated
roadways and parking lots. In no way shall this prohibit electronic aid
devices (such as motorized wheelchairs) used by persons with
disabilities.
I. No motorized vehicles shall be operated upon seeded or natural areas
of any Township park and recreation area, except emergency vehicles
and park maintenance vehicles.
§ 166-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-9
1:167
§ 166-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of these rules and
regulations shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be adjudged
guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not more than $600 and
costs of prosecution and, in default thereof, imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each and every violation shall constitute
a separate offense, and the imposition of one penalty shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue. The application of the penalty shall not be
held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 166-11. Scheduling. [Added 11-15-1993 by Ord. No. 93-26]
The Park and Recreation Board shall be responsible for the scheduling of
all events and use of Township parks. This scheduling shall be controlled
through the Township Manager's office during normal business hours.
Chapter 170
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 37.
Disturbing the peace — See Ch. 86.
Temporary retail businesses — See Ch. 215.
Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 170-1. License required.
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Township
of Montgomery without first having obtained a license as herein provided.
§ 170-2. Definitions and word usage.
J. Signs, placards or advertisements other than upon designated bulletin
boards.
K. Horses or horseback riding.
L. The use of roller blades, roller skates, skateboards or any device which
would mar the surface on the tennis courts in all Township-owned and -
leased parks and recreational areas are not allowed at any time or
under any circumstances.
M. All activities upon the tennis courts which are not incidental to or
pertaining to tennis are prohibited within all Township-owned and -
leased parks and recreational areas.
§ 166-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 170-2
1:168
§ 170-3. License application.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the following three
separate classifications:
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for
any goods, wares, services or merchandise for future delivery; the
seeking or taking of subscriptions or contributions on any of the
streets or sidewalks or from house to house or by visitation to
private residences or by entering in or upon private property within
the Township of Montgomery; or the seeking or taking of contracts
or orders for home or other building repairs, improvements and
alterations, including orders or contracts for any mechanical,
electrical, plumbing or heating device or equipment for house or
other building improvements or repairs, upon or from the places
aforesaid within the Township. [Amended 4-26-1993 by Ord. No.
93-12]
(1)
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services and/or merchandise, including but not limited to flowers,
shrubs and shrubbery, farm products and produce, for immediate
delivery, which the person selling or offering for sale carries with
him in traveling or has in his possession or control upon any of
the streets or sidewalks or from house to house or by visitation to
private residences or by entering in or upon private property within
the Township.
(2)
DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING MATERIALS — The distribution
of advertising materials for any goods, wares, services or
merchandise on public or private property shall be subject to the
regulations and requirements specified under this chapter
pertaining to peddling and soliciting. [Added 9-16-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-62]
(3)
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. Every person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling and the
distribution of advertising material upon private property in the
Township of Montgomery shall first make application to the
Montgomery Township Police Department, 1001 Stump Road,
Montgomeryville, Pennsylvania, for a license. If such person shall also
be required to obtain a license from any commonwealth or county
officer, he shall, on making such application, exhibit a valid
commonwealth and/or county license. Said application shall be upon a
form provided by the Montgomery Township Police Department and
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:169
shall contain at least the following information verified by oath or
affirmation: [Amended 4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 12B; 9-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-62]
(1) The full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
(2) Permanent address.
(3) The address at which the applicant will receive notices under this
chapter.
(4) The name of the employer or a statement that such applicant is selfemployed.
(5) The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise involved
or other purpose for the license.
(6) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime, and if the answer is in the affirmative, the
nature of the crime and punishment imposed therefor.
(7) The type of vehicle to be used, if any.
(8) The applicant shall also submit a photograph of himself, provided
that where a person makes application for himself and one or more
helpers, the applicable personal information specified above shall
be given for each helper and verified by oath or affirmation by him,
and an individual license shall be required for each helper. No
license under this chapter shall be transferable from one person to
another.
(9) Dates and locations within the Township where peddling or
soliciting activities are to take place. If a person is making
application on behalf of a political, charitable, religious or taxexempt
organization, for one or more other individuals within the
organization, names shall be provided for each day that activities
are to take place. Should the names or dates change after the
application is filed, those changes shall be provided before any
activities take place.
B. Placement of materials.
(1) No advertising materials shall be placed by any person, whether
licensed under this chapter or not, upon any parked motor vehicle
within the Township in the interest of preventing the accumulation
of litter upon private and public properties within the Township.
[Added 4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 12B]
(2) No advertising materials shall be thrown, dropped, placed, posted,
deposited or caused to be thrown, dropped, placed, posted or
deposited upon any of the streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds,
parking lots or other public properties within the Township.
[Added 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-62]
§ 170-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 170-4
1:170
§ 170-4. Permanent locations prohibited. [Amended 6-22-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow peddling or soliciting at
a permanent location in the Township for the purpose of more than one sale
at one location unless the solicitation is for a religious purpose (i.e., this
chapter is intended to regulate and permit door-to-door type sales).
§ 170-5. Fee exemptions.
The following persons shall apply for a license to solicit or peddle in the
Township, but shall not be required to pay a fee:
§ 170-6. Fees. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
No license shall be issued under this chapter until a fee is paid to
Montgomery Township for transmittal to the Township Treasurer for the
general use of the Township. The fee shall be set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors from time to time. A separate license fee shall be
paid by each individual who shall actually conduct soliciting or peddling in
the situation where a principal or employer desires to secure licenses for
agents, employees or servants.
A. Any person engaged in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise
donated by the owners thereof where the proceeds are to be applied to
any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
B. Any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the military
service of the United States who procures from the Prothonotary of
Montgomery County a certificate that he is unable to earn a livelihood
by manual labor, and provided that he otherwise complies with the
requirements of the Act of April 8, 1867, P.L. 50, 60 P.S. § 61,56 as
amended.
C. Any person soliciting contributions on behalf of organizations or
nonprofit corporations which have complied with the provisions of the
Solicitation of Charitable Funds Act, Act of August 9, 1963, P.L. 628, 10
P.S. § 16.1 et seq., as amended,57 governing solicitations for charitable,
benevolent, patriotic or other purposes, which persons are possessed of
a card or other written evidence of their appointment or authority to
solicit for said organization or corporation and upon proof of
compliance with the provisions of the aforesaid Act.
D. Any person soliciting contributions on behalf of a religious
organization.
56.Editor's Note: Former 60 P.S. § 61 was repealed 11-24-1992 by P.L. 717, No. 108.
57.Editor's Note: See now the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S.
§ 162.1 et seq.
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-7
1:171
§ 170-7. License renewal; fee. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any license issued for the purpose of engaging in soliciting and peddling
shall be renewed monthly by the licensee by the payment of an additional
fee as set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time. At the
time of any said renewal of license, the licensee must file an amendment to
the original application to reflect any changes necessary in the information
therein contained.
§ 170-8. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 170-9. Injunctions against religious organizations.
In the event that a license application for the solicitation of contributions to
a religious organization is denied, revoked or suspended, then the Township
must seek judicial review within 10 days of the denial. The Township shall
institute proceedings for temporary, preliminary and permanent injunction
against the religious activity and assume the burden of proof. Any restraint
imposed in advance of final judicial termination on the merits must be
limited to the preservation of the status quo for the shortest possible fixed
period.
§ 170-10. Appeals.
In the event that the party to whom the suspension or revocation notice has
been given under § 170-8 finds that his request for reinstatement of license
is denied by the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township, an appeal
may be taken within 30 days of the denial of the reinstatement by the Board
of Supervisors of Montgomery Township to the Court of Common Pleas of
Montgomery County.
A. Any license or permit issued for the purpose of engaging in soliciting
and peddling may be denied, suspended or revoked at any time upon
proof that:
(1) The application for the license contains false information;
(2) The licensee has been convicted of a crime of fraud or a felony or a
crime involving moral turpitude; or
(3) The licensee has failed to comply with any rules of conduct
prescribed in this chapter.
B. A verbal suspension can be given by the Chief of Police or officers
designated by him, which verbal suspension shall be followed by
written order issued within 72 hours after the verbal suspension. Any
person whose license has been revoked or suspended shall be entitled
to appear and be heard with counsel, if he so desires, before the Board
of Supervisors of Montgomery Township at a regular meeting pursuant
to a request for reinstatement of license.
§ 170-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 170-11
1:172
§ 170-11. Time for granting or denying licenses.
Any application for a license made to the Montgomery Township Police
Department shall be granted or denied within 72 hours.
§ 170-12. Rules of conduct.
Any person to whom a license or permit has been issued hereunder shall
comply with the following rules of conduct:
A. The licensee shall have in his possession at all times the license issued
to him and shall exhibit it upon request.
B. A licensee shall not engage in soliciting or peddling involving a product
or service not set forth in the license application.
C. The licensee shall not permit any other person or individual to have
possession of the license card issued to him and shall immediately
report the loss of any license card to the Township.
D. The licensee shall not permit the license card to be altered or defaced.
E. Any licensee engaged in soliciting or peddling shall do so only between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day of the week, except
where an occupant of a Township residence posts notice on his
property, in accordance with § 170-14 (Notice regulating soliciting or
peddling) of this chapter, either further regulating or prohibiting
soliciting or peddling. In such instance, any soliciting or peddling shall
be governed by the notice. [Amended 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-12;
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 10-245]
F. No licensee shall park any vehicle upon any street, alley or roadway
within the Township for a period of time longer than is reasonably
necessary to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate
vicinity.
G. No licensee shall enter or attempt to enter any dwelling or residence
without invitation or permission of the occupant, and the licensee shall
immediately leave any premises upon request.
H. No licensee shall represent that the license card issued to him is in any
way an endorsement by Montgomery Township of the licensee or the
goods or services which he sells, solicits or peddles.
I. Peddlers and solicitors must have permission of property owners to
occupy private property and must exhibit evidence of the same, in
writing, before the permit is granted.
J. Under no circumstances may a person peddling or soliciting do so
within any highway or highway right-of-way within the Township of
Montgomery.
§ 170-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-12
1:173
§ 170-13. License exemptions.
§ 170-14. Notice regulating soliciting or peddling. [Added
4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-1258; amended 11-8-2010 by Ord. No.
10-245]
Any person, who is an occupant of a Township residence, desiring to limit
or protect his privacy in regards to soliciting or peddling, may do so by
complying with the following requirements:
K. All notices posted in accordance with § 170-14 shall be strictly obeyed.
[Added 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-12]
L. All licensees shall wear a visible tag or otherwise display the name of
the organization for which they are soliciting or peddling and their
name, the tag to be displayed on the left lapel or chest and the tag to be
secured from the Township Registration Authority (Montgomery
Township Police Department). [Added 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-12]
M. All advertising materials distributed by a licensee upon private property
shall be securely placed on a porch or doorway without the use of tape,
tacks or nails to prevent littering so that the materials will not be
carried from the building or residence by the elements. [Added
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-62]
A. The following persons shall be exempt from the obligation to apply for
and receive a license as otherwise required by this chapter:
(1) A roadside stand whereat farmers sell products grown on their own
farms in Montgomery Township or farmers seeking or taking
orders for the sale of their farm products and garden produce
grown upon their own land.
(2) Persons who have prior invitation of the property owner to come
upon their property for the purpose of seeking or taking orders by
any manufacturer, producer or distributor for the sale of bread and
bakery products, meat and meat products or milk and milk
products as part of an established and recognized delivery route.
(3) Persons taking orders for merchandise from dealers, merchants or
manufacturers at their regular place of business and for business
use.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent Montgomery Township or its agents or
authorized representatives from requesting any person exempt from
the provisions of this chapter to identify himself prior to engaging in
soliciting or peddling for that person's own safety and the general
safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 170-14,
Violations and penalties, to § 170-15.
§ 170-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 170-14
1:174
§ 170-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1; 9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-62; 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-74]
A. Notice of the determination by any occupant of any residence within the
Township of a refusal of invitation to solicitors or peddlers shall be
given by notice posted on the premises in one of the two following
manners:
(1) NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS.
(2) NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS AFTER __ P.M.
B. Any occupant desiring to prohibit or further limit the solicitation or
peddling hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., as set forth in § 170-12E of this
chapter, shall post the appropriate notice on his property, in accordance
with § 170-12A of this chapter.
C. The letters utilized in the notice shall be at least one inch in height. For
the purpose of uniformity, the notice cards shall be provided by the
Township to persons requesting them at the cost thereof.
D. Such notice so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor or peddler of the determination by the occupant of the
residence of the information contained thereon.
E. It shall be the duty of every solicitor or peddler, upon going onto any
premises in the Township on which a residence is located, to examine
and look for the notice provided for in Subsection A above, if any is
posted, and be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If
the notice states NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS, then the solicitor or
peddler shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. If
the notice states NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS AFTER __ P.M., then
the solicitor or peddler shall immediately and peacefully depart from
the premises if the time of day is after that indicated in the notice.
F. In any residential development where there exists a lawfully constituted
homeowners' association whose membership consists of all owners of
dwelling units within the development, it shall be lawful for the
association, upon the consent of a majority of its members, to post the
notice authorized under Subsection A hereinabove upon signs posted
conspicuously at all entrances to the development, subject to the sign
requirements of Chapter 230, Zoning, in lieu of posting of notices at
each residence. It shall be the duty of every solicitor or peddler, upon
entering a development, to examine and look for such notice at the
entrance thereto and be governed accordingly as set forth under
Subsection E hereinabove.
G. It shall be a violation of this chapter if any solicitor or peddler refuses to
comply with any notice so posted in accordance with this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Montgomery
Township Police Department who shall have the power to determine in
§ 170-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-15
1:175
Chapter 174
POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 230. Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 174-1. License required; renewal. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-1]
No person in the capacity of keeper, proprietor, owner, superintendent
or manager shall operate a pool or billiard room within the Township
of Montgomery without first obtaining a license from the Township upon
application and the payment of an initial license fee. The licensee may be
renewed upon application and payment of an annual renewal fee. In the
event that the ownership or management of the billiard room changes,
the prior license is terminated and the successor shall apply and pay for
a change of ownership and/or management application and filing fee. The
amount of said fees shall be set by resolution of the Town Board from time
to time.
§ 174-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
POOL OR BILLIARD ROOM — Any place or facility open to the general
public containing three or more pocket pool or billiard tables for use by
members of the public, except for premises under the control and
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
each instance whether a violation has occurred. Any person who shall
violate or permit the violation of any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction of a summary offense before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation with costs
of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for
the punishment of summary criminal offenses. A separate offense under
this chapter shall be deemed to occur for each day or portion thereof
in which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this chapter
which is found to have been violated. All fines and penalties collected
for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
B. In addition to the penalty provisions hereinabove, the Township
Manager or his or her designee may institute proceedings in equity to
compel compliance with this chapter.
§ 170-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 174-3
1:176
§ 174-3. Hours; minors.
All pool and billiard rooms subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be
regulated as follows:
§ 174-4. Notice of hours.
Persons in the capacity of keeper, proprietor, owner, manager or
superintendent who operate a pool or billiard room in the Township of
Montgomery shall post upon the front door of the establishment, so that it
is legible and in a conspicuous place for all entering the premises to read,
a notice indicating the allowed days and hours of operation as set forth in
§ 174-3.
§ 174-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, either keeper,
proprietor, owner, manager or superintendent, shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs. The minimum amount of the fine shall be no less than $100 and costs.
In the event that any person upon whom the fine and costs are imposed does
not pay the fine and costs, such person may be sentenced and committed to
the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 174-6. When effective; applicability.
This chapter shall become effective five days after the date of enactment.
All persons operating a pool or billiard room in existence as of the effective
date of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter within
15 days from the effective date or be subject to the penalties for violation of
this chapter as set forth hereinabove.
A. The maximum hours of operation shall be between the hours of 6:00
am. and 2:00 a.m., Mondays through Thursday only; on Friday between
6:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. Saturday morning; and on Saturday from 6:00
a.m. until 3:00 a.m. Sunday morning.
B. No pool or billiard room shall be open to the public on Sunday morning
after 3:00 a.m., except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight.
C. No person under the age of 18 years shall be allowed or permitted to be
present in any pool or billiard room after 9:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday night unless in the company of a parent, in which event no
person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to be present
in any pool or billiard room after 11:00 p.m. On Friday and Saturday
nights, persons under the age of 18 may be allowed or permitted to be
present in any pool or billiard room after 11:00 p.m. and until 1:00 a.m.
but only if in the company of a parent.
§ 174-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-7
1:177
§ 174-7. Filing license applications.
All applications for a license to operate, renew or change ownership/
management of a pool or billiard room shall be submitted to the
Montgomery Township Police Department on forms provided by the
Montgomery Township Police Department on or before January 15 of the
year for which the license is being requested.
Chapter 178
(RESERVED)
Chapter 183
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 46.
Sewers — See Ch. 187.
Subdivision and land management — See Ch.
205.
Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 183-1. Scope.
This chapter governs the issuance of permits for retaining tanks by the
Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer Authority ("Authority") and by the
Township of Montgomery ("Township") for individual and community on-lot
sewage systems which employ renovation of sewage effluent in a subsurface
absorption area, except for large-volume on-lot sewage systems. The
Sewage Enforcement Officer may not issue a permit for an individual or
community on-lot sewage system which does one of the following:
§ 183-2. Definitions.
The definitions of terms used herein are set forth in § 187-2 of Chapter 187
and are incorporated into this chapter.
A. Discharges directly to the surface of the ground or to the surface
waters of this commonwealth.
B. Is a large volume on-lot sewage system; that is, an individual or
community on-lot sewage system with a design capacity to discharge
subsurface sewage flows which are in excess of 10,000 gallons per day.
C. Is proposing or designed for the disposal of substances defined as
industrial wastes under the Clean Streams Law.59
59.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 174-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 183-3
1:178
§ 183-3. Sewage Enforcement Officer.
§ 183-4. Permits; prohibited acts.
A. There shall be at all times a Sewage Enforcement Officer employed by
the Township.
B. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Supervisors
and must be certified by the State Board of Certification of Sewage
Enforcement Officers.
C. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall be appointed for a term of one
year, the term to begin on the first Monday in January of each year,
excepting for the initial term.
D. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall receive and review all
applications for permits under this chapter for individual and
community on-lot sewage systems and conduct such investigation and
inspections as are necessary under and to implement the Act60 and
regulations issued thereunder.
E. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall be paid in accordance with a
salary schedule to be fixed from time to time by resolution of the
Supervisors.
F. The Supervisors shall make application to the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources or any other suitable agency for
reimbursement for the cost of expenses in the enforcement of the
Sewage Facilities Act61 by the Sewage Enforcement Officer, as provided
by law.
A. No person in the Township shall install, construct or alter an individual
or community on-lot sewage system or construct, install or occupy any
building or structure for which an individual or community on-lot
sewage system is to be installed without first obtaining a permit from
the Sewage Enforcement Officer indicating that the site and the plans
and specifications of such system are in compliance with the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act ("SFA"),62 this chapter and
the regulations and standards adopted pursuant to the SFA. The
"alteration of a sewage system" shall mean the repair, replacement or
enlargement of a treatment tank, subsurface absorption area or
retention tank.
B. No human excrement or material containing human excrement shall be
used on the ground, placed on the surface of the ground or buried or
otherwise disposed of within the Township.
60.Editor's Note: See the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean
Waste Act," 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
61.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
62.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 183-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-4
1:179
§ 183-5. Permit fee.
Upon the filing of each application for a permit, there shall be imposed an
application fee in an amount according to the schedule of fees fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Supervisors. The application fee shall be
paid in advance upon the filing of the application.
§ 183-6. Duty to furnish information.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a permit under this chapter
to supply the Sewage Enforcement Officer with all the information which he
shall deem necessary to administer and enforce this chapter consistent with
the policy of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as expressed in the SFA63
and its regulations.
§ 183-7. Issuance or denial of permit.
§ 183-8. Permit applications.
An application for a permit shall be in writing to the Township and shall
include the necessary planning modules and be in such form and include
such data as is prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources and the Township.
C. No garbage, offal, pomace, dead animals, decaying matter or organic
waste substances of any kind shall be thrown, deposited or dumped
anywhere within the Township.
D. The transportation of garbage and slaughterhouse offal shall be done in
watertight containers or vehicles properly covered to avoid spoilage.
Containers shall be thoroughly cleansed after each use.
A. The permit shall be issued or denied within seven days after receiving
the application for permit, unless it is determined by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer that the data submitted by the applicant is
incomplete or the Township is unable to verify the information
submitted, in which event the Township shall give notice to the
applicant within seven days from receipt of the original application of
the reasons why the application is not acceptable. When the required
information is received, the Township shall act upon the application
within 15 days.
B. Denial of a permit shall be in writing and include a statement of the
reasons for the denial and that the applicant has a right to a hearing
before the Township upon a written request of the applicant filed within
30 days with the Township.
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 183-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 183-9
1:180
§ 183-9. Expiration of permit.
If construction of the proposed facility for which a permit under this chapter
has been granted has not commenced within two years of the permit's date
of issuance, the permit shall expire without notice to the holder. A new
permit must be obtained before beginning construction or installation of the
sewage system or structure.
§ 183-10. Conformance with plan.
No system or structure designed to provide individual or community on-lot
sewage systems shall be approved unless the system proposed is consistent
with the official Act 537 plan of the Township.64 In the event that the
Township has no plan or has not revised or implemented its plan as required
by the rules, regulations or order of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, no permits may be issued under this chapter
for those areas of the Township for which an official plan, revision thereto
or implementation thereof is required until the Township has submitted
the official plan or revision thereto and received the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, or has commenced
implementation of its plan or revisions in accordance with a schedule
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
§ 183-11. Subdivision procedures.
Whenever a single tract or other parcel of land or part thereof is subdivided
into two or more lots or whenever any person applies for a permit to install
the second or subsequent individual or community on-lot sewage system in
a subdivision or whenever any person applies for a permit required from
the Pennsylvania Department of Environment Resources, the developer or
the owner of record of the parcel of land involved shall prepare planning
modules for the revision or supplementation of the official plan and shall
submit the same to the Township, utilizing the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources planning modules for land development.
§ 183-12. Retaining tanks; fee.
A. The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to approve within
the Township the control and methods of retaining tank sewage
disposal and the collection and transportation of retaining tank waste.
B. The Authority shall adopt such rules and regulations concerning
sewage retaining tanks which it may deem necessary from time to time
to effect the purposes herein.
C. All users of retaining tanks must comply with all terms of this section,
the rules and regulations adopted by the Authority to govern retaining
tanks and the applicable laws and regulations of administrative
64.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 183-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-12
1:181
agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 72 and 73.
D. No person in the Township shall install, construct or alter a retaining
tank or install, construct, occupy or use a building to be served by a
retaining tank without first obtaining a permit from the Authority.
E. The Authority shall by resolution fix, alter, charge and collect fees,
rates, assessments and other charges for the use of retaining tanks at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
F. A permit fee as fixed by resolution of the Authority shall be paid by all
prospective retaining tank users at the time of filing the application.
The retaining tank users shall also be required to pay a periodic
inspection fee as fixed by resolution of the Authority, at such times as
the Authority shall determine that an inspection of the retaining tank
facilities is necessary.
G. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a retaining tank shall be by or under the direction and
control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at
such site or sites as may be approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources. The pickup and delivery of the retaining
tank waste shall be conducted with an Authority-approved manifest
system to verify the source, quantity and treatment site of all retaining
tank waste.
H. The applicant for a retaining tank permit shall submit the following to
the Authority:
(1) A performance bond to insure that the necessary steps for the
collection, transportation and disposal of the retaining tank waste
will be completed. The performance bond shall be issued by a
company and upon terms approved by the Authority, and the
amount of the bond shall be 150% of the annual cost of
transportation and disposal of the retaining tank waste as
estimated and determined by the Authority.
(2) Letters from an authorized official of two Pennsylvania-
Department-of-Environmental-Resources-approved disposal sites
[one primary and one alternate], agreeing to receive retaining tank
waste from the applicant.
(3) A list, both quantitative and qualitative, of all wastes which will be
discharged to a retaining tank. The qualitative analysis will be
performed in accordance with Standard Methods (latest edition)
down to detectable limits.
(4) A signed contract with a sewage hauler, providing that the hauler
will dispose of the retaining tank waste of the applicant on a
regular basis.
§ 183-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 183-12
1:182
I. Design standards.
(1) The design and construction of the retaining tank must comply in
all respects with the terms of 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 72 and 73.
(2) The property owner shall submit to the Authority for its approval
plans showing the size, shape, location, type of material used in the
fabrication of the retaining tank and details of its construction. This
information shall be given to the Authority prior to the issuance of
any building permit for newly constructed buildings and prior to
the issuance of any occupancy permit for existing buildings. No
building permit shall be issued until the Authority approves the
retaining tank application in each instance and grants a permit for
its installation, and no occupancy permit shall be granted until the
retaining tank installation is approved by the Authority.
(3) The property owner shall locate all retaining tanks so that the
sewage pumper will have easy access to withdrawal facilities
during all seasons of the year.
J. The property owner on which the retaining tank is located shall:
(1) Maintain the retaining tank facilities and equipment in proper
working order at all times in conformance with this chapter and
any other regulations of the Township or Authority, the terms of any
applicable laws and the regulations of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
(2) Permit an authorized representative of the Authority or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to make periodic inspections of the
retaining tank facilities.
(3) Submit a statement once a year to the Authority on the anniversary
date of his permit showing that the performance bond has been
renewed.
K. In the event that the Authority must utilize the performance bond to pay
for the collection, transportation or disposal of the property owner's
retaining tank waste, the property owner must either obtain a new
performance bond in an amount designated by the Authority or put into
escrow with the Authority an amount of cash determined by the
Authority as sufficient to pay all collection, transportation and disposal
costs for the retaining tank facilities. If the property owner does not
comply with these requirements within 30 days, the Authority shall
revoke the permit.
§ 183-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-12
1:183
Chapter 187
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage Treatment Agreement — See Ch. 21,
Art. I.
Sewer authority — See Ch. 46.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 183.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 183-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 183-12
1:184
Part 1
[AdopteSdew5-e2r3 U-2s0e1 A1nBdy ROergdu.l aNtoio. n1s1-25065]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 187-1. Purpose and policy.
A. This Part 1 provides for the regulation of the public wastewater
collection and treatment system operated by the Montgomery Township
Municipal Sewer Authority ("MTMSA") and, inter alia, sets forth
uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributions of
wastewater within the jurisdiction of Montgomery Township which is
ultimately discharged to the publicly owned treatment works' ("POTW")
treatment plants ("POTW-TP") specified below. Montgomery Township
is responsible for enforcement of this Part 1, but MTMSA, the POTWTPs
and the municipalities primarily responsible for any POTW-TP share
the duty to enforce this Part 1 to the extent necessary to assure
compliance with the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq. and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403), along
with all applicable state and federal laws and permits. No POTW-TP or
municipality responsible for a POTW-TP shall have any jurisdiction or
authority to enforce this or any ordinance as they might relate to
contributors whose discharge does not enter its own POTW-TP.
B. The objectives of this Part 1 are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system
which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge at the POTW-TP;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system
that will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into
receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) Protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater
and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public;
(4) Improve the opportunity to reuse and recycle wastewaters and
sludge from the wastewater system;
(5) Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the wastewater
system; and
(6) Enable POTW-TP permittees to comply with their National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge
use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws
65.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Repealed Former Part 1, Sewer Use And Regulations,
Adopted 6-2-1997 By Ord. No. 97-75, As Amended.
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-1
1:185
§ 187-2. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the MTMSA Manager shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this Part 1. Any powers granted
to or duties imposed upon the MTMSA Manager may be delegated by the
MTMSA Manager to a duly authorized MTMSA staff member.
§ 187-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, when used in this Part 1, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
BMP Best management practice
BMR Baseline monitoring report
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical industrial user
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
IU Industrial user
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU Nonsignificant categorical industrial user
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU Significant industrial user
SNC Significant noncompliance
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
§ 187-4. Definitions.
to which the POTW is subject; and to empower the POTW-TP to
enforce penalties against violators as required by its Enforcement
Response Guide and by federal and state laws.
C. This Part 1 shall apply to all users of the wastewater system. This Part 1
authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
§ 187-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-4
1:186
A. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Part 1, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
AMBLER BOROUGH — The Borough of Ambler Wastewater Treatment
Plant or the Manager of this POTW-TP.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of the EPA.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, OR SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USER —
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and
initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate
information for the wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(b)
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or his designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections A(1) through (3) above,
may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which
the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the MTMSA and the applicable POTWTP.
(4)
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:187
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 187-5A
and B of this Part 1 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the wastewater from other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
(building drain) of a user to the collection system; also called "house
connection."
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and
that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
CHALFONT-NEW BRITAIN TOWNSHIP JOINT SEWAGE AUTHORITY
— The Chalfont-New Britain Township Joint Sewage Authority
Wastewater Treatment Plant or the Manager of this POTW-TP.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
COLLECTION SYSTEM — The system of public sewers located within
Montgomery Township and operated by the MTMSA and located within
the public (legal) right-of-way or within easements owned by the
Township or the MTMSA; also called "sewer system."
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks
or other facilities serving two or more properties and collecting,
treating and disposing of domestic sewage into a subsurface soil
absorption area located on one or more of the properties.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Those pollutants for which the POTWTP
was designed to treat to a level less than the allowable as specified
in its NPDES discharge permit, or which the POTW-TP as currently
configured is able to treat to a level less than a proposed standard of
discharge. Generally includes BOD, COD, TSS, NH3-N, TKN as N and P.
Also referred to as "conventional pollutants."
§ 187-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-4
1:188
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The POTW-TP Manager if the POTW-TP has
an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR
403.11.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS — See definition of "compatible
pollutants" above.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for
a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit
of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived
from all measurements taken that day.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) — The
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or, where
appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
Secretary or other duly authorized official of said agency.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the water of the State of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER OR SEWAGE — The liquid and watercarried
waste from residential dwellings and commercial buildings.
This does not include industrial or processed wastewater produced
from industrial processes or pretreatment facilities.
EASEMENT/RIGHT-OF-WAY — An acquired legal right for the specific
use of land owned by a person other than the fee simple title owner.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
Regional Water Management Division Director, the Regional
Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — The estimated amount of
capacity utilized by a single-family residential dwelling. A "residential
dwelling" shall be a single-family dwelling, each family unit of a
multifamily dwelling (apartment, condominium, twin, townhouse, etc.)
and a mobile home. For all nonresidential, commercial or industrial
uses, one EDU shall equal 60,000 gallons of metered water
consumption per year or 15,000 gallons of metered water consumption
per quarter, and the number of EDUs shall be compared by dividing
the total number of gallons of water used for each quarter by 15,000
and rounding off the next lower whole number if the decimal remainder
is 0.49 or less and to the next higher whole number if the decimal
remainder is 0.50 or more.
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:189
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream, on a onetime
basis, without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
HATFIELD TOWNSHIP MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — The Hatfield
Township Municipal Authority (HTMA) Wastewater Treatment Plant, or
the Manager of this POTW-TP.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which structure wastewater shall or may be discharged.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into
the wastewater system.
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks
or other facilities serving a single property and collecting, treating and
disposing of domestic sewage into a subsurface absorption area.
INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL USER — An
industrial, commercial or institutional source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL USER PERMIT —
As set forth in Article IV of this Part 1.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — All wastewater other than domestic
wastewater; also includes process wastewater.
INFLOW/INFILTRATION (I/I) — The amount of extraneous surface
water (inflow) and groundwater (infiltration) entering the sewerage
system via cracks, breaks, cross connections, leaks, etc., which can be
economically removed by rehabilitation of the infrastructure.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
permitted to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the POTWTP's
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory
provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or
local regulations; section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA)"; any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
§ 187-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-4
1:190
Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act;66 the Toxic Substances Control
Act;67 and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
LANSDALE BOROUGH — The Borough of Lansdale Wastewater
Treatment Plant or the Manager of this POTW-TP.
LATERAL — Refer to "public sewer."
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the POTW-TP upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1)
and (b).
MANAGER — The person designated to supervise the operation of the
POTW and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this article, or his duly authorized representative.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that month.
MTMSA — The Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer Authority,
which has responsibility for the collection and treatment of wastewater
generated in the geopolitical boundaries of Montgomery Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which applied to a specific
category of industrial users. (40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471).
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act, 40 CFR 403.5.
66.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:191
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
(c)
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting
the criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this definition.
(b)
(3)
§ 187-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-4
1:192
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure for continuous or periodic
human occupancy from which wastewater is or may be discharged and
includes, without limitation, residential dwellings of all kinds, stores,
shops, offices, warehouses, factories and business, commercial or
industrial establishments.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole,
partial or joint, of any property located in Montgomery Township.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters
of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is
a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW-TP's NPDES
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT or POTW-TP — That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment to wastewater from each
participating municipality. The POTW-TPs servicing Montgomery
Township are as follows: MTMSA Eureka Wastewater Treatment Plant,
Ambler Borough Wastewater Treatment Plant, HTMA Wastewater
Treatment Plant, Chalfont-New Britain Joint Sewage Authority
Wastewater Treatment Plant, Upper Gwynedd Township Wastewater
Treatment Plant, and Lansdale Borough Wastewater Treatment Plant.
As used herein, the term POTW-TP shall, as the circumstances require,
refer to the facility treating the wastewater and/or the entity
responsible for its operation.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:193
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 187-5 of this Part 1.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO A PUBLIC SEWER — Property which
adjoins, abuts on or is adjacent to a public sewer or a street or highway
in which a public sewer is located, but shall not include any property
on which the principal occupied building is located more than 150 feet
from a public sewer.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), including
the POTW treatment plant and any sewers that convey wastewater to
the POTW treatment plant, but not including pipes, sewers, or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the
purposes of this Part 1, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons inside or outside Montgomery
Township and participating municipalities.
PUBLIC SEWER — Facilities, including any part of but not necessarily
the entirety of a system of such facilities, operated by the MTMSA
for the collection of wastewater within Montgomery Township. This
includes lateral lines from a street sewer to the curb or legal right-ofway
where such lateral lines are constructed by or dedicated to and
accepted by the MTMSA. A common sewer operated by the MTMSA for
the conveyance of wastewater.
RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND RECOVERY ACT (RCRA) —
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and
retains wastewater and is designed and constructed to facilitate
ultimate disposal of the wastewater at another site. Retaining tanks
include but are not limited to a chemical toilet, a holding tank, a privy,
an incinerating toilet, a composting toilet and a recycling toilet.
RETAINING TANK WASTE — Any waste from retaining tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries wastewater.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
§ 187-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-4
1:194
SEWAGE — Refer to "wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — Except as provided in
Subsection A(3) and (4) of this definition, a significant industrial user
is:
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
(1)
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the POTW on the basis that it has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(c)
(2)
The POTW-TP may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding
that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons
per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to POTW-TP's finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;
(a)
The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in § 187-43B of this Part 1 [see 40 CFR
403.12(q)], together with any additional information necessary
to support the certification statement; and
(b)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
(c)
(3)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2)
of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the POTW-TP may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that
such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(4)
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:195
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 187-5 of this Part 1. A slug discharge is any discharge of
a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable
potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way
violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STATE — State of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this Part 1.
SUPERVISORS — The Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors.
TOTAL DISSOLVED SOLIDS (TDS) — The total dissolved (filterable)
solids in water as determined by use of the method specified in 40 CFR
136.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The sum of free ammonia and
organic nitrogen compounds which are converted to ammonium sulfate
(NH4)2SO4 under conditions of digestion. Commonly described as free
ammonia plus nitrate plus nitrite nitrogens.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory
filtering.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Montgomery.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA
under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
UPPER GWYNEDD TOWNSHIP — The Upper Gwynedd Township
("UGT") Wastewater Treatment Plant or the Manager of this POTW-TP.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the POTW.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
§ 187-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-4
1:196
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of
municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulation of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:197

ARTICLE II
General Sewer Use Requirements
§ 187-5. Prohibited discharge standards.
A. General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
B. Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH of less than 6.0 or more than 9.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in
no case solids greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts
or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, petroleum products
(including plastics, gasoline, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil), mud, glass
grinding or polishing wastes;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; except, however,
that in the case of compatible pollutants (see definition in § 187-4 of
this Part 1), such discharge is permissible to the extent that it is in
accordance with any enacted surcharge policy through which the
discharger pays the POTW-TP for the treatment/removal of certain
pollutants; but provided further, that in no case shall a slug load
have a flow rate or contain concentrations or qualities of pollutants
that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than
five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities
or flow during normal operation of the individual discharge and/or
of the POTW-TP;
§ 187-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-5
1:199
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 104° F. (40° C.), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104° F. (40° C.);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Superintendent in accordance with § 187-14 of
this Part 1;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids (including automobile anti-freeze),
gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance or repair;
(10)Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the POTW-TP's
NPDES permit;
(11)Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW-TP;
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW-TP
in a wastewater discharge permit;
(15)Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which
might cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
(17) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than are stated in § 187-8 of this Part 1;
§ 187-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-5
1:200
§ 187-6. National categorical pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
§ 187-7. State pretreatment standards.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations,
or those in this Part 1.
§ 187-8. Local limits.
(18)Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
of more than 5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit of the meter.
C. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
A. The POTW-TP is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
B. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against passthrough
and interference. Except as may be approved by the particular
POTW-TP, no person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of
the following daily maximum limit:
(1) MTMSA Eureka Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Arsenic 0.10
Barium 2.00
Boron 1.00
Cadmium 0.02
Chrome (total) 1.00
Chrome (hexavalent) 0.10
Copper 1.00
Cyanide 0.20
Endrin 0.0004
Fluoride 4.00
Iron 5.00
Lead 0.10
Lindane 0.008
§ 187-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-8
1:201
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Mercury 0.005
Methoxychlor 0.20
Nickel 1.00
Phenol 0.50
Selenium 0.02
Silver 0.10
Tin 3.00
Total halogenated organics 5.00
Total for all priority pollutants 30.0
Toxaphene 0.01
Vanadium 3.00
Zinc 1.00
2, 4-D 0.20
2, 4, 5-TP Silvex 0.02
Oil and grease:
(a) Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of
mineral oil origin.
(b) Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
oil, greases or fats of an animal or vegetable origin.
(c) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat
or grease in excess of 25 milligrams per liter.
Compatible (Conventional)
Pollutants mg/l
BOD 200
TSS 200
Ammonia nitrogen as N 25
Organic nitrogen as N 15
TKN as N 40
Total phosphorus as P 10
Phosphorus (soluble) as P 7
TDS 750
(2) Ambler Borough Wastewater Treatment Plant. [Amended
7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-280]
§ 187-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-8
1:202
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Arsenic 0.19
Cadmium 0.02
Chromium (total) 6.01
Copper 1.28
Cyanide (total) 0.36
Aluminum 14.51
Chromium, hexavalent 0.42
Molybdenum Monitor only
Selenium 0.13
Lead 0.32
Mercury .0009
Nickel 2.16
Phenols 3.26
Silver 0.96
Zinc 1.55
Oil and grease:
(a) Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of
mineral oil origin.
(b) Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
oils, greases or fats of an animal or vegetable origin.
(c) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat
or grease in excess of 25 milligrams per liter.
Compatible (Conventional)
Pollutants
mg/l
BOD N/A
TSS N/A
Ammonia nitrogen as N N/A
Organic nitrogen as N 15
TKN as N 40
Total phosphorous as P 52.64
Phosphorus (soluble) as P N/A
TDS Monitor only
(3) Chalfont-New Britain Township Joint Sewage Authority Wastewater
Treatment Plant.
§ 187-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-8
1:203
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Arsenic 4.0
Beryllium 0.005
Cadmium 0.650
Chromium (total) 1.0
Copper 1.0
Cyanide (total) 0.75
Lead 0.50
Mercury 0.020
Nickel 2.0
Selenium 0.140
Silver 0.730
Zinc 1.00
Oil and grease:
(a) Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of
mineral oil origin.
(b) Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
oil, greases or fats of an animal or vegetable origin.
Compatible (Conventional)
Pollutants mg/l
BOD 250*
TSS 250*
Ammonia nitrogen as N 25*
Organic nitrogen as N 15
TKN as N 40
Total phosphorus as P 6.6*
Phosphorus (soluble) as P 7
TDS 750
§ 187-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-8
1:204
* Surcharge for strong wastes:
Industrial and/or commercial establishments discharging
strong wastes to the sewer system having a greater BOD
that 250 mg/l, a total suspended solids concentration greater
than 250 mg/l, an ammonia nitrogen concentration greater
than 25 mg/l, or a phosphorus concentration greater than 6.6
mg/l, shall pay a strength of waste surcharge, in addition to
the basic volume rental or charge which shall be made in
accordance with policies/procedures adopted by the Chalfont-
New Britain Township Joint Sewage Authority.
(4) HTMA Wastewater Treatment Plant. [Amended 2-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-287]
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Arsenic 0.020
Bis (2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate 0.250
Cadmium 0.010
Chromium (total) 2.00
Copper 2.00
Cyanide (total) 0.500
Lead 0.200
Mercury 0.002
Methylene Chloride 0.200
Nickel 0.250
Phenols (total) 0.500
Silver 0.300
Trichloroethylene 0.500
Zinc 1.00
Oil and grease:
(a) Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of
mineral oil origin.
(b) Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
oil, greases or fats of an animal or vegetable origin.
(c) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat
or grease in excess of 25 milligrams per liter.
§ 187-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-8
1:205
Compatible (Conventional)
Pollutants mg/l
BOD 200
TSS 200
Ammonia nitrogen as N 25
Organic nitrogen as N 15
TKN as N 40
Total phosphorus as P 10
Phosphorus (soluble) as P 7
TDS 750
(5) Lansdale Borough Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Cadmium, total 0.3
Chromium, total 6.0
Copper, total 1.1
Lead, total 1.2
Phenol, total 0.2
Selenium, total 0.3
Zinc, total 1.7
Total toxic organics* Monitor only
Molybdenum, total 0.4
PCB5 0.007
Any single toxic organic* Monitor only
Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate 0.21
Ethylbenzene 1.66
Methylene Chloride 0.31
Tetrachlorethane 0.01
Tetrachloroethene 0.25
Toluene 2.08
Butylbenzylphthalate 2.37
Di-n-butylphthalate 1.05
Flouranthene 2.00
Napthalene 3.98
Phenanthrene 0.05
§ 187-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-8
1:206
Compatible (Conventional)
Pollutants mg/l
BOD5** 750 (daily average
concentration)
TSS** 750 (daily average
concentration)
Ammonia nitrogen as NH3-N** 50 (daily average
concentration)
Phosphate as P 10 (daily average
concentration)
No user may discharge total dissolved solids (TDS) in amounts
which cause or contribute to pass-through or interference at the
POTW or in violation of any other portion of this Part 1.
Oil and grease:
Instantaneous maximum concentration of oil and grease shall not
exceed 100 mg/l.
NOTES:
* Total toxic organics (TTO) is defined as the sum of all
concentrations greater than the detection limit of the volatile
organics, acid extractable and base/neutral extractable
compounds of the 126 priority pollutants. No user may discharge
any single toxic organic pollutant or combination of toxic organic
pollutants in amounts which cause or contribute to pass-through
or interference at the POTW.
** Any user which discharges wastewater to the Borough's sewer
system having concentrations of five-day biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD5), total suspended solids (TSS) and ammonianitrogen
(NH3-N) in excess of the following concentrations will be
subject to the Borough's strength surcharge program:
BOD5: 230 mg/l;
TSS: 200 mg/l;
NH3 -N: 25 mg/l.
(6) Upper Gwynedd Township Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Aluminum 13.9
Arsenic 0.09
Cadmium 0.003
Copper 0.63
Cyanide, free 0.05
§ 187-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-8
1:207
Toxic Pollutants mg/l
Lead 0.04
Dichlorobromomethane 0.005
Zinc 0.77
Chlorodibromomethane 0.003
Chloroform 0.08
Chromium, total 2.22
Chromium (+6) 0.15
Cyanide, total 0.30
Cyanide, amenable 0.05
Mercury 0.0005
Nickel 0.39
Phenols 44.0
Selenium 0.02
Silver 0.07
Residual chlorine 0.60
Oil and grease (fog) 100
Color 200 PCU
pH 6.0 to 9.0 S.U.
Total iron Monitor only
Compatible (Conventional)
Pollutants mg/l
CBOD-5 750
COD 1,500
TSS 750
Ammonia 50
Total phosphorus as P 24.9
The specific pollutant discharge limitations listed above are the
highest allowable concentration in any type of sample, either a
grab or composite, collected over any time interval. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal, unless
indicated otherwise.
The specific pollutant discharge limitations listed above apply at
the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW or at
the point designated by the POTW-TP.
C. The above limits for toxic pollutants apply at the end of the process,
prior to mixing with nonprocess flows, and for other pollutants apply at
the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW, which for
§ 187-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-8
1:208
§ 187-9. POTW-TP's right of revision.
Each POTW-TP reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements
on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this Part 1.
§ 187-10. Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The POTW-TP may impose mass limitations on users who are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements,
or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
purposes of this Part 1 includes all points within and throughout the
collection system. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
total metal unless indicated otherwise. The POTW-TP may impose mass
limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based
limitations above. All studies performed by or on behalf of MTMSA to
verify plant performance at a user's request shall be conducted at that
user's sole expense. MTMSA and/or Montgomery Township may impose
a surcharge by resolution or sewer rent ordinance or by including
the surcharge in any permit for any exceedance of the compatible
(conventional) pollutant limitations. All other violations for the other
pollutants listed under § 187-8 of this Part 1 shall be brought into
compliance by the discharger.
D. As a condition of providing sewer service to users, or of continuing
sewer service to users, and whether or not a permit has been issued for
the discharge. MTMSA and/or the POTW-TP shall be permitted to enter
upon a user's property for the purpose of defining and quantifying
pollutants being discharged to the POTW by the user. Should testing
establish the presence of pollutants entering the POTW from the user's
property in excess of the limits established by this Part 1, and
specifically this section, the user shall be responsible for all costs of
testing plus a ten-percent administrative charge.
E. The POTW-TP may develop best management practices (BMPs), by
ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits
and the requirements of § 187-5 of this Part 1.
§ 187-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-10
1:209

ARTICLE III
Pretreatment of Wastewater
§ 187-11. Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this Part 1 and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in § 187-5 of this Part 1
within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the POTW-TP,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall
be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the POTW-TP and to the MTMSA for review, and shall be acceptable to the
POTW-TP and the MTMSA before such facilities are constructed. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the POTW-TP and the MTMSA under the provisions
of this Part 1.
§ 187-12. Additional pretreatment measures.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW-TP may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance
with the requirements of this Part 1.
B. The POTW-TP may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW-TP or the MTMSA, they are necessary for the
proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease
and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users unless a residential user who is contributing excessive
amounts of grease, oil, or sand has first been given the opportunity to
reduce the discharge by other means. All interception units shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the POTW-TP and/or the MTMSA and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly,
as needed, by the user at its expense, in accordance with any procedure
for the installation and maintenance of grease traps as may be
established from time to time by the POTW-TP and/or MTMSA.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
§ 187-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-13
1:211
§ 187-13. Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans.
[Amended 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 12-255]
Within one year of a user being designated as an SIU and at least every two
years thereafter, the POTW-TP or MTMSA shall evaluate whether each SIU
needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action
to control slug discharges. All users are required to notify the POTW-TP or
MTMSA immediately of any changes in their facilities affecting the potential
for an accidental discharge and/or slug discharge to the POTW. The POTWTP
or the MTMSA may require any user to develop, submit for approval
and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary
to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the POTW-TP or the MTMSA may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
§ 187-14. Hauled wastewater.
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW-TP and the MTMSA of
any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 187-35 of this Part 1;
and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
A. Septic tank wastewater may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the POTW-TP or MTMSA, and at such times as
are established by the POTW-TP or MTMSA. Such wastewater shall not
violate Article II of this Part 1 or any other requirements established by
the POTW-TP or MTMSA. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may require septic
tank wastewater haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The
POTW-TP and/or MTMSA may collect samples of each hauled load to
ensure compliance with applicable standards.
B. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may require haulers of industrial wastewater
to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may
require generators of hauled industrial wastewater to obtain
wastewater discharge permits and/or to provide a disclosure affidavit
as to the nature of the wastewater. The POTW-TP or MTMSA also may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial wastewater. The discharge of
hauled industrial wastewater is subject to all other requirements of this
Part 1.
§ 187-13 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-14
1:212
C. Industrial wastewater haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW-TP or MTMSA. No load may be discharged
without prior consent of the POTW-TP or MTMSA. The POTW-TP or
MTMSA may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance
with applicable standards. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may require the
industrial wastewater generator and/or hauler to provide a wastewater
analysis of any load prior to discharge.
D. Industrial wastewater haulers must provide a wastewater-tracking
form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name
and address of the industrial wastewater hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of wastewater, and
volume and characteristics of wastewater. The form shall identify the
type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether
any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
E. MTMSA and/or the POTW-TP may require each industrial wastewater
hauler to post a bond indemnifying MTMSA and/or the POTW-TP, their
consultants, employees and agents from any damages the industrial
wastewater hauler's wastewater may cause to the POTW, POTW-TP,
employees, third parties and the environment. Should the wastewater
contaminate other waste or wastewater, the industrial wastewater
hauler shall be responsible for the complete removal and disposal of
such contaminated waste or wastewater at his expense.
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-14
1:213

ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Discharge Permits
§ 187-15. Wastewater analysis.
When requested by the POTW-TP or MTMSA, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 15
days of the request. The POTW-TP or MTMSA is authorized to prepare a
form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.
§ 187-16. Permit requirement.
§ 187-17. Existing connections.
Any user that had obtained a wastewater discharge permit from the MTMSA
and/or the POTW-TP prior to the effective date of this Part 1 may continue to
discharge wastewater into the POTW in accordance with the provisions of
the aforementioned permit. However, the user must renew the wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 prior to the
expiration of the existing permit. Any user required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to
the effective date of this Part 1 without virtue of a wastewater discharge
permit issued by the MTMSA and/or the POTW-TP and who wishes to
continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said
date, apply to the POTW-TP or MTMSA for a wastewater discharge permit
in accordance with § 187-19 of this Part 1, and shall not cause or allow
discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of
this Part 1 except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued
by the POTW-TP or MTMSA.
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
POTW-TP, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to § 187-17 of this Part 1 may continue to
discharge for the time period specified therein.
B. The POTW-TP may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Part 1.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this Part 1 and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles X
through XII of this Part 1. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal
and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
§ 187-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-18
1:215
§ 187-18. New connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with § 187-19 of this
Part 1, must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
§ 187-19. Application contents.
A. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. The POTW-TP may require users to submit all or
some of the following information as part of a permit application:
(1) Identifying information.
(a) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(b) Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and
plant production processes on the premises;
(2) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations.
(a) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes,
and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description
should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates
points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(b) Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(c) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;
(d) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
(e) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by
size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(4) Time and duration of discharges;
(5) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
§ 187-18 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-19
1:216
§ 187-20. Application signatories and certifications.
(6) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in Section
2.2C (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
(7) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the POTW-TP, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process.
(c) Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
(d) The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
§ 187-39 of this Part 1. Where the standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation as required by the POTW-TP
or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the
standard.
(e) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in § 187-40 of this Part 1.
(8) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to
be present in the discharge based on § 187-33B of this Part 1 [40
CFR 403.12(e)(2)].
(9) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the POTWTP
to evaluate the permit application.
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative
of the user and contain the certification statement in § 187-43A of this
Part 1.
B. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization
§ 187-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-20
1:217
§ 187-21. Permit decisions.
The POTW-TP will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete permit
application, the POTW-TP will determine whether to issue a wastewater
discharge permit. The POTW-TP may deny any application for a wastewater
discharge permit.
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the
POTW-TP prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
C. A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
by the POTW-TP (see definition in § 187-4 of this Part 1) must annually
submit the signed certification statement in § 187-43B of this Part 1.
§ 187-20 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-21
1:218
ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
§ 187-22. Duration.
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the
discretion of the POTW-TP. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate
a specific date upon which it will expire.
§ 187-23. Contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the POTW-TP to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the POTW-TP or
MTMSA in accordance with § 187-26 of this Part 1, and provisions
for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on federal, state, and local law.
(5) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in
accordance with § 187-33 of this Part 1.
(6) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or
local law.
(7) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
POTW-TP to be necessary.
§ 187-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-23
1:219
§ 187-24. Appeals.
(8) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the POTW-TP (per § 187-33
of this Part 1) must be included as a condition in the user's permit
(or other control mechanism).
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the treatment works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW-TP to ensure
compliance with this Part 1, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
A. The POTW-TP and/or the MTMSA shall provide public notice of the
issuance of a wastewater discharge permit for a significant industrial
user and for an industry requiring categorical and pretreatment
standards. All other wastewater discharge permits issued by the POTWTP
and/or MTMSA are for the convenience of the POTW-TP and/or
MTMSA and are available for public inspection at the POTW-TP and/or
MTMSA offices during normal business hours. Any person, including
the user, may petition the POTW-TP and/or MTMSA to reconsider the
§ 187-23 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-24
1:220
§ 187-25. Modification.
The POTW-TP may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
terms of any wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of
its issuance.
B. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
C. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection,
and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
D. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
E. If the POTW-TP fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to
modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
F. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
within the period prescribed by Pennsylvania's Local Agency Law, 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 105, et seq.
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, the POTW-TP, POTW or POTW-TP personnel, or the receiving
waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
§ 187-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-25
1:221
§ 187-26. Transfer.
§ 187-27. Revocation.
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with § 187-26 of this
Part 1.
A. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days' advance notice to
the POTW-TP and the POTW-TP approves the wastewater discharge
permit transfer. The notice to the POTW-TP must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
B. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
A. The POTW-TP may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the POTW-TP of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the POTW-TP of changed
conditions pursuant to § 187-34 of this Part 1;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the POTW-TP or MTMSA timely access to the
facility premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
§ 187-25 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-27
1:222
§ 187-28. Reissuance.
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with § 187-19 of this Part 1, a minimum of 180
days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge
permit, unless a different time frame is set forth in the user's permit.
§ 187-29. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this Part 1.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
A. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Pretreatment Works Penalty Law (Act 9 of
1992),68 the POTW-TP reserves the right to regulate waste entering the
POTW regardless of its point of origin.
B. Each municipality which utilizes the POTW-TP shall:
(1) Adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this
Part 1 and local limits, including required baseline monitoring
reports (BMRs) which are at least as stringent as those set out in
§ 187-8 of this Part 1. The requirement shall specify that such
ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect
changes made to the POTW-TP ordinance or local limits;
(2) Enforce its respective sewer use ordinances with respect to the
discharges within each of its jurisdictions. The enforcement of a
particular municipality's sewer use ordinance shall be a joint and
cooperative effort between the municipality which utilizes the
POTW, and staff from the POTW-TP and/or the municipality with
primary responsibility for the POTW treatment plant operations
and MTMSA. The POTW-TP and the municipality with primary
responsibility for the POTW-TP operations reserve all rights which
they may have to either undertake enforcement pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Pretreatment Works Penalty Law, and/or to seek
enforcement of any intermunicipal agreement which may require
the cooperation of the municipality which fails or refuses to act.
68.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
§ 187-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-29
1:223
(3) Submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(4) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by
the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be
conducted by POTW-TP; and which of these activities will be
conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and POTW-TP;
(5) Provide the POTW-TP with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment
activities;
(6) Mandate limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it
discharges to the POTW;
(7) Include requirements for monitoring the contributing
municipality's discharge; and
(8) Provide the POTW-TP access to the facilities of users located within
the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the
purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed
necessary by the POTW-TP.
§ 187-29 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-29
1:224
ARTICLE VI
Reporting Requirements
§ 187-30. Baseline monitoring reports.
A. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW-TP or
MTMSA a report which contains the information listed in Subsection B,
below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard,
shall submit to the POTW-TP or MTMSA a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection B, below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow
and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) All information required in § 187-19A(1)(a), (2), (3)(a), and (6), of
this Part 1.
(2) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The user shall provide the information required in
§ 187-19A(7)(a) through (d) of this Part 1.
(b) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements
of this Subsection B(2).
(c) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate
compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along
with supporting data shall be submitted to the control
authority;
(d) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
§ 187-39 of this Part 1;
(e) The POTW-TP may allow the submission of a baseline report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
§ 187-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-30
1:225
§ 187-31. Compliance schedule progress reports.
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§ 187-30B(4) of this Part 1:
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures;
(f) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(3) Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in § 187-4 of this Part 1 and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(4) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 187-31 of this Part 1.
(5) Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with § 187-43A of this Part 1 and
signed by an authorized representative as defined in § 187-4 of this
Part 1.
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. (Such events
include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation.);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
C. The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW-TP or MTMSA no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and
§ 187-30 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-31
1:226
§ 187-32. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW,
any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the POTW-TP or MTMSA a report containing the information
described in §§ 187-19A(6) and (7) and 187-30B(2) of this Part 1. For users
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits, this report shall contain
a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 187-43A of this Part 1. All sampling will be
done in conformance with § 187-40 of this Part 1.
§ 187-33. Periodic compliance reports.
D. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the POTW-TP or MTMSA.
A. All significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the
POTW-TP but in no case less than twice per year (June and December),
submit to the POTW-TP and the MTMSA reports indicating the nature,
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance
reports must be prepared in accordance with the requirements of
§ 187-30B of this Part 1. In the event that the months for submission of
the reports are altered by the POTW-TP, factors such as local high or
low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc. shall be taken into
consideration. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires
compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution
prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required
by the POTW-TP or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine
the compliance status of the user.
B. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may authorize an industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant
regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user
has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that
the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water
and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
industrial user [see 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]. This authorization is subject
to the following conditions:
§ 187-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-33
1:227
(1) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the
facility, provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by
an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no
process wastewater.
(2) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective
period of the wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer
than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver
before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent wastewater
discharge permit. See § 187-19A(8) of this Part 1.
(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the
facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the
facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by the
authorized or duly authorized representative of the industrial,
commercial, institutional, or significant industrial user as defined
in § 187-4 of this Part 1, and include the certification statement in
§ 187-43A of this Part 1 [40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)].
(5) Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA-approved method from 40
CFR 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant
was used in the analysis.
(6) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the POTW-TP must be
included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in
its request for the waiver must be maintained by the POTW-TP for
three years after expiration of the waiver.
(7) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's
permit by the POTW-TP, the industrial user must certify on each
report with the statement in § 187-43C below, that there has been
no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of
the industrial user.
(8) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's
operations, the user must immediately comply with the monitoring
requirements of § 187-33A of this Part 1, or other more frequent
monitoring requirements imposed by the POTW-TP, and notify the
POTW-TP.
(9) This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards,
except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment
standard.
§ 187-33 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-33
1:228
§ 187-34. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the POTW-TP or MTMSA of any significant changes
to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change.
§ 187-35. Reports of potential problems.
C. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 187-43A of this Part 1.
D. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
E. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the POTW-TP, using the procedures
prescribed in § 187-40 of this Part 1, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in the report.
A. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 187-19 of this Part 1.
B. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 187-28 of this Part 1 or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under § 187-25 of this Part 1 in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of
any previously unreported pollutants.
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that
might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the POTW-TP or MTMSA of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
actions taken by the user along with the identity of the person or
persons believed to be responsible for the discharge.
B. Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the POTW-TP, submit to the POTW-TP or MTMSA a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
§ 187-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-35
1:229
§ 187-36. Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the POTW-TP or MTMSA as the POTW-TP or MTMSA
may require.
§ 187-37. Notice of violation; repeat sampling; reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the POTW-TP or MTMSA within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling within seven days of
becoming aware of the violation and perform the repeat analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW-TP or MTMSA within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is
not required if the POTW-TP performs sampling at the user's facility at least
once a month, or if the POTW-TP performs sampling at the user between the
time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user
or the POTW-TP receives the results of this sampling, or if the POTW-TP has
performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
§ 187-38. Prohibition of discharge of hazardous waste.
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property;
nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this Part 1.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in Subsection A, above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
D. Significant industrial users are required to notify the POTW-TP
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a
slug discharge.
A. No user shall discharge hazardous waste or any substance which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261
into the POTW or POTW-TP. The prohibition in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of
§§ 187-30, 187-32, and 187-33 of this Part 1.
B. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
POTW-TP or MTMSA, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the
§ 187-35 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-38
1:230
§ 187-39. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136
and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
POTW-TP or other parties approved by EPA.
§ 187-40. Sample collection.
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
C. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
D. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Part 1, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
A. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, based on data that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
B. Except as indicated in Subsections C and D below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW-TP. Where timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
POTW-TP, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using
protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR 136
and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during
a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil
and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the POTW-TP, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples
may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
§ 187-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:231
§ 187-41. Date of receipt of reports.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 187-42. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Part 1 shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this Part 1, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices established
under § 187-8E of this Part 1. Records shall include the date, exact place,
method (including sample preservation), and time of sampling, and the
name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user, the POTW-TP, the municipality, the MTMSA, or where the user has
been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW-TP or
MTMSA.
§ 187-43. Certification statements.
C. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
D. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day
compliance reports required in §§ 187-30 and 187-32 of this Part 1 [40
CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do
not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available,
the POTW-TP may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required
by § 187-33 of this Part 1 [40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the
industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
A. Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring
waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed
and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance
with § 187-20 of this Part 1; users submitting baseline monitoring
reports under § 187-30B(5) of this Part 1; users submitting reports on
compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines
§ 187-40 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-43
1:232
under § 187-32 of this Part 1; users submitting periodic compliance
reports required by § 187-33A through C of this Part 1, and users
submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the
basis of § 187-33B(4) of this Part 1. The following certification
statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in
§ 187-4 of this Part 1:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
B. Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by
the POTW-TP (as defined in § 187-4 of this Part 1) and § 187-20C of this
Part 1 must annually submit the following certification statement
signed in accordance with the signatory requirements (as defined in
§ 187-4 of this Part 1). This certification must accompany an alternative
report required by the POTW-TP:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR ____ [specify applicable national pretreatment standard
part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that
during the period from __________,__________
to__________,__________[months, days, year]:
(a) The facility described as__________ [facility name] met the definition
of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as defined in § 187-4 of
the Montgomery Township Sewer Use Ordinance;
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
C. Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on § 187-33B of this Part 1 must certify on
each report with the following statement that there has been no
increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the user.
§ 187-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-43
1:233
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR_____
[specify applicable national pretreatment standard part(s)], I certify
that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no
increase in the level of _____[list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to
the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under
§ 187-33A of this Part 1.
§ 187-43 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-43
1:234
ARTICLE VII
Compliance Monitoring
§ 187-44. Right of entry; inspection; sampling.
A. The POTW-TP or MTMSA shall have the right to enter the premises of
any user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this Part 1 and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. The POTW-TP shall notify the MTMSA prior to
entry of a user's premises. Users shall allow the POTW-TP or MTMSA
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties. Such requests for inspection and sampling do not
require advance notice to the user, and POTW-TP and MTMSA
personnel shall be admitted to the user's premises for such purpose
regardless whether advance notice was given to the user.
B. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the POTW-TP or MTMSA
shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
specific responsibilities.
C. The POTW-TP or MTMSA shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
D. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least
annually to ensure their accuracy.
E. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the POTW-TP or MTMSA and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne
by the user.
F. Unreasonable delays in allowing the POTW-TP or MTMSA access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this Part 1.
G. When it would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user to
situate the monitoring facility on the user's premises, the municipality
may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment
§ 187-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-44
1:235
§ 187-45. Search warrants.
If the POTW-TP or MTMSA has been refused access to a building, structure,
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this Part 1, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the POTW-TP or MTMSA designed to verify compliance with this
Part 1 or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, the POTW-TP or MTMSA
may seek issuance of a search warrant from the District Justice in whose
jurisdiction the property is situate.
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper condition at the
expense of the user.
§ 187-44 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-45
1:236
ARTICLE VIII
Confidential Information
§ 187-46. Public access to information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the POTW-TP or MTMSA's inspection and
sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the POTW-TP or MTMSA, that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request
must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that
such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program
or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized
as confidential information and shall be available to the public without
restriction.
§ 187-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-46
1:237

ARTICLE IX
Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
§ 187-47. Grounds for publication.
The POTW-TP shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the
POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall be applicable
to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
Subsections C, D or H of this section) and shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in Article II of this Part 1;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article II of this Part 1
multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by Article II of this Part 1 (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW-TP
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public;
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW-TP's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
§ 187-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-47
1:239
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the POTW-TP determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
§ 187-47 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-47
1:240
ARTICLE X
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
§ 187-48. Authorization of enforcement.
The municipalities with primary responsibility for the POTWs and the
POTW-TPs, in conjunction with MTMSA and/or the Township, are fully
empowered to undertake all enforcement remedies set forth below in order
to assure user compliance with all state and federal laws and regulations.
The enforcement actions described herein will be undertaken pursuant
to the POTW-TP's duly adopted and EPA-approved Enforcement Response
Guide, a federally mandated statement of policy which provides fair and
even application of all enforcement remedies to users in violation, such
document being available at all times for public inspection. In addition, the
municipalities with primary responsibility for the POTWs, MTMSA and the
POTW-TPs retain each and every right and power granted pursuant to the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law69 also known as "Act 9 of
1992," in addition to any amendments thereto.
§ 187-49. Surcharge in lieu of enforcement remedy.
With respect to compatible pollutants (as defined in § 187-4 of this Part
1), the POTW-TPs may, from time to time and at their discretion, adopt
a policy whereby certain specifically identified conventional pollutants are
permissibly discharged to the POTW for removal at the POTW-TP, with the
cost of such removal to be borne by the discharger. The POTW-TP may
expand or limit the list of compatible pollutants to which this surcharge
system applies based upon the POTW-TP's capacity/ability to effectively
remove particular compatible pollutants. In the event that a compatible
pollutant is within the scope of the surcharge system as it exists at the
time of discharge, then such compatible pollutant discharge shall not be
considered a violation of this Part 1. However, any failure to pay the
surcharge cost for the POTW-TP's removal of the pollutant shall itself be
considered a violation of this Part 1 and subject to enforcement action,
in addition to all generally held rights of collection. At no time shall the
surcharge factor as calculated by the respective POTW-TP be greater than
or equal to 1.7 where 1.0 equals the sum of the values related to compatible
pollutants, including flow.
§ 187-50. Notification of violation.
When the POTW-TP or MTMSA finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
POTW-TP or MTMSA may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.
The specific manner in which such notice of violation shall be issued, and
the terms and conditions pursuant to which the user shall respond or
correct the violation, shall be as set forth in the Enforcement Response
69.Editor's: See 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
§ 187-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-50
1:241
Guide. When the notice of violation includes a plan for dissatisfactory
correction and prevention of the violation, submission of such plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit
the authority of the POTW-TP or MTMSA to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.
§ 187-51. Consent orders.
The POTW-TP or MTMSA may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents
shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such
documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders
issued pursuant to §§ 187-53 and 187-54 of this Part 1 and shall be judicially
enforceable.
§ 187-52. Show-cause hearing.
A. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, to appear and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the
user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days
prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user as defined in § 187-4 and required by
§ 187-20A of this Part 1. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
B. Any hearing conducted pursuant to this section shall be presided over
by a committee (hereinafter "committee"), composed of three persons,
including two persons designated by the POTW-TP and one person
designated by MTMSA. In the event that the POTW-TP or MTMSA fails
to designate a hearing participant, then the other member(s) shall
designate an individual to so serve. The committee may itself conduct a
hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or
any officer or employee of the POTW-TP or MTMSA to:
(1) Issue, in the name of the committee, notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
§ 187-50 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-52
1:242
§ 187-53. Compliance orders.
When the POTW-TP or MTMSA finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
POTW-TP or MTMSA may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline
for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
§ 187-54. Cease-and-desist orders.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the committee for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this Part 1, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the
hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
D. After the committee has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order,
through the MTMSA Manager (who shall actually issue the order), to
the user responsible for the discharge directing that following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances
shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices, or
other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and
directives, as are necessary and appropriate, may be issued.
E. Any user aggrieved by the enforcement of this Part 1 may take an
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, and have a hearing thereon, if the appeal is filed in
accordance with the provisions of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 105 et seq., including the time period for appeal prescribed therein.
A. When the POTW-TP or MTMSA finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to
§ 187-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-54
1:243
§ 187-55. Administrative fines.
§ 187-56. Emergency suspensions.
recur, the POTW-TP or MTMSA may issue an order to the user directing
it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A. When MTMSA or the POTW-TP finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, MTMSA or the POTW-TP may fine the user in
an amount not to exceed $25,000 per day or any greater amount which
might be permitted by amendment to the POTW Penalty Law. Such fines
shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation. The actual amount
of the fine in a particular case shall account for the factors set forth in
the Enforcement Response Guide and in any separately adopted
statements of policy on the imposition of fines pursuant to the POTW
Penalty Law.
B. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and if the
unpaid charges, fines and penalties are not paid after 60 calendar days,
the aggregate amount thereof shall bear interest from the penalty date
at the rate of 0.83% per month (10% per year). A lien against the user's
property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
C. A user charged with a violation shall have 30 days to pay the proposed
penalty in full, or, if the user wishes to contest either the amount of the
penalty or the fact of the violation, the user must file an appeal of the
action within 30 days to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania. Failure to appeal within this period shall result in
a waiver of all legal rights to contest the violation or the amount of the
penalty.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably
appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
§ 187-54 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-56
1:244
§ 187-57. Termination of discharge.
to the health or welfare of persons. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or
which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
B. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop
or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTWTP
or MTMSA may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the POTW-TP or MTMSA that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
§ 187-57 of this Part 1 are initiated against the user.
C. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the POTW-TP or
MTMSA prior to the date of any show-cause or termination hearing
under § 187-52 or § 187-57 of this Part 1.
D. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
A. In addition to the provisions in § 187-27 of this Part 1, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article II of this Part 1.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 187-52 of this Part
1 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the POTW-TP shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
§ 187-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-57
1:245

ARTICLE XI
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
§ 187-58. Injunctive relief.
When the POTW-TP or MTMSA finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
POTW-TP or MTMSA may petition the Court of Common Pleas of
Montgomery County, through the attorney for the MTMSA and/or the
POTW-TP for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
Part 1 on activities of the user. The POTW-TP or MTMSA may also seek such
other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition
for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against a user.
§ 187-59. Civil penalties.
In the event that MTMSA or the POTW-TP is required to seek court redress,
for violations of this Part 1, then all amounts recoverable elsewhere herein
as administrative fines shall be recoverable as civil penalties; attorneys'
fees, court costs, and related expenses shall also be recoverable. Filing suit
for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against a user.
§ 187-60. Criminal prosecution.
In the event that any discharge or other violation of this Part 1 constitutes a
violation of any criminal or penal statute, then in addition to all enforcement
remedies described elsewhere in this Part 1, MTMSA and the POTW-TP or
the participating municipalities shall have the unfettered right to initiate
and/or assist in any state or federal criminal proceedings as a result of
such violation. Examples of criminal conduct in connection with a violation
include, but are not limited to, knowing or intentional introduction of any
substance into the POTW-TP which causes injury to persons or property,
otherwise undertaking any act or failing to undertake any act which
recklessly endangers the well-being of the community or plant personnel,
falsification of documents required to be filed pursuant to this Part 1, and
tampering with or otherwise rendering inaccurate a monitoring device or
similar equipment.
§ 187-61. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this Part 1 are not exclusive. The POTW-TP
or MTMSA may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be
in accordance with the POTW-TP's Enforcement Response Guide. However,
§ 187-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-61
1:247
the POTW-TP or MTMSA may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW-TP or MTMSA is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
§ 187-61 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-61
1:248
ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Enforcement Action
§ 187-62. Performance bonds.
The POTW-TP may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
Part 1, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first
files a satisfactory bond, payable to the POTW-TP, in a sum not to exceed
a value determined by the POTW-TP to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
§ 187-63. Liability insurance.
The POTW-TP may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this Part 1,
a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits
proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
§ 187-64. Water supply severance.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may
be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated to the POTW-TP or MTMSA its ability
to comply.
§ 187-65. Public nuisances.
A violation of any provision of this Part 1, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
is hereby declared a public nuisance to the extent that it constitutes such
nuisance as defined by Pennsylvania law or municipal order.
§ 187-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-65
1:249

ARTICLE XIII
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
§ 187-66. Upset.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection C, below, are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the POTW-TP
or MTMSA within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days):
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
§ 187-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-66
1:251
§ 187-67. Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 187-5A of
this Part 1 or the specific prohibitions in § 187-5B of this Part 1 if it can
prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone
or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause passthrough
or interference and that either:
§ 187-68. Bypass.
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the passthrough
or interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the POTWTP
was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.
A. For the purposes of this section:
(1) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(2) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C and D of this
section.
C. Bypass notifications.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the POTW-TP or MTMSA, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW-TP or MTMSA of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
§ 187-66 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-68
1:252
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its
cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time
it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW-TP
or MTMSA may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if
the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
D. Bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and an enforcement action against a user for
a bypass may be undertaken unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
(2) The POTW-TP or MTMSA may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW-TP or MTMSA
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in
Subsection D(1) of this section.
§ 187-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-68
1:253

ARTICLE XIV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 187-69. Permit required.
No unauthorized persons (i.e., persons other than personnel of MTMSA)
shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the MTMSA Manager.
§ 187-70. Classes of permit; information required; unauthorized
connection prohibited.
There shall be three classes of building sewer permits: for residential
service; for commercial service; and for industrial service. In all cases,
the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by MTMSA. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of MTMSA. A permit and inspection fee for a residential, commercial and
industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to MTMSA at the time the
application is filed. Permit and inspection fees for sewer permits shall be in
such amounts as may be established from time to time by MTMSA through
resolution. No property, building or structure or use thereof, other than that
described in the building sewer permit, shall at any time be connected with
or attached to a public sewer.
§ 187-71. Bearing of costs; indemnification.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner or user,
who shall indemnify MTMSA and Montgomery Township from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation of the
building sewer.
§ 187-72. Separate sewers.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building or any part of any building as may be determined by MTMSA.
§ 187-73. Use of old sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, upon examination and test by MTMSA, to meet all
requirements of this Part 1.
§ 187-74. Conformance to codes. [Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No.
13-269]
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
lateral and appurtenant facilities, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall
§ 187-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-74
1:255
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and/or
other applicable rules and regulations of the MTMSA and Montgomery
Township. In the event of any inconsistencies between the rules and
regulations of the MTMSA and Montgomery Township and the International
Plumbing Code, the rules and regulations of the MTMSA and Montgomery
Township shall control.
§ 187-75. Grease interceptors and sand, soil and oil separators.
[Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-269]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES — Those establishments engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following
preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all
methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods),
boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are
infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation
activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a
receptacle that requires washing. These facilities include restaurants,
cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery
stores, churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants, or any other
industrial or commercial establishments which discharge, or are likely
to discharge, grease into the public sewer system.
GREASE — Material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease from
animal or vegetable sources. The term "fats, oil and grease" shall be
deemed as grease by definition. Grease does not include petroleumbased
products.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A device for separating and retaining
waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater
exiting the interceptor and entering the public sewer system. These
devices also serve to collect settlable solids, generated by and from
food preparation activities, prior to the wastewater exiting the
interceptor and entering the public sewer system.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A device that is specifically designed and
manufactured to separate oil from water and permits the oil to be
collected and removed on a regular basis so as to prevent it from being
discharged into the public sewer system.
B. Control plan for grease and food waste.
(1) Any person who constructs, renovates or expands a food service
facility shall be required to submit to MTMSA a grease and food
waste control plan that will effectively control the discharge of
undesirable materials into the public sewer system.
(2) Any owner of an existing food service facility shall also be required
to submit a grease and food waste control plan that will effectively
§ 187-74 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-75
1:256
control the discharge of undesirable materials into the public sewer
system.
C. Grease interceptor installation, connection and location requirements.
(1) Installation requirements. All owners of existing, proposed or
newly renovated or expanded food service facilities within the
MTMSA wastewater service area shall be required to install, at the
owner's expense an approved, properly operated and maintained
grease interceptor.
(2) Sanitary sewer flows. Sanitary sewer flows from toilets, urinals,
lavatories, etc., shall not be discharged into the grease interceptor.
These flows shall be conveyed separately to the sanitary sewer
service lateral.
(3) Floor drains. Only floor drains which discharge or have the
potential to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease
interceptor.
(4) Garbage grinders/disposers. Solid food waste products shall be
disposed of through normal solid waste/garbage disposal means,
and not the sanitary sewer system.
(5) Dishwashers. Commercial dishwashers must be connected to the
grease interceptor. Dishwashers discharge soap and hot water
which can melt grease and allow it to pass through an undersized
grease interceptor. Interceptors must be sized accordingly to allow
enough detention time to allow water to cool and grease to solidify
and float to the top of the interceptor.
(6) Location. The grease interceptor shall be installed outside the
building upstream from the sanitary sewer service lateral
connection unless MTMSA allows an interior installation. This will
allow easy access for inspection, cleaning and removal of the
intercepted grease at any time. A grease interceptor may not be
installed inside any part of a building without written approval by
MTMSA.
D. Design criteria.
(1) Construction. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards of the MTMSA and shall have a
minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease
retention. All grease-removal devices or technologies shall be
subject to the written approval of MTMSA. Such approval shall be
based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed
technology.
(2) Access. Access to grease interceptors shall be available at all times,
to allow for their maintenance and inspection. Access to grease
traps shall be provided by two manholes (one on each
§ 187-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-75
1:257
compartment) terminating at finished grade with cast-iron frame
and cover.
(3) Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may
exist, the grease interceptor shall be designed to have adequate
load-bearing capacity.
(4) Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to a grease
interceptor shall enter only through the inlet pipe of the
interceptor. Each grease interceptor shall have only one inlet and
one outlet pipe.
(5) Grease trap sizing. The required size of the grease interceptor shall
be calculated using the EPA-2 model. All grease interceptors shall
have a capacity of not less than 1,000 gallons nor exceed a capacity
of 3,000 gallons. If the calculated required capacity exceeds 3,000
gallon, multiple units plumbed in series shall be installed.
E. Grease interceptor cleaning/maintenance.
(1) Cleaning/pumping. The owner of a food service facility shall,. at
such owner's expense, maintain and keep in good repair all grease
interceptors to assure the proper operation and efficiency thereof.
Cleaning of grease interceptors shall include the complete removal
of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and
bottom sludge and solids. This work shall be performed by a
qualified and licensed hauler. Decanting or discharging of removed
waste back into the grease interceptor from which it was removed
or any other grease trap, for the purpose of reducing the volume to
be disposed, is prohibited. Cleaning shall also include a thorough
inspection of the interceptor and its components. Any needed
repairs shall be noted, and repairs shall be made at the owner's
expense.
(2) Cleaning/pumping frequency. The grease interceptor must be
cleaned/pumped out completely a minimum of once every four
months, or more frequently as determined by MTMSA, as needed to
prevent carryover of grease into the MTMSA sewer system.
(3) Disposal. All materials removed from each grease interceptor must
be disposed of at a facility approved to receive such waste in
accordance with the provisions of this program. In no way shall the
pumpage be returned to any private or public portion of the public
sewer system. All pumpage from grease interceptors must be
tracked by a manifest, which confirms pumping, hauling and
disposal of the waste. The owner of the food service facility must
obtain and retain a copy of the original manifest from the hauler.
(4) Maintenance log. A grease interceptor cleaning/maintenance log,
indicating each cleaning/pumping for the previous 24 months, shall
be maintained for each food service facility by the owner thereof.
This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler and
§ 187-75 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-75
1:258
disposal site and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for
inspection. Said log shall be made available to MTMSA or its
representative, upon request.
(5) Submittal of records.
(a) Each owner of a food service facility shall submit all cleaning
and maintenance records to MTMSA. The maintenance records
shall include the following information:
[1] Facility name, address, contact person and phone number;
[2] Company name, address, phone number and contact name
of person responsible for performing the maintenance,
cleaning, pumping or repair of grease interceptor;
[3] Types of maintenance performed;
[4] Dates maintenance was performed;
[5] Date of next scheduled maintenance; and
[6] Copies of manifests.
(b) The owner shall be required to submit maintenance records to
MTMSA on a biannual basis (twice per year). Records shall be
submitted by March 1 and September l of each year. The
records shall be submitted to:
Manager
Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer Authority
1001 Stump Road
Montgomeryville, PA 18936
(6) The MTMSA will perform periodic inspections of food service
facilities and shall notify the owner thereof any additional required
maintenance or repairs. Upon written notification by the MTMSA,
the owner shall be required to perform the specified maintenance
within 14 calendar days. Upon inspection by the MTMSA, the
owner may be required to install, at his expense, additional
controls to provide a complete system which prevents discharges of
undesirable materials into the public sewer system.
F. Additives. Any biological additive(s) placed into the grease interceptor
or building discharge line, including but not limited to enzymes,
commercially available bacteria, or other additives designed to absorb,
purge, consume, treat or otherwise eliminate grease, shall require
written approval by the MTMSA prior to use. The use of such additives
shall in no way be considered as a substitution for the maintenance
procedures and/or cleaning procedures required herein.
§ 187-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-75
1:259
G. Chemical treatment. Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, acid
or other chemical solvents designed to dissolve or remove grease shall
not be allowed to enter the grease interceptor.
H. Sand, soil and oil separators. All owners of car washes, truck washes,
garages, service stations, car and truck maintenance facilities,
fabricators, utility equipment shops and other facilities (as determined
by the MTMSA) that have sources of sand, soil and oil shall install
effective sand, soil and oil traps, interceptors and/or oil/water
separators. These systems shall be sized to effectively remove sand, soil
and oil at the expected flow rates. These systems shall be designed in
accordance with the criteria established within the latest edition of the
International Plumbing Code. These systems shall be, at the owner's
expense, cleaned or pumped on a regular basis to prevent impact upon
the MTMSA sewer system. Users whose systems are deemed to be
ineffective by the MTMSA shall be asked to change the cleaning
frequency and/or to increase the size of the system. Owners of washing
facilities will be required to prevent the inflow of detergents and
rainwater into the MTMSA sewer system. Oil/water separator
installations shall be required at facilities that accumulate petroleum
oils and greases.
I. Laundries. Owners of commercial laundries shall equip them with an
interceptor with a wire basket or similar device, removable for
cleaning, that prevents passage into the MTMSA sewer system of solids
1/2 inch or larger in size, such as rags, strings, buttons, or other solids
detrimental to said system.
J. Bottling establishments. Bottling plants shall discharge wastewater
into an interceptor that will provide for the separation of broken glass
or other solids before discharging into the MTMSA sewer system.
K. Permit requirement. Every person who is required to install a grease
interceptor or a sand, soil and oil separator shall apply for and be issued
a permit setting forth required specifications for said interceptor and
separator and cleaning, maintenance, disposal and reporting
requirements.
L. Cost reimbursement. If MTMSA is required to repair and/or clean out
its sewer lines as a result of a stoppage resulting from a poorly
maintained grease interceptor, and/or sand, soil and oil separator, the
owner thereof shall be required to refund the labor, equipment,
materials and overhead costs incurred by MTMSA and any fines
incurred by MTMSA due to any sanitary sewer overflow caused by the
stoppage. Additionally, the owner shall also pay the reasonable costs
and fees incurred by the MTMSA by having to engage the services of its
consulting engineers and solicitor in connection with the administration
of the requirements of this section.
§ 187-75 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-75
1:260
§ 187-76. Elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a method approved by
MTMSA and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 187-77. Surface runoff and groundwater.
No person shall make connection of sump pumps, roof downspouts,
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a POTW unless such connection is
approved in writing by MTMSA for purposes of disposal of polluted surface
drainage.
§ 187-78. Connection to lateral.
The connection of the building sewer to the lateral installed on the POTW
collection system shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing codes or other applicable standards set forth in MTMSA's
Standard Specifications for the Construction of Sanitary Sewers, Force
Mains, Pump Stations, and Wastewater Treatment Plants, latest edition. All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by MTMSA before installation.
§ 187-78.1. Inspection; supervision of connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the MTMSA
Manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the POTW. In the event that the applicant installs the lateral, he shall notify
the MTMSA Manager when the lateral is ready for inspection before the
trench is backfilled. The connection to the public sewer and testing shall be
made under the supervision of the MTMSA Manager or his representative.
§ 187-78.2. Safety measures; guarding of hazard; restoration.
All safety measures during construction or installation of sewer facilities
by an owner shall be the sole responsibility of the owner and his agents
M. Inspection. MTMSA or its representatives shall have the right at
reasonable times to inspect any grease interceptor or sand, soil and oil
separator.
N. Alteration of control methods. MTMSA reserves the right to request
additional control measures if existing control equipment is shown to be
insufficient to protect the MTMSA sewer system from interference due
to the discharge of grease, sand, soil, oil or any other undesirable
materials.
§ 187-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-78.2
1:261
and contractors and shall conform to all federal, state and local laws and
regulations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights, so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to MTMSA and Montgomery Township.
§ 187-78.3. Conditions prior to commencement of work.
No excavation, construction, or connection work shall be commenced within
the Montgomery Township or MTMSA right-of-way until the owner, his
agents and/or independent contractor shall comply with the regulations
and requirements of the MTMSA, including but not limited to: obtaining
necessary permit or permits applicable to said work, paying all required
tapping fees and connection fees, entering into a tapping fee and
development agreement which shall set forth terms relating but not limited
to indemnification of MTMSA, insurance coverage, and the applicant's
being responsible for any damages to person or property in connection with
any such work.
§ 187-78.4. Owner.
The term "owner," as used herein, shall be deemed to include the owner or
owners in fee simple, lessees of the premises, occupiers of the premises,
users, and all other parties having a use or interest in the premises and
occupying the same with or without the consent and permission of the
owner of the fee title.
§ 187-78.5. Capping of unused points of connection.
Sanitary sewers installed with unused points of connection for building
sewers shall have said points of connection capped for watertight integrity
prior to connection of the building sewer. The method of capping shall be
one approved by the MTMSA Manager.
§ 187-78.2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-78.5
1:262
ARTICLE XIVA
Sanitary Sewer Plan; Mandatory Connections; Conditions of
Connection; Billing Procedures and Rates
§ 187-78.6. Plan; rental charges.
Montgomery Township is divided into separate sanitary sewer districts as
designated by a plan prepared by MTMSA's Engineer and approved by the
Township. This plan may be amended from time to time by the Township. A
copy of the plan is on file at the Township offices. The sewer rental charges
for the users in all districts are set forth in § 187-78.13 and the billing
procedures are described hereinafter in § 187-78.12 of this Part 1.
§ 187-78.7. Mandatory connection to public sewers.
A. Upon the completion of any public sewer to be operated by MTMSA,
MTMSA shall cause notice of that fact to be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township, such notice to state
that owners of property accessible to such sewer and upon which there
is an occupied building are compelled to make connection therewith. A
copy of such notice, together with a schedule of the sewer connection
fees and rents then in effect, shall be mailed by registered mail to each
person known to MTMSA to own property accessible to such sewer, but
failure to mail such copies or a defect in the mailed copies or a defect in
the mailing thereof shall not affect the validity of the notice.
B. Any person owning property accessible to a public sewer (as defined in
§ 187-4 of this Part 1) on which there is an occupied building shall, at
his own expense, install sanitary sewer facilities in such building and
connect the same to the public sewer within 60 days after publication of
the notice of completion of the sewer specified in Subsection A above.
C. Any person owning property accessible to a public sewer on which an
occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of erection and
at his expense, install sanitary facilities in such building and connect
the same to the public sewer.
D. Persons owning properties not accessible to a public sewer because the
principal occupied building is more than 150 feet from such sewer and
persons owning properties not accessible to a public sewer who are
nevertheless able to arrange for connections thereto through
intermediate properties may be permitted to make such connection
upon approval of MTMSA.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying a property on
which there is a building required to be connected to a public sewer
under the provisions of Subsection A to construct or use on such
property any individual or community on-lot system or other device for
the disposal of sewage. Any such prohibited systems or devices shall be
abandoned in accordance with the requirements of the Montgomery
County Health Department within 30 days following the date on which
§ 187-78.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-78.7
1:263
§ 187-78.8. Connection fees.
No connection shall be made to any public sewer except upon payment of
the prescribed connection fee, customer facilities fee, tapping fee (capacity
part, distribution or collection part and special purpose part),
reimbursement component and permit fee and upon permit issued by
MTMSA pursuant to rules and regulations regarding connections
promulgated by MTMSA and approved by the Township. The fees for
purchasing capacity in MTMSA's sewer system shall be adopted from time
to time by resolution of MTMSA.
§ 187-78.9. Damage prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of MTMSA's sewage system.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest
under charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 187-78.10. Design standards.
All sanitary sewers to be constructed within Montgomery Township and/
or will discharge to the MTMSA POTW shall have all materials and details
of construction and installation procedures conform to the requirements of
the MTMSA's Standard Specifications for Construction of Sanitary Sewers,
Force Mains, Pumping Stations and Wastewater Treatment Plants (latest
edition).
§ 187-78.11. Conditions of connection.
All connections to the public sewage system are made upon the express
understanding and agreement of the property owner and/or user that:
the aforesaid connection is required to be made. The use of any such
individual or community on-lot sewage system in violation of this
section shall be subject to the penalties hereof and shall also be deemed
to be a nuisance which shall be abated as provided by law.
F. If any person required to make a connection to a public sewer by this
section fails to do so after reasonable notice and opportunity, MTMSA
shall report such failure to the Township, and the Township or MTMSA
may proceed as permitted by law to enter upon the property, make such
connection and collect the cost thereof by municipal lien or otherwise.
A. Neither the Township, MTMSA nor any officer, employee or agent
thereof shall be liable for any damage or expenses resulting from leaks,
stoppages or defective plumbing or from any other cause occurring to
any premises or within any house or have resulted from stoppages,
damage or defects in any building sewer or drain, nor shall the
Township nor MTMSA nor any officer, employee or agent thereof, be
liable for a deficiency or failure of service when occasioned by an
§ 187-78.7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-78.11
1:264
§ 187-78.12. Sewer rent billing.
emergency, required repairs or failure from any cause beyond its or
their control.
B. MTMSA shall have the right to restrict the use of the sewer system
whenever the public welfare may require it.
C. MTMSA and its duly authorized agents shall have the right of access at
all reasonable hours to all parts of any property, building or structure
connected with the sewer system for the purpose of examining and
inspecting the connections and fixtures or for disconnecting service or
for any other proper purpose.
D. The property owner and/or the user shall be obligated to maintain the
sewer facilities, including laterals and sewer pipes and appurtenances,
on its property in good repair, free from leaks of any type, and to fix,
repair or replace any such facilities which are, in the sole discretion of
MTMSA, causing or likely to cause inflow or infiltration (I/I) to the
POTW. I/I shall include the introduction into the POTW of any of the
pollutants, substances or wastewater identified in § 187-5B(12) of this
Part 1 as well as I/I as defined in this Part 1. Any property owner or user
who causes or allows the occurrence of I/I shall be deemed to be
creating a nuisance and shall be in violation of this Part 1 and, upon
receipt of reasonable notice from MTMSA, shall correct same within 30
days (or sooner if the situation presents an emergency or danger to the
public health, safety and welfare). If the property owner or user does
not take corrective measures, MTMSA or its authorized agents may
take measures to abate the nuisance and thereafter collect the cost of
such measures from the property owner and/or user. If payment is not
made, MTMSA may file a municipal claim and/or a civil action.
E. The property owner or user must give prompt written notice to MTMSA
upon any change in ownership, change in tenant or change in use of any
property connected to the sewage system.
A. Residential users. Each residential dwelling shall be billed for one EDU
of capacity. A "residential dwelling" shall be a single-family dwelling,
each family unit of a multifamily dwelling (apartment, condominium,
twin, townhouse, etc.) and a mobile home.
B. Nonresidential users.
(1) For all nonresidential, commercial or industrial uses, one EDU shall
equal 60,000 gallons of metered water consumption per year or
15,000 gallons of metered water consumption per quarter, and the
number of EDUs shall be computed by dividing the total number of
gallons of water used for each quarter by 15,000 and rounding off
the next lower whole number if the decimal remainder is 0.49 or
less and to the next higher whole number if the decimal remainder
is 0.50 or more.
§ 187-78.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-78.12
1:265
(2) Any nonresidential, commercial or industrial use not using a
metered public water supply shall be required to install metering
equipment in its water supply system for the purposes of
determining its sewer rental. The type of equipment and
installation procedures shall be subject to the prior review and
approval of MTMSA. The installation and completion of the
metering equipment shall be in accordance with the MTMSA's
specifications and subject to final inspection and approval by
MTMSA. The user shall read the water meter quarterly and report
the readings to the MTMSA at least 30 days in advance of the
MTMSA's quarterly sewer rental billing. The water meter shall be
calibrated by and at the expense of the owner in intervals of not
less than five years by a company approved by MTMSA, and
verification of the calibration shall be given to MTMSA.
Representatives of MTMSA shall have the right of access into and
upon the property of any user to independently verify the water
meter reading and to have the water meter independently
calibrated.
(3) For nonresidential, commercial and industrial uses, all water used
on a property shall be metered for the purpose of determining the
sewer rents, except as follows:
(a) Automatic sprinkling fire protection water can be excluded
from the metering for sewer rent purposes if the water for this
purpose has a separate meter.
(b) An industrial user utilizing a process using noncontact process
water which does not flow into MTMSA's sewer system may
apply to MTMSA for approval of a metering system which will
exclude for billing purposes the water not introduced into
MTMSA's sewer system.
(c) In the case of inaccurate or missing water meter readings, the
succeeding annual average calculated after repair and
replacement of the meter shall be used to estimate the water
usage for the period having inaccurate or missing water meter
readings. Payment for these quarterly periods of inaccurate or
missing water meter readings shall be at least 80% of the
water usage as estimated by MTMSA during the period in
question. The account shall be reconciled after the year where
accurate water meter readings have been determined, and the
owner/user shall pay the amount due as determined by
MTMSA within 30 days, together with interest at 10% per year.
(d) It shall be conclusively presumed that all nonresidential,
commercial and industrial users discharge a minimum of 80%
of their wastewater production over a twelve-hour period each
day, with the remainder discharged over the remaining hours
in the day.
§ 187-78.12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-78.12
1:266
C. Multiple connections to lateral. If two or more dwellings, apartments,
stores, offices or industrial units are connected through a single lateral
or if two or more families use separate cooking and/or toilet facilities in
a single dwelling, the sewer rent shall be computed as though each
such dwelling, apartment, store, office or industrial unit and each such
family were a separate property or user with a separate connection to
the public sewer.
D. Quarterly payments.
(1) Residential sewer rents shall be payable in advance, and rent for
each calendar quarter shall be billed and payable in accordance
with the due dates noted on the quarterly billing documentation
issued by MTMSA. Rent for the quarter in which a new connection
is made shall be prorated and shall be billed in conjunction with the
next regular quarterly billing or by special billing, as the official
responsible for billing may elect.
(2) Sewer rent for nonresidential, commercial, industrial and
institutional users shall be billed and payable in accordance with
the due dates noted on the quarterly billing documentation issued
by MTMSA.
E. Interest penalty for late payment; lien.
(1) If any quarterly installment of sewer rent is not paid within 30 days
after the date of the bill, a ten-percent penalty shall be added
thereto; and if the installment plus penalty is not paid within 60
days after the date of the bill, the aggregate amount thereof shall
bear interest from the penalty date at the rate of 0.83% per month
(10% per year). Any unpaid sewer rent, together with penalties,
interest and costs thereon to the extent permitted by law, shall be a
lien on the property served which may be collected by action in
assumpsit or by a lien filed in the nature of a municipal claim, as
provided by law. In addition, MTMSA shall have the right to require
any water utility to shut off the water supply to any property with
respect to which the sewer rent imposed is unpaid until all such
rents, together with interest and penalties, are paid. The property
owner shall be responsible for all costs involved in shutting off the
water supply as fixed by resolution of MTMSA.
(2) In addition to the foregoing penalty, interest and costs imposed, if
MTMSA or the Township files a lien or commences litigation to
collect any delinquent sewer rental billing, there shall be added to
the amount billed and claimed an attorney's fee of 10% of the total
delinquent amount, plus all court costs and other costs of
collection.
F. Payment address. Bills for sewer rents shall be mailed to the address
specified in the application for the connection permit unless and until a
different address is reported to MTMSA by the owner or user of the
property. Failure to receive a bill as the result of incorrect address or
§ 187-78.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-78.12
1:267
§ 187-78.13. Sewer rental charges. [Amended 1-3-2012 by Ord. No.
11-25370]
Charges are per quarter for all residential and nonresidential (commercial
and industrial) users and customers as follows:
otherwise shall not excuse nonpayment of rent nor extend the time for
payment.
G. Responsibility of owner. The owner of the property billed shall be
responsible for payment of the sewer rents. If requested by a property
owner, MTMSA may bill a tenant of the owner or user, but the owner
shall remain responsible for payment of the sewer rents, and the
property may be subject to lien by MTMSA.
H. Supplying information to MTMSA. The applicant or owner or user (all
collectively "user") shall provide to MTMSA at any time(s) all
information, plans, studies and documents requested by MTMSA
necessary to determine the appropriate number of EDUs to be assigned
to the user's facility.
I. Amendments. The Township and MTMSA reserve the right to change
EDU values from time to time, to add or delete property classifications
and, in cases of dispute, to determine the classification of a given
property.
A. There shall be a fixed service charge per EDU of $87.59. A residential
EDU shall include any single-family dwelling, each family unit of a
multifamily dwelling (apartment, condominium, twin, townhouse), and
a mobile home. For all nonresidential users and customers, one EDU
shall equal up to and including 15,000 gallons of metered water
consumption per quarter, and any fraction thereof shall be charged as
an additional EDU.
B. There shall be a usage charge per 1,000 gallons, or any fraction thereof,
of water consumed by all users and customers of $2.84.
C. For residential customers and users not having a metered water supply,
there shall be a flat charge of $133.98.
D. There shall be a charge of $25 for any sewer certification given by the
Authority.
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that the sewer rental charges adopted herein
would commence and be effective 1-1-2012 for the first quarterly sewer billings for 2012
and for each quarterly billing thereafter.
§ 187-78.12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-78.13
1:268
ARTICLE XIVB
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 187-78.14. Severability.
If any provision of this Part 1 is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 187-78.15. Repealer.
All other Part 1 and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting
with any part of this Part 1 are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency or conflict.
§ 187-78.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-78.15
1:269

ARTICLE XIVC
Effective Date
§ 187-78.16. When effective.
This Part 1 shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
§ 187-78.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-78.16
1:271

Part 2
[AdoSpetewdag1e-2 M6-a1n9a9g8emByenOtr dP.r oNgor.a 9m7-88]
ARTICLE XV
Program Regulations and Standards
§ 187-79. Title, scope and purposes.
§ 187-80. Definitions.
The definitions of terms used in Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapters
71, 72 and 73 and the definitions of terms set forth in Montgomery
Township Ordinance No. 97-75, being the Sewer Use Ordinance,72 are
herein incorporated by reference and made a part of this Part 2. Such
definitions as well as those set forth below shall govern the interpretation
of this Part 2 unless the context wherein a term is used clearly indicates
otherwise.
MONTGOMERY COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Montgomery
County Health Department and/or its Sewage Enforcement officer
designated to serve Montgomery Township ("county").
A. Title. This Part 2 shall be known as the "Sewage Management
Ordinance for Sewage Systems."
B. Scope. This Part 2 applies to any person who owns, uses or operates any
sewage system in the Township.
C. Purposes.
(1) Under the Clean Streams Law and the Sewage Facilities Act,71 the
Township has the duty to provide for adequate sewage treatment
facilities for the protection of the public health by prohibiting the
discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage. The
Township's Sewage Facilities Plan requires that it is necessary to
formulate and implement a sewage management program to
effectively prevent and abate water pollution and hazards to the
public health caused by improper sewage treatment and the
disposal thereof.
(2) The purposes of this Part 2 are to provide for the regulation,
inspection, maintenance and rehabilitation of any sewage system;
to permit intervention in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and to establish penalties
necessary for the proper administration of the sewage
management program.
71.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., respectively.
72.Editor's Note: See Part 1 of this chapter.
§ 187-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-80
1:273
MONTGOMERY TOWNSHIP MUNICIPAL SEWER AUTHORITY — The
Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer Authority ("Authority") shall
administer, implement and enforce this Part 2.
OWNER — Together with "user" and "person" as used herein means any
property owner, person, company, firm, corporation, partnership, other
business entity, applicant, tenant, user or contractor operating with the
approval of the owner of any individual or community sewage system on any
property in the Township of Montgomery.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
formerly the Department of Environmental Resources.
RETAINING OR HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives
and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to hold sewage
pending the ultimate disposal of the sewage to another site.
§ 187-81. Objectives.
It is the objective of the Township of Montgomery and of the Authority to
make public sewers available to all properties in the Township within a
period of 10 years so that when this objective is achieved, all individual and
community systems will be phased out and eliminated.
§ 187-82. Classifications of systems and jurisdictions; approval
process; applicability.
A. The types of sewage systems which are governed by this Part 2 are as
set forth below, and, in addition, this Part 2 governs the use and
operation of any and all other types of individual and community private
or nonpublic sewage systems that are permitted under the Sewage
Facilities Act and its regulations73:
(1) On-lot system: subsurface discharge, both individual and
community.
(2) Off-lot system: subsurface discharge, both individual and
community.
(3) On-lot system: stream discharge, both individual and community.
(4) Off-lot system: stream discharge, both individual and community.
(5) On-lot system: surface discharge, both individual and community.
(6) Off-lot system: surface discharge, both individual and community.
B. Health Department approval:
(1) The permits for the approval of the installation and design and the
first inspection of systems providing for the subsurface discharge
of less than 10,000 gallons per day which are identified above in
73.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 187-80 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-82
1:274
§ 187-83. Powers and duties of Authority.
The Authority in the administration and enforcement of this Part 2 shall
have all of the powers and duties given local agencies under the Sewage
Facilities Act and the regulations adopted thereunder by PaDEP.
§ 187-84. Exempt properties; inspection required for all properties;
pumping regulations.
Subsection A(1) and 2 and of such systems providing for surface
discharge spray irrigation for single-family residences and holding
tanks are issued by the Montgomery County Health Department.
(2) Any owner, user or applicant who applies to the Montgomery
County Health Department for approval of any type of sewage
system shall on or before the date of making such application
submit a copy of the application and design plans (hereinafter
"application") to the Authority so that the Authority shall have the
opportunity to review and comment upon such application to both
the Montgomery County Health Department and the applicant
before the Montgomery County Health Department issues its
permit for the approval of the application. Owners are put on notice
that the county will not review any application until it receives
confirmation from the Authority that the same application has been
filed with the Authority for review.
C. PaDEP approval:
(1) The permits for the approval of the installation and design and the
first inspection of systems providing for stream discharge and
surface discharge identified above in Subsection A(3) through (6)
and subsurface discharge systems 10,000 gallons per day and
greater are issued by PaDEP.
(2) Any owner, user or applicant who applies to PaDEP for approval of
any type of sewage system shall on or before the date of making
such application submit a copy of the application and design plans
(hereinafter "application") to the Authority so that the Authority
shall have the opportunity to review and comment upon such
application to both PaDEP and the applicant before PaDEP issues
its permit for the approval of the application.
D. This Part 2 shall apply to the use and operation, maintenance,
inspection and the repair, rehabilitation or replacement of all sewage
systems.
A. This Part 2 shall not apply to preexisting stream discharge sewage
systems operating under current PaDEP and NPDES permits. These
exempt properties are:
(1) The orchard wastewater treatment plant.
§ 187-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-84
1:275
(2) The Gwynmont Farms wastewater treatment plant.
(3) Montgomeryville Elementary School wastewater treatment plant.
B. The Authority shall inspect all sewage systems in the Township,
including those constructed before or after the effective date of this
Part 2.
(1) With regard to those systems identified in § 187-82B above, the
Authority shall inspect these systems at least every three years.
(2) With regard to those systems identified in § 187-82C above, the
Authority shall inspect these systems at least once per year.
C. The Authority shall give a report once per year to the Township setting
forth the results of its inspections of all sewage systems.
D. All subsurface discharge sewer systems in the Township shall be
pumped out at least once every three years or more frequently as
designated by the Authority. Property owners and users shall keep a
record of when their systems were pumped out and the name of the
licensed contractor performing this work, and a copy of this record
shall be delivered to the Authority within 30 days of the date that the
work was performed and completed.
E. The Authority shall provide wastehauler receiving facilities for the
receipt, treatment and final disposal of the wastes pumped out under
Subsection D above. The Authority shall set standard fees for the
acceptance and disposal of such wastes from time to time in accordance
with the Sewer Use Ordinance74 and any other rules and regulations
adopted by it.
F. The owner/user having its subsurface discharge sewage system
pumped out shall be responsible for all costs associated therewith.
G. The Authority and/or the Montgomery County Health Department shall
have the power and duty to issue a citation to any property owner or
user who has a sewage system found to be in violation of the provisions
of this Part 2 or of the provisions of the Sewage Facilities Act and the
regulations thereunder. Any such property owner or user shall be given
a reasonable time as determined by the person issuing the citation to
complete a satisfactory correction, replacement or rehabilitation of the
sewage system at the cost of the owner or user, and, if he fails to do so,
the Authority and the Montgomery County Health Department may
proceed under § 187-94, Violations and penalties, of this Part 2 and
under the provisions of the Sewage Facilities Act and its regulations to
restrain the violation and to abate any nuisance caused by the sewage
system.
74.Editor's Note: See Part 1 of this chapter.
§ 187-84 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-84
1:276
§ 187-85. Permits for use and operation of sewage systems.
H. Prior to any change of ownership and conveyance of any lot or property
on which is installed a sewage system that is subject to the provisions of
this Part 2, such system shall be pumped out and its contents disposed
of as required by this section, unless the owner-seller has filed with the
Authority documentation from a contractor licensed to perform pumpout
services that the system was pumped out within a period of one year
immediately preceding the date of conveyance. Following the
conveyance of the lot or property, the new owner-user shall be subject
to the provisions of this Part 2.
I. If the owner or user of any lot served by an individual or community
sewage system does not know or cannot determine the location of the
system on the lot or property, the owner-user shall be obligated to
locate the system as required by the Authority within a reasonable time
period as determined by the Authority and shall have said system
pumped out and maintained in accordance with the terms of this Part
2.
A. The permits for new sewage systems covering the design, installation
and inspection of same must be obtained by all owner-users from either
the Montgomery County Health Department or from PaDEP. See
§ 187-82B and C above for a determination as to which of these entities
has jurisdiction over any installation permit to be issued.
B. Within 90 days of the date that the Montgomery County Health
Department or PaDEP issues and approves an installation permit for
any sewage system constructed after the effective date of this Part 2,
the owner or user shall apply for a use and operation permit to the
Authority.
C. The application for a use and operation permit for all sewage systems
constructed after the effective date of this Part 2 shall be on a form
provided by the Authority and shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
(1) The owner shall submit a copy of the PaDEP or Montgomery County
Health Department installation permit to the Authority.
(2) The owner shall designate a person to be responsible for operation
and maintenance activities and shall demonstrate that the legal
and financial arrangements necessary for assumption of this
responsibility are in place.
(3) The owner shall provide a copy of any and all contracts entered into
between the owner and any other person, firm or legal entity
respecting operations and/or maintenance of the system and
sludge removal.
(4) The owner of a facility requiring an NPDES discharge permit shall
provide a written plan for regular and periodic sampling and
§ 187-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-85
1:277
§ 187-86. Issuance or denial of permit for use and operation.
testing of the influent and effluent of the system to determine that
it is being operated in accordance with the discharge permit issued
by PaDEP, and the plan shall require the submission of copies of the
results to PaDEP and the Authority within 30 days of the last day of
each month.
(5) The owner shall present a written plan for regular and periodic
inspections and maintenance of the system and its appurtenances.
(6) Written permission of the owner permitting the Authority, its
authorized servants, agents and employees to enter upon the
property to inspect the system, observe its operation and secure
such test samples as deemed appropriate by said entities and to
permit such inspections and test sampling as required by the
Authority.
(7) The owner's agreement and plan to integrate his sewage needs and
system into the Authority's sewage program in the area, including
the use of the public sewage system of the Authority when same is
available.
D. The seven requirements in Subsection C immediately above shall apply
only to new systems wherein the installation permit was issued by
PaDEP under § 187-82C above. With regard to new systems wherein the
installation permit was issued by Montgomery County Health
Department under § 187-82B above, the application for the use and
operation permit shall include only the requirements of Subsection
C(1),(6) and (7) above.
E. With regard to all sewage systems in the Township existing before the
effective date of this Part 2, the Authority shall issue to the owners of
same use and operation permits without requiring any application or
the payment of any fee for the initial permit.
F. The Authority shall determine the period of time for which the use and
operation permits are issued, taking into consideration the inspection
and other requirements of this Part 2.
A. Any permit shall be issued or denied within 15 days after receiving the
application for same, unless it is determined by the Authority that the
data submitted by the applicant or owner is incomplete or the entity is
unable to verify the information submitted, in which event notice shall
be given to the applicant or owner within 15 days of receipt of the
original application of the reasons why the application is not
acceptable. When the required information is received, the Authority
shall act upon the application within 15 days.
B. Any denial of a permit shall be in writing and shall include a statement
of the reasons for the denial and that the applicant has a right to a
§ 187-85 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-86
1:278
§ 187-87. Fee schedule.
§ 187-88. Bonds and escrow funds.
hearing before the Authority upon a written request of the applicant or
owner filed within 30 days with the Authority.
A. The Authority shall, by resolution, adopt a fee schedule for the
inspections of sewage systems under § 187-84 hereof and for the use
and operation permits issued under § 187-85 hereof.
B. These schedules shall be kept on file at the Authority offices and shall
be changed and revised from time to time as the Authority shall deem
necessary.
C. The Authority shall be reimbursed by any owner or user of a system for
any and all required emergency responses, the actual expenses
incurred by the Authority plus 10% for administration and additional
emergency response costs.
D. Fees for actual expenses related to systems that fail or are in violation
of the Clean Streams Law, Sewage Facilities Act75 or any of its
regulations or of the provisions of this Part 2 shall be paid by the owner.
The Authority shall be reimbursed for any and all actual expenses
incurred in making any inspections or tests and taking steps to require
an owner or user to correct a faulty or failed system. These fees will
include any necessary consultants', engineering and legal fees related
to this enforcement activity plus a ten-percent administration fee.
A. Prior to the issuance of any permit for the use and operation of any new
sewage system wherein an installation permit was issued by PaDEP
under § 187-82C above, the owner shall post a bond with a recognized
bonding company approved by the Authority in the amount of 110% of
the estimated replacement costs of the system and a bond for 110% of
the annual cost of maintenance of the system. These costs and bond
amounts shall be determined by the Authority's engineer. These bonds
shall be for a period of at least two years with the obligation on the part
of the owner to renew them so long as the system remains in operation.
Said bonding company or companies approved by the Authority shall
have at least an AM. Best rating of B+ or higher.
B. Each time the bonds are subsequently renewed, the dollar amount of
the bonds shall be escalated in accordance with the following:
(1) Replacement costs. The initial actual costs of installation shall be
escalated by McGraw Hill Engineering News Record Construction
Cost Index (ENR-CCI) as the ratio of current date ENR-CCI to the
substantial completion date ENR-CCI times the actual initial
75.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 187-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-88
1:279
§ 187-89. Retaining or holding tanks.
installation costs. [Calculated amount = (ENR-CCI year 2 ÷ ENRCCI
initial) x initial costs].
(2) Maintenance costs. The initial estimated annual costs of
maintenance shall be escalated by the United States Department of
Labor Consumer Price Index (CPI) as the ratio of the current date
CPI to the substantial completion date CPI times the initial
estimated annual maintenance. The CPI escalated annual
maintenance shall be adjusted by the ratio of ending annual
average flow to the preceding period's annual average flow, the
result raised to the six-tenths power. {Calculated amount = (CPI
year ÷ CPI Initial) x [(Q year ÷ Q initial) ^ 0.6] x annual
maintenance cost}. The calculated new bond amount shall be
compared against the preceding twelve-month maintenance cost,
and the larger of the two amounts shall be the amount.
C. In lieu of such bonds, the owner shall be permitted to establish an
escrow fund for the replacement cost and the annual maintenance cost
with the Authority for at least 50% of the estimated cost of replacement
and/or maintenance of the system with the obligation to add to this fund
10% of same each year until the fund reaches 110% of the cost of
replacement and/or maintenance of the system as determined by the
Authority.
A. The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to approve within
the Township the control and methods of the use and operation of
retaining or holding tank sewage disposal and the collection and
transportation of retaining or holding tank waste.
B. The Authority shall adopt such rules and regulations, including a fee
schedule concerning sewage retaining or holding tanks, which it may
deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
C. Since retaining/holding tanks are the least desirable method of
handling wastewater and it is the objective of the Township and its
Authority to provide public sewerage service to the entire Township,
the Authority shall not issue any permits for new retaining or holding
tanks unless one of the following is met and the owner purchases
capacity in the treatment, conveyance and collection facilities by paying
the required tapping fee:
(1) The Authority estimates that within a three-year period public
sewerage will be within 150 feet of the principal building on the
property proposing to utilize retaining/holding tanks as a
temporary means of sewerage disposal.
(2) The owner posts an escrow amount in cash equal to 110% of the
average annual contract amount for wastewater hauling and
disposal at a rate of every three days of three independent private
§ 187-88 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-89
1:280
wastehaulers. These funds shall be used by the Authority to
maintain/operate the retaining/holding tank if required through
default of the owner. When the retaining/holding tank is terminated
and public sewerage service provided, the remaining funds will
be returned to the owner. The retained interest becomes the
Authority's as a fee for administering the account.
(3) The owner intends to use the holding-retaining, collection system
as a short-duration (less then four months) facility. A permit may be
issued by the Authority without guaranty, but wastehauler and
disposal location contract must be provided. In the event of the
owner's failure to operate and maintain the system to the
satisfaction of the Authority, the owner agrees that the Authority
may terminate the permit and prohibit the use previously
approved, and all occupied/used facilities operated by the owner
shall be closed until public sewerage service is provided.
D. No person in the Township shall install or construct a retaining or
holding tank or install, construct, occupy or use a building to be served
by a retaining or holding tank without first obtaining a permit from the
Montgomery County Health Department under § 187-82B above.
E. The Authority shall inspect retaining or holding tanks located in the
Township annually, and the owner shall pay an annual inspection fee in
accordance with the Authority's fee schedule. The owner shall also pay
to the Authority actual costs of Authority covering any emergency
responses concerning operation and maintenance of retaining or
holding tanks.
F. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a retaining or holding tank and the disposal thereof
shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the
PaDEP. The pickup and delivery of the retaining or holding tank waste
shall be conducted with a manifest system to verify the source, quantity
and treatment site of all retaining or holding tank waste. The owner
shall submit to Authority annually copies of all manifests evidencing
proper disposal of the sewage.
G. The regulation covering hauled wastewater in Ordinance No. 97-75,
§ 187-13 of this chapter, the Sewer Use Ordinance, of the Township is
herein incorporated by reference and made a part hereof.
H. The applicant for the use and operation of a new retaining or holding
tank permit shall submit the following to the Authority:
(1) A performance bond or an escrow fund created with the Authority
to ensure that the necessary steps for the collection, transportation
and disposal of the retaining or holding tank waste will be
completed. Any performance bond shall be issued by a company
having an AM. Best rating of B+ or higher and upon terms
approved by the Authority, and the amount of the bond or escrow
fund shall be 110% of the annual cost of transportation and
§ 187-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-89
1:281
disposal of the retaining or holding tank waste as estimated and
determined by the Authority.
(2) Letters from an authorized official of two PaDEP-approved disposal
sites, one primary and one alternate, agreeing to receive retaining
or holding tank waste from the applicant.
(3) A list, both quantitative and qualitative, of all wastes which will be
discharged to a retaining or holding tank. The qualitative analysis
will be performed in accordance with the United States
Environmental Protection Agency's Standard Methods (latest
edition), down to detectable limits.
(4) A signed contract with a sewage hauler providing that the hauler
will dispose of the retaining or holding tank waste of the applicant
on a regular basis.
I. Design standards.
(1) The design and construction of the retaining tank must comply in
all respects with the terms of Title 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 71, 72
and 73.
(2) The property owner shall submit to the Authority for its approval
plans showing the size, shape, location, type of material used in the
fabrication of the retaining or holding tank and details of its
construction. This information shall be given to the Authority prior
to the issuance of any building permit for newly constructed
buildings and prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for
existing buildings. No building permit shall be issued by the
Township until the Authority approves the retaining or holding tank
application in each instance and grants a permit for use and
operation, and no occupancy permit shall be granted until the
retaining or holding tank installation is approved by the Authority.
(3) The owner shall locate all retaining or holding tanks so that the
sewage pumper will have easy access to withdrawal facilities
during all seasons of the year.
J. The owner of the property on which the retaining or holding tank is
located shall:
(1) Maintain the retaining tank facilities and equipment in proper
working order at all times in conformance with this Part 2 and any
other regulations of the Montgomery County Health Department,
Township or Authority and the terms of any applicable laws and the
regulations of PaDEP.
(2) Permit an authorized representative of the Montgomery County
Health Department, Authority or PaDEP to make periodic
inspections of the retaining tank facilities.
§ 187-89 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-89
1:282
§ 187-90. Planning modules required for subdivision or land
development.
Whenever an owner of a single lot or tract of land or a part thereof applies
to subdivide same into two or more lots or to install a second or subsequent
individual or community sewage system on the lot or tract, or whenever
the owner applies for a permit required by PaDEP, the owner shall prepare
planning modules for the revision or supplementation of the Official Plan
of the Township and shall submit the same to the Township, utilizing the
PaDEP's planning modules for land development.
§ 187-91. Adoption of standard specifications by reference.
This Part 2 adopts by reference the Standard Specifications for
Construction of Sanitary Sewers, Force Mains, Pump Stations and
Wastewater Treatment Plants for the Montgomery Township Municipal
Sewer Authority which are dated August 1987, revised April 1992, and
previously adopted by resolution of the Authority.
§ 187-92. Standards for conservation of water.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind in the Township of Montgomery which is
constructed or remodeled, and in which plumbing, water piping or water
fixtures are to be installed, extended or altered in any way, and for which a
building or construction permit is required to be obtained from Montgomery
Township (or would be required but for the exemption from a permit
requirement for public or governmental agencies) unless the new, extended
or altered plumbing, water piping and other water-using fixtures therein
(3) Submit a statement once a year to the Authority on the anniversary
date of his permit showing that the performance bond has been
renewed.
K. In the event that the Authority must utilize the performance bond or
escrow fund to pay for the collection, transportation or disposal of the
owner's retaining or holding tank waste, the owner must either obtain a
new bond in an amount designated by the Authority or place into
escrow with the Authority an amount of cash determined by the
Authority as sufficient to pay all collection, transportation and disposal
costs for the retaining or holding tank facilities, and this sum shall
include the annual cost of these items. If the owner does not comply
with these requirements within 30 days, the Authority shall revoke the
permit and close all facilities serviced by the retaining/holding tank.
L. The regulations of this section shall apply only to retaining or holding
tanks constructed after the effective date of this Part 2, except that
Subsections A, B, E, F, G and J of this section shall apply to holding
tanks constructed both before and after the effective date hereof.
§ 187-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-92
1:283
conform to the requirements, standards and regulations of the water
company providing the source of public water for said building or structure.
§ 187-93. Design and installation of capped sewer.
§ 187-94. Violations and penalties.
A. When required by the Authority or Township, all owners of land
intended to be improved and developed with on-site sewage disposal
shall, as a part of final approval of land development, agree to design
and install a capped sewer system for connection to and becoming a
part of the sewer system of the Authority.
B. When it is determined by the Township or the Authority that a property
to be subdivided or developed shall be served within a reasonable time
by public sewers, capped sewers shall be installed. The sewer lines
shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision or development,
and the laterals shall be capped at the street right-of-way line. When
capped sewers are provided, on-site sewer systems designed and
approved in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2 shall also be
provided.
C. The design and installation of the capped sewer system shall be in
accordance with the standard specifications of the Authority as adopted
by this Part 2 in § 187-91 above.
A. Any person or owner who shall violate any provision of this Part 2 or
resolution or regulation promulgated hereunder, or any provision of the
Clean Streams Law, the Sewage Facilities Act or any regulations
promulgated under either of these Acts, or who is the owner or user of
property on which a condition exists that constitutes a nuisance under
the Clean Streams Law or Sewage Facilities Act, or who fails or refuses
to comply with any lawful notice, order or direction, or who resists or
interferes with any officer, agent or employee of a local agent or an
employee or agent of PaDEP in the performance of his or her duties
shall be guilty of a summary offense. Upon conviction thereof, such
person shall be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $500 for each
violation. Each day on which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense. The fines shall be paid to the Authority.
Such fines and penalties, together with the costs of prosecution, may be
collected by suit or summary proceedings brought in the name of the
Township or Authority.
B. Any penalty proceedings commenced hereunder shall not prevent the
Township, the Authority, the Montgomery County Health Department or
PaDEP from taking any action deemed necessary for violations of the
law or of this Part 2, including but not limited to actions taken for civil
remedies, suits in equity to restrain or prevent violations of the law or
of this Part 2, actions for penalties, fines and fees under the Sewage
Facilities Act and actions to abate any nuisance as same is defined in
the Sewage Facilities Act.
§ 187-92 MONTGOMERY CODE § 187-95
1:284
§ 187-95. Promulgation of regulations.
In implementing this Part 2, the Authority may, by resolution, promulgate
such forms and regulations for the administration and enforcement hereof
as it shall determine are necessary. Failure of any owner or user to receive
or secure any required forms or copies of regulations shall not constitute a
defense to the enforcement or penalty provisions of this Part 2. Copies of all
such forms and regulations shall be available to the public in the Authority's
office during business hours.
§ 187-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-95
1:285
Chapter 189
SHADE TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation and Parks Board — See Ch. 30.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 166.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
§ 189-1. Purpose and establishment of Commission.
In order to better provide for the planting, maintenance and protection of
shade trees within or partially within the ultimate right-of-way along public
streets and highways of Montgomery Township, Pennsylvania, and also
upon public lands of the Township, the Montgomery Township Shade Tree
Commission is hereby established pursuant to the Second Class Township
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 189-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated:
BOARD — Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township.
COMMISSION — Shade Tree Commission.
DRIPLINE — A generally circular line the circumference of which is
determined by the outermost reaches of a tree's, trees' or woodlands’
widest branching points.[Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation.
PRUNING — The selective removal of plant parts to meet specific goals and
objectives.[Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
PUBLIC STREET or HIGHWAY — Any public right-of-way, a portion of which
is used for vehicular travel, in the Township.
RAISING — Selective pruning to provide vertical clearance.[Added
6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
SHADE TREE — Any tree fully or partially within the ultimate right-of-way
along any public street or highway, or any tree on public lands or in public
easements. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "shade tree" shall
include the following: any tree with any part of its drip line or root system
within the ultimate right-of-way along any public street or highway; any tree
required to be planted by the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance;76 and any tree required in a deed restriction on any lot.77
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 187-95 MONTGOMERY CODE § 189-2
1:286
SPECIMEN TREE — A specifically selected tree considered worthy of
conservation by the Township because of species, size, shape, form,
historical or memorial importance, or any other significant
characteristic.[Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
THINNING — Selective pruning to reduce density of live branches.[Added
6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
TOPPING — The reduction of a tree’s size using head cuts that shorten
limbs or branches back to a predetermined crown limit. Topping is not an
acceptable pruning practice.[Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
§ 189-3. Commission members; appointment; terms; vacancies;
parliamentary procedure. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No.
08-232]
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Supervisors in
accordance with the following procedures:
§ 189-4. Powers.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall be composed of three to five
members who shall be residents of the Township.
B. Commission members shall serve for terms of five years, or until their
successors are appointed, except that members first appointed shall be
appointed so that the terms of not more than two members expire
annually. All persons appointed shall serve their full terms unless they
voluntarily resign or are removed by the Supervisors for dereliction or
neglect of duty. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
C. Whenever possible, due consideration will be given to representation
from various geographic sections within the Township, so that all Board
members shall not be from the same geographic area.
D. In all matters of parliamentary procedure not specifically governed by
the Commission's bylaws, Robert's Rules of Order shall prevail.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall have authority for control of the
shade trees in the Township and is authorized to plan for or order the
planting, removal, maintenance and protection of shade trees.
B. If the Commission determines that it is necessary for the Township to
employ any engineer, forester, arborist or other assistant in order to
perform its duties, the Commission shall request the Board to direct
Township employees to perform such tasks or to contract with other
persons to perform such tasks. If the Board approves such a request,
77.Editor's Note: The former definition of "specimen plant," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242.
§ 189-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:287
§ 189-5. Annual report.
The Shade Tree Commission shall annually report in full to the Board its
transactions and expenses for the last fiscal year of the Township.
§ 189-6. Meetings.
The Shade Tree Commission shall meet at least quarterly at such times and
on such dates as the Commission may establish. All meetings shall be public
meetings held in the Township Building. Meetings shall be advertised in
conformity with the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 189-7. Landholder's liability for costs; assessments; liens.
the employees or contractors shall be under the direction and control
of the Township Manager.
C. The Commission shall have the power to create, publish and amend
guidelines for the care and protection of shade trees. Such guidelines
may include pruning limbs, preventing or curing disease or infestation,
or other guidelines for the care and maintenance of shade trees.
D. The Commission may request that the Township, upon 30 days' notice
to the owners of private property, require the owners of property to cut
and remove any dead shade tree, or any tree afflicted with any disease
which threatens to injure or destroy shade trees in the Township.
E. Emergency situations. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, the Township shall have the right, but not the obligation,
without prior notice to any property owner, to perform any acts
necessary to abate clear, present and immediate threats to the public
health, safety or welfare caused by the condition of any trees or parts
thereof. If any such threat is the result of any person's action or
inaction, the Township will assess the cost of such summary abatement
against that person. [Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
F. The Shade Tree Commission may periodically conduct a survey of
specimen trees within the Township and shall encourage the protection
of all such trees. [Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
A. The cost of planting, transplanting or removing any shade trees or parts
thereof, of the necessary and suitable protection for trees, curbing or
grading for the protection thereof, and of the replacing of any pavement
or sidewalk necessarily disturbed in the execution of such work,
whether such work is performed by Township personnel or by a
contractor hired by the Township to do such work, or by the owner of
the real estate or by a contractor hired by the owner of the real estate,
may be chargeable to the owner of the real estate upon whose property
such work is done. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
B. The amount each owner is to pay shall be ascertained and certified by
the Commission to the Board and to the Township Treasurer.
§ 189-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 189-7
1:288
§ 189-7.1. Residential street tree replacement. [Added 9-26-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-298S]
§ 189-8. Removal of stumps, dead, diseased or hazardous trees.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-232; 6-28-2010 by Ord. No.
10-242]
C. Upon the filing of the certificate with the Board, the Township Secretary
shall cause 30 days' written notice to be given to the person against
whose property an assessment has been made. The notice shall state
the amount of the assessment and the time and place of payment and
shall be accompanied by a copy of the certificate.
D. The amount assessed against the real estate shall be a lien from the
time of the filing of the certificate with the Board, and, if not paid within
the time designated in the notice, a claim may be filed and collected by
the Township in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and
collected.
A. Where a street tree is required to be replaced or planted on an
individual residential lot, street tree species may be selected from
§ 205-56A or § 205-56B of the Montgomery Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
B. Street trees replaced or planted on individual residential lots shall be a
minimum of two inches in caliper, 12 feet to 14 feet in height, and shall
have a full branching structure. All main branches shall be pruned to a
clearance height of six feet above the ground. Trees shall have a single,
straight trunk and unpruned leader free of codominant stems within the
lower half of the crown, and shall be free of disease and mechanical
damage.
C. Setbacks from sidewalks and roadways shall be in accordance with the
setbacks required in § 205-56A, § 205-56B, and § 205-52A(2).
D. Where street trees are required to be replaced or planted on an
individual residential lot in conjunction with a Subdivision or Land
Development application, the sizing requirements of § 205-56A or
§ 205-56B shall be met.
A. All stumps of trees cut down shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
B. All dangerous deadwood and all broken limbs or other defective parts of
shade trees which constitute a hazard to the health of the tree, to public
safety, or to property shall be removed.
C. Notice to remove and replace shade trees.
§ 189-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-8
1:289
§ 189-9. Acts injurious to shade trees prohibited.
Except in case of necessity, or for the protection of life or property, it shall
be a violation of this chapter for any person to do any of the following acts:
(1) Notice to remove. The Township may, upon written notice sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, require owners of property
to cut and remove dead, diseased or hazardous trees.
(a) Trees afflicted with insect infestations or other disease agents,
the spread of which threatens to destroy or injure other trees
in the Township, shall be removed and disposed of in
accordance with the recommendation of a certified arborist.
(b) Trees that pose a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the
public shall be removed.
(2) Failure to remove. Upon failure to comply with such notice within
30 days of receipt, the Township may cause the work to be done
and levy or collect the costs thereof from the owner of the property.
(3) The Township shall give said 30 days' notice by mailing to the last
known address of the owner of the property and by posting the
notice at the main entrance to the main habitable or occupied
structure on the property.
(4) Collection of costs. The costs of such work shall be a lien upon the
premises from the time of the commencement of work, which date
shall be fixed by the Township Engineer and filed with the Township
Secretary. Any such lien may be collected by action in assumpsit or
by lien filed in the manner provided by law for the filing and
collection of municipal claims.
A. Cut down or remove any shade tree, or interfere in any manner with the
main roots of any shade tree.
B. Spray any shade tree with injurious chemicals or insecticides, oil, gas,
gasoline, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life, about the
roots of any shade tree.
C. Place any rope, guy wire, cable, sign, poster or other fixture on a shade
tree. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
D. Use, store or pour any material in such a manner that it could result in
injury to a tree. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-24278]
E. Injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect shade trees.
F. Protection from building operations and other work. [Amended
6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
through F and Subsections E through G.
§ 189-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 189-9
1:290
(1) Prior to any building operation or the performance of any work
whatsoever in the Township in the vicinity of any trees, such
builder, worker or subdivider shall submit to the Township a plan of
the area in which such building, work or construction shall be done.
The location of aerial utility lines shall be noted on the plans. Such
plans shall include the location of all trees. Trees shall be clearly
depicted by a symbol showing approximate location. Notes
regarding size should also be included. Trees in hedgerows, groves
and woodlands may be shown by indicating the outer canopy or
dripline of the tree grouping. Existing trees shown as masses must
be labeled with an approximate quantity of trees. The plans shall
also clearly show which trees are to be removed and which are to
be preserved. The Township shall rule on such plans and may
designate other trees to be removed or protected.
(2) Before any such work shall be commenced in connection with any
building operation or the performance of any work whatsoever in
the Township, tree protection fencing per § 205-53B shall be placed
so as to effectively prevent injury to any trees in the vicinity.
(3) No person shall place or pile any building materials, cement, stone
or other substances which shall compact the soil or impede the
passage of water and air to the roots of any shade tree within the
dripline of any shade tree.
(4) Protection of shade trees shall be in conformity with the Landscape
Article of the Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.79
G. Discharge of injurious materials prohibited. No person shall
intentionally pour salt water, oil or other materials at any place in such
a manner that injury may result to any shade tree.
H. Pruning, trimming, thinning, raising or removal. All pruning activities
shall be conducted in accordance with the American National Standard
for Tree Care Operations – Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant
Maintenance – Standard Practices (Pruning) ANSI A300 (Part 1) - 2001
Pruning, and as amended. [Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
(1) Pruning, trimming or removal. A permit shall be required for any
person, to cut, prune, trim, or break greater than 10% of all
branches on any shade tree; to climb with spurs; or to remove any
street tree or any tree that was required to be planted as part of a
subdivision or land development; or to cut or interfere in any way
with the main roots of any tree in such a manner that it could result
in injury to a tree.
(2) Minimum vertical clearance over public walks and streets – raising.
All trees shall be kept trimmed so that the minimum clearance
where they overhang any public walk shall be eight feet and the
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development, Article VI, Landscaping.
§ 189-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-9
1:291
§ 189-10. Protection of roots. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No.
10-242]
No person shall, without first obtaining a permit, place or hereafter
maintain any stone, concrete or other substance which shall impede the
passage of water and air to the roots of any tree unless such person shall
leave an open space of ground surrounding the trunk of the tree, such space
to be not less than four square feet.
§ 189-11. Attachment of electric wires prohibited.
No person shall permanently attach any electric wire, insulator or any
device for the holding of an electric wire to any shade tree.
§ 189-12. Enforcement. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
Provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by Montgomery Township or its
duly authorized representatives.
§ 189-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 189-14. Disposition of penalties and assessments.
All penalties or assessments imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the
Township Treasurer to be placed to the credit of the Montgomery Township
Tree Fund subject to be drawn upon by the Commission for the purposes of
the preceding sections as approved by the Board.
minimum clearance where the trees overhang any public street or
highway shall be 18 feet. However, the Commission reserves the
right to designate a higher clearance on certain highways where
heavy traffic or other conditions make it expedient. A permit shall
not be required to maintain required minimum clearance.
I. Tree topping, as defined above, shall be expressly prohibited. [Added
6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
who shall violate the terms or conditions of any permit issued under this
chapter shall be liable, upon a finding of a violation by a District Justice,
to a fine or penalty not exceeding $500 for each and every offense, and
each day that any such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fine or
penalties may be collected as like fines and penalties are now by law
collected. [Amended 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-242]
B. Such fine or penalties shall be a lien upon the real estate of the offender
and may be collected as municipal claims are collected.
§ 189-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 189-15
1:292
§ 189-15. Advisory role. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-232]
The Board is to be advisory and shall coordinate its activities with the
elected officials and other advisory committees of the Township.
§ 189-16. Service without pay; reimbursement for certain expenses.
[Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-232]
Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services.
Upon approval of the Supervisors, members of the Board may be
reimbursed by the Township for certain expenses incurred in performance
of their duties.
§ 189-17. Maintenance by Township funds. [Added 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-232]
The Commission shall annually certify the costs incurred under this chapter
to the Supervisors. The costs shall be paid from the general Township fund.
Chapter 193
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 65.
Collection bins — See Ch. 77.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 116.
Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 189-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-17
1:293

ARTICLE I
Dumping, Storage and Burning
[Adopted 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13380]
§ 193-1. Prohibited methods of disposal.
No person, partnership, association or corporation shall dump, store, or
accumulate any rubbish, waste, garbage, ashes, paper, junk and discarded
or refuse materials at or upon any public or private property (vacant or
occupied), at or upon any watercourse, ravine, quarry, ditch or gutter or
upon any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley or upon the ditch or
gutter thereof or upon any sidewalk or footpath within the limits of the
Township of Montgomery.
§ 193-2. Prohibition of open fires and burning; exception.
§ 193-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or permit the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction of a summary offense before a District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation with costs
of prosecution, and, in default of the payment of such fines and costs, be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for the
punishment of summary criminal offenses. A separate offense under this
A. It shall be unlawful to burn, ignite, incinerate, maintain or permit to
bury any materials whatsoever, of whatever nature, including solid
waste, recyclable materials, leaves, grass, weeds, and hedge and tree
trimmings. [Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-244]
B. Exceptions to allow open fires and burning:
(1) Burning shall be permitted for fire-fighting training by Townshipdesignated
fire-fighting organizations subsequent to the proper
notification and approval of the Township Fire Marshal.
(2) Burning shall be permitted for recreational and entertainment
purposes, such as bonfires and camp fires, subsequent to proper
notification and approval of the Township Fire Marshal.
(3) When approved by a governmental agency only, burning is
permitted for the prevention and control of disease or pests, for the
conservation and management of unique and natural areas, to
prevent or abate a fire hazard, or as a management technique for
preventing wildfires, scientific research, or vegetation
management.81
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Dumping, Storage and Burning,
adopted 10-1-1962 by Ord. No. 1, as amended.
81.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding an exception to allow burning of
vegetation on properties used primarily for agricultural purposes, and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-244.
§ 193-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-3
1:295
article shall be deemed to occur for each day or portion thereof in which is
a violation is found to exist or for each section of the article which is found
to have been violated.82
82.Editor's Note: Section 4 of Ord. No. 00-133 provided as follows: “Montgomery Township
and its agents, officials, and representatives, shall not, under any circumstances, be liable
or responsible for damages caused to any person or property for the conduct of any
burning activity in compliance or noncompliance with the terms and provisions hereof.
The person, persons, company, or companies responsible for any such burning activity
shall bear sole liability for damages caused as a result thereof.”
§ 193-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-3
1:296
ARTICLE II
Waste Collection and Recycling
[Adopted 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 115]
§ 193-4. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Municipal Waste Collection and
Recycling Ordinance."
§ 193-5. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-218]
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act of 1980.83
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act of 1988.84
ALUMINUM — Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food containers,
commonly known as "aluminum cans."
BIMETAL CANS — Empty food or beverage containers constructed of
a mixture of ferrous metal, usually steel, and nonferrous metal, usually
tin.
BULK ITEMS — Any large durable goods such as refrigerators, washing
machines, window air conditioners, hot-water heaters, dishwashers and
any other major home appliances in addition to other large bulk items
such as dressers, beds, mattresses, sofas, television sets and other
large household items.
BUSINESS(ES) — The legal owner, occupant or lessee of a commercial,
industrial or cooperative enterprise, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, institution, trust or governmental entity that engages in
any form of business or governmental operations.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Paper products made of a stiff, moderately
thick paper board, containing folds or alternating ridges, commonly
known as "cardboard."
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
GLASS — Products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone.
The product may be transparent (clear) or colored (e.g., brown or
green) and used as a container for packaging (e.g., jars) or bottling of
various matter. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, window or
plate glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — The material bagged or raked during or after the
cutting of a lawn, field or similar grassed area.
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 193-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:297
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All types of high-grade, white or
colored paper, bond paper and computer paper used in commercial,
institutional, business, office and municipal establishments.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Small quantities of hazardous
waste (as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act) available to a
person or entity on a retail basis, such as pesticides, certain paints,
paint thinners and solvents, cleaning agents and automotive products.
IMA — The Intermunicipal Agreement adopted by the municipalities
which are members of the Northern Montgomery County Recycling
Commission.
LANDLORD(S) — Any individual or organizational owner who rents
and/or leases residential units, commercial space or an industrial
complex(es). Landlords own the properties in question and deal directly
with their tenants or lessees.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree
trimmings and similar material, but does not include grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Such matter typically has a gloss or shine added to the paper. Expressly
excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MIXED PAPER — All types of paper combinations, such as colored
paper, carbonless forms, ledger paper, colored paper envelopes,
mixtures of high-grade office paper and the like.
MUNICIPALITY — Montgomery Township.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any municipal waste as defined by Section 103
of the Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No.
97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., and Section 103 of Act 105 and any rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR(S) — Any collector, remover,
transporter and/or hauler of municipal waste and/or recyclable
materials in the NMCRC. A municipality shall be considered a
municipal waste collector if it provides manpower and equipment for
the collection of municipal waste.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and
other matters of public interest.
NONCURBSIDE RESIDENT(S) — Residents of a multifamily residential
unit where provision is made to collect and dispose of waste through
collective dumpsters.
NORTHERN MONTGOMERY COUNTY RECYCLING COMMISSION
(NMCRC) — The legal entity established by and operating as agent
for the municipalities hereunder who have delegated certain of their
duties and powers respecting recycling, including but not limited to the
§ 193-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-5
1:298
development, implementation and enforcement of common recycling
programs. Presently the NMCRC is comprised of Ambler Borough,
Franconia Township, Hatfield Township, Hatfield Borough, Lower
Gwynedd Township, Lower Salford Township, Montgomery Township,
North Wales Borough, Souderton Borough, Telford Borough, and
Towamencin Township and shall be deemed to include all new member
municipalities and accepting member municipalities who have
completed the withdrawal process.
PARTICIPATING MUNICIPALITIES — Those municipalities which have
executed the intermunicipal agreement (IMA).
PERSON or ENTITY — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
business, association, institution, cooperative enterprise, trust,
municipality, municipal authority, federal institution or agency, state
institution or agency (including but not limited to the Department
of General Services and the Public School Building Authority), other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or group whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provision of this article prescribing a fine, penalty or imprisonment or
any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" or "entity" shall
mean the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity
having officers and directors.
PLAN or COUNTY PLAN — The latest revision of the county-wide
municipal waste management plan adopted by the county and approved
by DEP, as such may hereinafter be supplemented, revised, amended or
modified in compliance with the law.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of plastics, the recycling regulations will
stipulate the specified types of plastics that may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by a person or entity
which can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful
products. Materials which may be recycled include, but are not limited
to, glass (clear, brown or green), aluminum, steel and bimetal cans,
high-grade office paper, mixed paper, newspaper (including newspaper
inserts, junk mail and telephone books), corrugated paper, magazines
and other periodicals, plastic containers and other materials as may be
designated from time to time as recyclable materials.
RECYCLING COLLECTOR — A municipal waste collector engaged in
the collection, removal, transportation or hauling of recyclable
materials.
RECYCLING PROCESSORS — Entities which receive recyclable
materials, separate recyclable materials from nonrecyclable residue
and market the separated recyclable materials for reuse or
remanufacture.
RENTAL AGENT(S)/PROPERTY MANAGERS — Any individual or
organization who or which assumes the owner's responsibility in
§ 193-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:299
§ 193-6. Legislative intent. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-218]
§ 193-7. Program responsibilities; rules and regulations.
renting and/or leasing residential units, commercial space or industrial
complexes. Agents do not own the properties in question but deal
directly with tenants or lessees on behalf of the owner(s).
RESIDENT(S) — The legal owner, occupant or lessee of a single-family
residential unit in a municipality served by curbside collection of
municipal wastes and/or recyclables or owner, occupant or lessee of
any other type of multifamily residential unit, including but not limited
to townhomes, duplexes, condominiums and apartments, whose
multifamily unit has curbside collection of municipal waste and/or
recyclables. Also classified as a resident will be any business
professional who operates a profession from his/her personal residence.
YARD WASTE — Twigs, shrub trimmings, small branches and like
vegative matter.
B. All terms not separately defined in this article that are contained in Act
97 and Act 101 are incorporated herein by reference.
A. The reduction of the amount of municipal waste and conservation of
recyclable materials is an important public concern by reason of the
growing problem of municipal waste disposal and its detrimental
impact on the environment. It is the intent of this article to require,
promote and regulate recycling activities in the municipality and to
protect the health, safety and welfare of residents.
B. This article has been developed to meet and implement municipal
responsibilities established under Act 101.
C. It is the intent of this article to promote intergovernmental cooperation
in recycling activities by and among the municipalities comprising the
NMCRC. Such cooperation is intended to more efficiently conduct
recycling programs and to reduce costs.
D. The municipality's adoption of this article anticipates the assignment of
certain of its duties and powers under Act 101 to the NMCRC with
respect to recycling activities and enforcement against violations of this
article. Such assignment of duties and powers will be accomplished in
accordance with Section 304(c) of Act 10185 and as set forth in this
article and in the intermunicipal agreement adopted by the member
municipalities of the NMCRC. Duties and powers not assigned by the
intermunicipal agreement or subsequent agreement shall remain with
the municipality.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.304(c).
§ 193-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-7
1:300
§ 193-8. Municipal waste collector registration.
A. Licensing of the municipal waste collectors for recycling activities will
be undertaken by the Township in conjunction with municipal waste
collection and disposal licensing activities.
B. (Reserved)86
C. The Township, in conjunction with the municipal waste collectors, shall
be responsible for establishing an education program and together
shall conduct and maintain a comprehensive public information
program as follows:
(1) The Township shall include articles and information on recycling
requirements and activities within regular newsletters or mailings
to residents and businesses in the community.
(2) The Township shall, at least 30 days prior to the start of the
recycling program and at least every six months thereafter, place
one-fourth-page advertisements in newspapers of general
circulation serving the Township of Montgomery outlining the
requirements of this article and providing information relative to
the recycling program operation.
(3) The municipal waste collectors shall, at least 30 days prior to the
start of the recycling program and at least every six months
thereafter, deliver or include with their invoices sent to customers
an information sheet on recycling. At the request of the municipal
waste collectors, the Township will, as a service to the municipal
waste collectors, provide facts relative to the requirements and
operation of the recycling program that can be utilized in the
aforementioned information sheet.87
A. Every person or entity who desires to engage in or wishes to continue
engaging in the municipal waste collector business with regard to any
property in the Township shall be required to first register with the
Township. Such registration shall be effective for a period of one year
beginning January 1 of each calendar year. Every person or entity
desiring or continuing to engage in the municipal waste collector
business shall register with the Township on or before December 1 to
qualify as a registered municipal waste collector on January 1 of the
following year and shall complete any forms or application materials as
requested by the Township. Those municipal waste collectors
registering with the Township to collect municipal waste and recyclable
86.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, concerning authorization of the Township to establish
rules and regulations, as amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1, was repealed 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-218.
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsections D through I, concerning responsibility for weight and
volume quantity data, recycling containers, compliance by persons or entities, compliance
by municipal waste collectors, the posting of educational information, and exemptions,
respectively, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 7-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-218.
§ 193-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-8
1:301
materials during 1990 must register with the Township within 30 days
of the effective date of this article, and said registration shall be valid
through December 31, 1991.
B. The collection equipment and transportation vehicles used for the
collection of municipal waste within the Township shall be of the closed
body type with an automatic compactor unit, and said collection
equipment and transportation vehicles shall be labeled to indicate the
name of the municipal waste collector and shall further indicate that
the vehicle is transporting municipal waste or recyclable materials.
Said vehicles shall at all times be in good and proper mechanical
condition and in compliance with the minimum safety and sanitary
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All such vehicles
shall be specifically designed to prevent leakage of any liquid or fluids.
Other type vehicles may be used only for the collection of recyclable
materials and bulk items, provided that such items are separately
collected in accordance with regulations established by the
Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors by a resolution. The
municipal waste and recyclables so collected shall be suitably enclosed
or covered so as to prevent roadside littering, attraction of vermin or
creation of other nuisances. The collection equipment and
transportation vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. No person or entity shall be entitled to register with the Township as a
municipal waste collector unless such person or entity can show
certificates of insurance covering public liability for both bodily injury
and property damage, owners' and contractors' protective insurance
and automobile insurance with respect to personal injuries and
property damage. Such insurance shall be in amounts that shall from
time to time be set forth by the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery
Township by regulations established by a resolution. Each and every
policy of insurance herein mentioned which is required pursuant to the
terms of this article shall carry with it an endorsement to the effect that
the insurance carrier will transmit to the Township, by certified mail,
written notice of any modifications, alterations or cancellation of any
policy or policies or the terms thereof. The above-mentioned written
notice shall be mailed to the Township at least 10 days prior to the
effective date of any such modification, alteration or cancellation.
Failure to maintain required insurance coverage shall result in
cancellation or forfeiture of the collector's license.
D. Each municipal waste collector shall, on the first day of each calendar
quarter, file a rate schedule with the Township showing the rates to be
charged to its customers for the collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials. Such rate schedule shall not be changed by the
municipal waste collector without first giving notice to the Township at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. Each municipal
waste collector shall file a map with the Township on the first day of
each calendar year or upon changes of its routes, showing the areas of
the Township in which it operates and a timetable setting forth the days
§ 193-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-8
1:302
§ 193-9. Use of other collection agents; intergovernmental
cooperation.
of collection. Collections of municipal waste and recyclable materials
by municipal waste collectors shall take place at the times designated
by resolution.
E. At the time of such registration, the municipal waste collector shall pay
the Township a registration fee and a truck fee for each transportation
vehicle that will be used in the Township to collect municipal waste or
recyclable materials, which sum shall be used to offset the
administrative and regulatory costs to the Township concerning
municipal waste collection and recycling. The registration fee and the
truck fee shall be set by resolution of the Montgomery Township Board
of Supervisors from time to time.
A. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the Township from assigning a
portion or all of its responsibilities under Act 101 and this article to
another entity. Such assignment of responsibility will be accomplished
in accordance with Section 304(c) of Act 101 and would require the
Township to enter into a written agreement with the entity accepting
such responsibilities. However, under no circumstances will the
Township relinquish its right to select the methodology for conducting
recycling; municipal waste collector subscription service to individual
customers; franchising or bidding of municipal waste collector services
on a partial or community-wide basis; or municipal waste collector
services provided by a municipality.
B. The municipality recognizes that intergovernmental cooperation among
the municipalities comprising the membership of the NMCRC will be of
benefit to the municipality by more efficiently conducting recycling
program activities. Intergovernmental cooperation efforts will include,
but are not limited to, the following: [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
07-218]
(1) Ongoing determination of the list of recyclable materials for the
NMCRC municipalities.
(2) Development and implementation of joint education programs,
including the placement of newspaper ads, website pages and
other appropriate media.
(3) Preparation of information for municipality newsletters.
(4) Development and implementation of reporting forms and grant
applications and the filing of such forms and applications with the
appropriate agencies.
(5) Preparation of informational sheets for municipal waste collectors.
Promulgation of rules and regulations pertaining to the recycling
program.
§ 193-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-9
1:303
(6) Authorization for the NMCRC solicitor to seek enforcement against
violations of this article as specified herein.
C. Intermunicipal agreement. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-218]
(1) In order to implement the intent and terms of this article, the
municipality, pursuant to the authority of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, Act of July 12, 1972, codified at 53 P.S. §§ 481
through 490,88 and Article 9, § 5, of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, has determined to enter into an
intermunicipal agreement (IMA) between the municipalities
comprising the NMCRC.
(2) Terms and implementation of IMA. The terms and implementation
of the IMA shall be as more fully set forth in the IMA and this
article, as follows:
(a) The NMCRC shall develop, implement and maintain a recycling
program for the municipalities comprising the NMCRC.
(b) The participating municipalities shall certify that they have
enacted a municipal recycling ordinance in a form
substantially similar to this article by providing an executed
and attested copy of the ordinance to the NMCRC solicitor.
(c) The NMCRC shall be authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations and administer and enforce those rules and
regulations as desired or to delegate such enforcement to the
member municipalities.
(d) The NMCRC shall be authorized to enforce the IMA and select
municipal ordinances enacted pursuant to the IMA.
(e) The purpose of the IMA is to provide a uniform recycling
program for the municipalities comprising the membership of
the NMCRC and to minimize duplicative efforts by the member
municipalities.
(3) Findings under Intergovernmental Cooperation Act. As required by
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of July 12, 1972, P.L. 762,
No. 180,89 as amended, the following matters are specifically found
and determined:
(a) The conditions of agreement are set forth in the IMA.
(b) The duration of the term of the IMA is set forth in §§ 913 and
914 of the IMA.
88.Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. §§ 481 through 490 were repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158,
No. 177, § 2(a), effective in 60 days. For subject matter of the repealed sections, see now
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
89.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 193-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-9
1:304
§ 193-10. Responsibilities of municipal waste collectors. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 01-149; 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-218]
(c) The purpose of the IMA is to cooperate with the NMCRC and
other participating municipalities in developing, implementing
and maintaining a recycling program.
(d) The organizational structure necessary to implement the
agreement is set forth in the IMA, with which the member
municipalities shall cooperate.
(e) The manner in which property, real or personal, shall be
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of is by way of lease
or other contract unless otherwise set forth in the IMA.
A. Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
(1) Unless specifically provided otherwise in the NMCRC's rules and
regulations, all municipal waste collectors shall deliver or send, at
least every six months, an information sheet that names the
materials which are to be recycled.
(2) Municipal waste collectors shall be responsible for obtaining
weight and volume data on all municipal waste and recyclable
materials collected by them in each municipality which is a member
of the NMCRC. Said data shall be supplied to the NMCRC on an
annual basis by January 15 for the preceding year. Such report
shall include the name of the market or processor where recyclable
materials are delivered and shall be signed by an officer of the
municipal waste collector.
(3) Municipal waste collectors shall maintain records of their
collection, removal, transportation and hauling activities for each
municipality and make them available for inspection by the
NMCRC, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
NMCRC.
B. Collection, processing, marketing and reporting requirements.
(1) Each municipal waste collector operating in the municipality shall
be responsible for complying with the requirements of this article
and the NMCRC's rules and regulations for the collection,
processing and marketing of recyclable materials.
(2) The municipal waste collector shall, in providing refuse collection
and disposal services, also provide for the collection of recyclable
materials. Unless specifically provided otherwise in the NMCRC's
rules and regulations, where once- or twice-a-week municipal
waste collection is provided, the municipal waste collector must
provide at least once-a-week recyclable material collection.
Customers using once-a-month municipal waste collection must
have recyclable materials collected at least once a month.
§ 193-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:305
§ 193-11. Materials to be recycled. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
07-218]
(3) A municipal waste collector shall not be permitted to allow
recycling containers or dumpsters to fill beyond capacity and shall
schedule the frequency of such collection accordingly.
(4) The municipal waste collector shall be responsible for the
processing and marketing of the recyclable materials or the
delivery of recyclable materials to a recycling processor. Such
activities may be conducted by the municipal waste collector or any
agent thereof or a private entity conducting such business, a
nonprofit entity able to undertake such effort or any
governmentally owned or operated facility capable of such
functions.
(5) The municipal waste collector shall, prior to initiating processing
and marketing activities, provide the NMCRC with a summary of its
proposed efforts, including the location of the facility(ies) to which
the recyclable materials will be delivered, to the maximum extent
possible. All such facility(ies) shall be appropriately licensed and
permitted. Updates shall be provided as changes are made.
(6) All municipal waste collectors shall keep records of the quantities
of recyclable materials collected in the municipality. The records
shall include the weight of the total quantities of recyclable
materials and total quantities of municipal waste and an estimate of
the corresponding volume of material for both recyclable materials
and municipal waste. Estimates of the individual components
comprising the commingled recyclable materials shall also be
provided. Written reports shall be provided to the NMCRC on
reporting forms provided by the NMCRC and shall include the
name and location of the processing center and/or recyclable
materials dealer and shall be submitted in accordance with the
time schedules established in this article.
(7) Leaf waste quantities shall be recorded by the municipal waste
collector collecting such materials. Such quantities may be in the
form of estimates on either a cubic yard or tonnage basis collected,
and written documentation must be provided to the NMCRC by
January 31 of each year for materials collected in the preceding
calendar year of the total quantity of leaf waste collected. The
collector has the option of reporting tonnage either in compacted
or uncompacted cubic yards.
(8) Municipal waste collectors shall not collect refuse, recyclable
materials or any other wastes between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. Eastern standard time nor, when applicable, between
8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daylight saving time. Failure to comply
with this provision shall subject a municipal waste collector to
enforcement by the individual municipality.
§ 193-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-11
1:306
§ 193-12. Program authority of NMCRC. [Amended 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-218]
A. All homes, apartments and other residential establishments shall be
required to separate and recycle the following: clear glass, colored
glass, newsprint (including newspaper inserts, junk mail and telephone
books), aluminum cans, steel cans, bimetallic cans, No. 1 PET plastics
and No. 2 HDPE plastics.
B. Commercial establishments will be required to separate and recycle the
following: corrugated paper, high-grade office paper, aluminum cans
and yard waste.
C. Hospitality establishments, which include restaurants and taverns,
shall be required to separate and recycle the following: cardboard,
office paper, newspaper (including newspaper inserts, junk mail and
telephone books), aluminum cans, steel cans, bimetallic cans, No. 1 PET
plastics and No. 2 HDPE plastics.
D. Community events. Recycling containers shall be provided at all
community events attended by 200 or more people. The disposal of
recyclable materials collected at such events shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this article. [Added 9-27-2010 by Ord. No.
10-244]
A. The NMCRC is authorized to carry out a recycling program on behalf of
the member municipalities in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the IMA.
B. In accordance with the responsibilities in this article, the NMCRC is
authorized to establish, by resolution, rules and regulations related to
the administration of the recycling program and to administer and
enforce against violations of all such rules and regulations. The NMCRC
shall determine the recyclable materials to be separated by residents,
noncurbside residents and businesses and collected by municipal waste
collectors; however, this designation may be changed by the NMCRC
from time to time. The municipality may require additional materials to
be recycled, in which event such additional materials shall be deposited
at drop off centers designated by the municipality, and the municipal
waste collector will not be responsible for collecting such materials.
Any additional requirements imposed by the municipality shall be
consistent with and not interfere with the recycling program developed
and implemented by the NMCRC. All commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments shall also be required to separate the
materials designated by the NMCRC for recycling.
C. In accordance with Section 1501(c)(1)(iii) of Act 101,90 the NMCRC
shall be authorized to exempt persons occupying commercial,
institutional and industrial establishments from the requirements of
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501(c)(1)(iii).
§ 193-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-12
1:307
§ 193-13. Ownership of recyclable materials and municipal waste.
[Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-218]
§ 193-14. Alternate recycling activities. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-218]
§ 193-15. Handling of leaf waste. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord. No.
07-218; 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 07-229]
this article if they have otherwise provided for the recycling of
materials designated by this article and any subsequent resolutions.
To be eligible for this exemption, the commercial, industrial or
institutional waste generator must provide, on an annual basis, written
documentation to the municipality and the NMCRC of the total quantity
of each material recycled, in the form and by the Act as provided for
in the NMCRC's rules and regulations. Exemptions shall be handled
administratively by the NMCRC.
A. All recyclable materials and municipal waste placed at curbside for
collection or in any container or dumpster designated for recyclable
materials shall become the property of the municipal waste collector
providing the service, except as outlined in § 193-14 of this article.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any person or entity, other than
the municipal waste collector providing the service, to collect or
remove any of the recyclable materials from their designated collection
location, except as outlined in § 193-14 of this article. Each
unauthorized collection from one or more designated locations on one
calendar day, in violation hereof, shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
A. Any person, volunteer organization or other entity may utilize
alternative methods, other than collection by a municipal waste
collector, to accomplish the purpose of reutilizing recyclable materials.
Any such person, volunteer organization or other entity shall register
such programs with the NMCRC recycling consultant and the
municipality where the recycling activity shall take place. All recyclable
materials tonnage data shall be collected and reported to the NMCRC
recycling consultant in accordance with all applicable procedures for
the reporting of such information.
B. The NMCRC is authorized to permit an alternate recycling program to
be developed in accordance with Paragraph 1501(h) of Act 10191 if the
requirements of that paragraph can be complied with. The NMCRC
shall, before implementation of the program, review and approve the
program. The municipal waste collector conducting the program must
provide annual written documentation to the NMCRC of the total
quantity of each material recycled.
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501(h).
§ 193-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-15
1:308
§ 193-16. Responsibilities of generator. [Amended 7-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-218]
A. Each person or entity, unless exempted under § 193-16C of this article,
who or which generates municipal waste and/or designated recyclable
materials shall have such waste and recyclable materials collected by a
municipal waste collector who is legally operating within the Township,
and such collection shall be no less frequent than one time per week.
[Added 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-24492]
B. The municipality hereby authorizes establishment of a program for
curbside collection of leaf waste at least once during the Spring and at
least once during the Fall of each year. In addition thereto, the leaf
waste collection program shall be augmented by designation by the
municipality of a DEP-permitted, dropoff compost facility for residents
of the municipality to utilize as needed, which facility shall be open at
least once per month for collection of leaf waste generated between
scheduled curbside collections.
C. Leaf waste collection shall be conducted by the municipality or
authorized private municipal waste collectors in accordance with
regulations of DEP. All leaf waste shall be disposed of in a DEPpermitted
compost facility in accordance with all applicable state
guidelines.
D. All private municipal waste collectors shall provide the municipality and
NMCRC with the name and address of the facility(ies) where the leaf
waste will be disposed and report the quantity in tons or cubic yards.
Leaf waste shall not be commingled with any other municipal solid
waste. The disposal of leaf waste at a sanitary landfill, waste-to-energy
facility or any other facility which is not a DEP-permitted composting
facility is strictly prohibited.
E. The methodology for separating and collecting leaf waste shall be
established and implemented by the municipality and imposed upon
participating private waste collectors. The leaf waste collection
guidelines set forth in this article are intended to be general in nature.
The actual leaf waste collection and education program shall be
established in more detail by the municipality pursuant to resolution
and is subject to modification, as needed from time to time, provided
that any modifications to the program comply with this article and the
most recent regulations of DEP.
F. Leaf waste shall not be left at curbside more than 24 hours prior to
collection and shall not be left in a form which obstructs the flow of
traffic or affects the performance of drainage facilities or catch basins.
92.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections A
through E as Subsections B through F, respectively.
§ 193-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-16
1:309
A. Each person or entity who or which generates municipal waste in the
NMCRC shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of
this article for the separation of recyclable materials as required by Act
101 as implemented by the NMCRC. This shall include tenants and
lessees occupying leased properties.
B. Owners, landlords or rental agents of any leased property, other than a
single-family-occupied property, shall be responsible for publicly
posting educational information provided by the NMCRC, municipality
and/or municipal waste collectors; providing appropriate recyclable
material collection containers; and providing for pickup of such
containers in accordance with this article. Owners, landlords or rental
agents of a single-family-occupied property may assign such
responsibility to the tenant or lessee occupying the property through a
lease or rental agreement or other written assignment.
C. Every person or entity must separate household hazardous waste and
leaf waste from the recyclable materials and other municipal waste. It is
the responsibility of a person or entity to dispose of household
hazardous waste in accordance with applicable law as implemented by
the Montgomery County Waste System Authority.
D. All occupants of single-family homes, including townhomes and row
homes where individual municipal waste collection occurs, shall
maintain a separate container of the type specified or provided by the
NMCRC or municipal waste collector to collect all designated
recyclable materials in a commingled or modified commingled (e.g.,
different materials separated into paper bags and placed in the
container) fashion, as established by the municipal waste collector,
subject to the rules and regulations of the NMCRC No municipal waste
or recyclable material container shall be placed at the curb or in the
front yard of any resident's property except during the period
beginning at 6:00 p.m. on the evening prior to the day of scheduled
collection, and the empty container shall be removed by 11:59 p.m. on
the day of scheduled collection. Enforcement of container rules for
placement at curbside shall be the responsibility of the municipality.
Newspapers may also be placed in paper bags (no plastic bags) or
bundled and tied, both across and lengthwise, with rope or cord, and
kept dry prior to collection and placed at curbside with the recycling
container. No such municipal waste containers or recyclable material
containers, including bundles of newspapers (other than containers
supplied by municipal waste collectors), shall weigh more than 50
pounds.
E. Owners or landlords of any multifamily residential units where
individual residential refuse collection does not occur shall be
responsible for providing suitable containers or dumpsters for
recyclable materials. Such containers or dumpsters shall be provided
through arrangements with a municipal waste collector, and sourceseparated
or commingled recyclable material containers or dumpsters
may be utilized. The containers or dumpsters must be provided at easily
§ 193-16 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-16
1:310
§ 193-17. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
7-9-2007 by Ord. No. 07-218; 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 07-229]
accessible locations, and written instructions must be provided to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of such containers or
dumpsters. Owners or landlords of multifamily residential units who
comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be liable for
the noncompliance of any persons or entity occupying their buildings
as such noncompliance relates to separation of materials. All tenants
or lessees of multifamily residential units shall be responsible for
separating recyclable materials and placing them in the containers or
dumpsters provided for such purposes.
F. Owners or landlords of any institutional, commercial, business or
industrial establishment shall be required to meet the same
requirements outlined in Subsection E, unless exempted under
§ 193-12C of this article or unless such responsibilities are specifically
assigned, in writing, to the tenant or lessee of such property.
A. Any person or entity violating the provisions of this article pertaining to
the separation of recyclable materials and leaf waste, collected within
the boundaries of any municipality which is a member of the NMCRC,
including commingling of recyclable materials and leaf waste by
municipal waste by haulers and their employees, shall receive an
official written warning sent certified mail, return receipt requested,
from the NMCRC Solicitor and/or from the solicitor for the municipality
in which the alleged violation occurred for the first offense. Thereafter,
within two years from the date of the written warning for the first
offense, any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this
article pertaining to the separation of recyclable materials and leaf
waste collected within the boundaries of any municipality which is a
member of the NMCRC shall be subject to a criminal fine of not less
than $2,500 per violation, plus damages, court costs and reasonable
attorney's fees and imprisonment in the Montgomery County
Correctional Facility to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of
summary offenses. Enforcement of any such violations shall be by
action commenced by the NMCRC and/or the municipality in which the
alleged violation occurred before a District Justice in the same manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
B. No municipal waste collector shall knowingly collect municipal waste
which contains recyclable materials or leaf waste. The municipal waste
collector shall provide a person or entity violating the provisions
contained herein with written notice for the first offense and also
provide the NMCRC and the member municipality with the same
written notice. Any municipal waste collector who shall knowingly
violate the provisions of this subsection and collect municipal waste
containing recyclable materials and leaf waste from a person or entity
who or which has previously been notified by the NMCRC, municipality
§ 193-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-17
1:311
§ 193-18. Construal.
This article shall be construed under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 193-19. Modifications.
The Township may, from time to time, modify the regulations adopted in
accordance with this article or make modifications to this article.
and/or a municipal waste collector of noncompliance shall receive an
official warning from the member municipality and/or NMCRC for the
first offense. The municipal waste collector, for subsequent offenses
within a two-year period of the warning, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $1,500 per violation, plus
damages, court costs and reasonable attorney's fees and imprisonment
in the Montgomery County Correctional Facility to the extent allowed
by law for the punishment of summary offenses. Enforcement of any
such violation shall be by action commenced by the NMCRC and/or the
municipality in which the alleged violation occurred before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
C. Any person or entity who shall violate any provision of this article not
covered in Subsection A or B above shall receive an official written
warning sent certified mail, return receipt requested, from the NMCRC
solicitor and/or from the solicitor for the municipality in which the
alleged violation occurred for the first offense. Thereafter, within two
years from the date of the written warning for the first offense, any
person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article not
otherwise covered in Subsection A or B shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a criminal fine of not less than $500 per violation, plus
damages, court costs and reasonable attorney's fees and imprisonment
in the Montgomery County Correctional Facility to the extent allowed
by law for the punishment of summary offenses. Enforcement of any
such violations shall be by action commenced by the NMCRC and/or
appropriate member municipality before a District Justice in the same
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Each day on which a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty.
D. The NMCRC is authorized to establish, through its rules and
regulations, procedures through which violations of this article and of
the NMCRC's rules and regulations themselves may be determined and
administrative sanctions therefor, including but not limited to
imposition of monetary penalties.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the NMCRC's
remedies, which shall include but not be limited to including the filing
of actions at law or in equity seeking damages and/or injunctive relief.
§ 193-17 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-20
1:312
§ 193-20. Authorization to Execute IMA. [Amended 7-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-218]
The Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors to execute that certain intergovernmental agreement attached
hereto as Exhibit A93 between all the municipalities comprising the
membership of the Northern Montgomery County Recycling Commission,
which IMA sets forth the procedures and administration of the NMCRC.94
93.Editor's Note: A copy of said agreement is available in the Township offices.
94.Editor’s Note: Former Arts. III, Solid Waste Joint Cooperation, adopted 9-24-1990 by Ord.
No. 117, as amended; IIIA, Hours of Collection, adopted 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 00-127;
and IV, Recycling, adopted 8-18-1991 by Ord. No. 121; and which immediately followed
this section, were repealed 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-244.
§ 193-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-20
1:313
Chapter 201
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Nuisances — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 193-20 MONTGOMERY CODE § 193-20
1:314
ARTICLE I
Excavations and Highway Occupancy
[Adopted 7-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-18395]
§ 201-1. Purpose; definitions.
§ 201-2. Permit process and requirements.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the public good and
establish a permit process and requirements for roads, utility cuts in
roads and streets, backfilling of trenches, replacing of removed
pavement sections and regulating the location and construction of
utility facilities and other structures within Township highway rights-ofway
for the purpose of insuring the structural integrity of the highway,
economy of maintenance, preservation of proper drainage and safe and
convenient passage of traffic.
B. Definitions. The definitions of words and terms, when used in this
article, have the meaning set forth in the PA DOT regulations for
occupancy of highways by utilities, 67 Pa. Code § 459.1, as amended.
A. Application procedure.
(1) General rule. Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, no
work may be performed within the right-of-way involving the
placing of utility facilities or other structures or opening of the
surface without first obtaining a permit from the Township. Work
performed within the right-of-way shall conform to PA DOT
regulations Chapter 203 (relating to work zone traffic control).
(2) Emergency repairs of utility facilities. Emergency repairs of utility
facilities may be performed without first obtaining a permit under
this article; however, application must be made by the applicant or
person making such repair, pursuant to this article, for a permit
under this section, within 16 hours of beginning the emergency
repair work or the next business day for emergencies occurring on
weekends and holidays when the Township Building is closed.
(3) Who may execute applications:
(a) If a corporation or other entity, authority, political subdivision
or other person in the business of providing utility or other
entity service owns, operates or intends to operate the facility,
the application shall be submitted in the name of, and executed
by, the party. An application may not be submitted in the name
of contractors of the owner or operator, nor in the name of
persons only being serviced by the facility.
95.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Excavations and Highway
Occupancy, adopted 3-9-1981 by Ord. No. 46A, as amended.
§ 201-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:315
(b) In the case of a facility owner who is not in the business of
providing utility service, such as a developer whose land is
located outside a utility's service jurisdiction, the application
shall be submitted in the name of, and executed by, the owner
of the facility at the time of construction. The applicant shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Township from claims by
anyone claiming residual property interests in the permitted
area.
(c) The application and/or permit are not transferable or
assignable.
(4) Financial duties. An applicant shall provide satisfactory evidence to
the Township of ability to completely discharge construction,
maintenance and financial duties imposed by this article. The
Township may require security, including but not limited to:
(a) Executing indemnity agreements satisfactory to the Township.
(b) Obtaining insurance in a form and amount acceptable to the
Township.
(c) Obtaining surety bonds in a form and amount acceptable to the
Township to guarantee necessary maintenance costs for the
facility and the right-of-way in which it is located for a period of
at least two years after the acknowledged completion of the
permitted work.
(d) Depositing sufficient currency in an escrow account acceptable
to the Township to fully secure the obligations in Subsections
A(4)(a) and A(4)(b) above as an alternative to the obtaining of
the surety bonds.
(e) The use of bonded contractors as well as consultants and
engineers having professional liability insurance.
B. Required application information. A permit application:
(1) Shall be submitted in person or by mail on a properly completed
Township form, available at the Township Building.
(2) Shall be signed by the applicant and the consulting engineer, if any,
performing work related to the application.
(3) Shall include at least four sets of plans, detailing the location and
pertinent horizontal and vertical dimensions of the opening, the
proposed utility installations and related highway features,
including specific highway location, center line, edges of pavement,
outside edges of shoulders, curbing, guide rail, highway drainage
structures and right-of-way lines. Color coded plans and freehand
drawings of roadway or utility features are unacceptable.
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:316
(4) Shall be accompanied by a check or money order, payable to
Montgomery Township according to the Schedule of Fees of the
Township.96
(5) Shall be submitted to the Township at least 30 days prior to the
anticipated start of work. If the permitted work shall be performed
for the permittee by a contractor, the application shall, if possible,
be submitted to the Township at least 60 days prior to soliciting
bids for the permitted work so that the permittee may notify
bidders of permit requirements. If the application specifies that the
permitted work involves providing priority utility service, the
Township office will process the priority application before other
nonpriority applications submitted by the applicant.
(6) Shall identify consulting engineers performing work related to the
application. The consulting engineer shall also sign the application.
C. Plans for occupancy within the township right-of-way. A permit
application for occupancy within the Township right-of-way shall
include detailed plans which comply with the following:
(1) Plans shall have a horizontal scale of one inch equal to no more
than 50 feet. Plans shall show all proposed construction and
restoration details.
(2) Plans depicting installation or replacement of a facility shall
identify utility facilities and other structures within the right-ofway,
and shall include typical cross sections at each significant
change in highway cross section features.
(3) Plans depicting installation of a facility longitudinally within the
pavement or shoulder, or both, shall verify there is no feasible
space outside the pavement or shoulder available for placing the
facility.
D. Traffic control plan. A traffic control plan shall be submitted with the
application in the following manner:
(1) With the exception of emergency work, the applicant shall submit a
traffic control plan for Township approval for work on roadways or
rights-of-way whenever it will be necessary to close a portion of a
travel lane or whenever it will be necessary to completely close a
highway to perform the permitted work. If a roadway is approved
for closure the applicant must:
(a) Advertise in the local newspaper at least twice one week prior
to the anticipated closure notifying motorists of closure.
96.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Fees, as amended from time to time, is on file in the
Township' offices.
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:317
(b) Provide written notices to emergency services (police, fire and
ambulance) and school district notifying them of work at least
two weeks prior to the closure.
(c) Provide written notices to residents who reside along that
roadway notifying them of the work to be done one week prior
to the closure.
(d) Post all required detour signs.
(2) The Township may require an applicant to submit a traffic control
plan under special circumstances at the Township's discretion.
(3) A traffic control plan shall comply with PA DOT regulations Chapter
203 and shall clearly indicate how the work area, vehicular and
pedestrian traffic will be protected maintained and controlled.
(4) A traffic control plan shall consist of one of the following:
(a) A reference to specific figures in PA DOT regulations Chapter
203, if the referenced figures properly depict actual site
conditions and address the necessary traffic control.
(b) Four copies of specific figures form PA DOT regulations
Chapter 203, which have been modified to depict actual site
conditions and the necessary traffic control requirements for
the specific project.
(c) Four copies of a detailed drawing, showing actual site
conditions and the necessary traffic control requirements for
the specific project.
(d) Four copies of a detour plan with signage, if required.
E. Blasting requirements. When blasting methods other than controlled
blasting, as specified in PA DOT regulations, § 203.3(b)1 of Publication
408, will be used or when blasting is anticipated within 100 feet of a
bridge, box or culvert, a detailed plan of excavating, shoring, blasting
and backfilling procedures shall be submitted at least 15 days prior to
blasting. Prior to blasting within the right-of-way, insurance shall be
furnished. The insurance shall name the Township as an additional
insured and shall be in such types and amounts as may be specified by
the Township staff.
F. Authority to reject application. The Township will examine and
determine the genuineness, regularity and legality of every application
and may reject an application if not satisfied as to its genuineness,
regularity or legality, or the truth of a statement contained in the
application. The Township may also make investigations and require
additional information as it deems necessary.
G. Debarred applicant.
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:318
(1) The Township may debar an applicant, including permittee,
consultants, contractors and their employees, agents, successors
and assigns, from placing a facility, working within or otherwise
occupying Township highway right-of-way under permit, directing
work or having involvement in a permit issued or an application
submitted under this chapter, for one or more of the following:
(a) Unsatisfactory past performance, as documented by records,
reports or performance ratings.
(b) Failure to complete permitted work under the permit and this
chapter, as documented by records, reports or performance
ratings.
(c) Bribing, attempting to bribe or giving gratuities to Township
employee or permit inspector.
(d) Submitting false information.
(2) The first debarment of an applicant shall be for six months to 18
months. A subsequent debarment of the same applicant ordered
within five years after the first debarment is served, shall be for 18
months to three years.
H. Issuance of permits.
(1) General rule. Upon approval of an application submitted under this
article, a permit will be issued by the Township, subject to this
article, and the conditions contained in the permit and its
attachments and supplements. The permit shall be the applicant's
authority to proceed with the work specified in the permit. A copy
of the permit and relevant plans shall be available at the work site
for review.
(2) Agreement/security. If a permittee is authorized to perform a
substantial amount of work within the right-of-way, the Township
may, at its discretion, require the applicant to execute an
agreement or provide security, or both, as a prerequisite to
issuance of the permit. If security is required, it shall be delivered
to the Township in a form and amount acceptable to the Township
and shall guarantee restoration and maintenance of the highway
for a period of at least two years after acknowledged completion of
the permitted work.
(3) Photo documentation. At least 15 days prior to beginning work, the
permittee shall deliver photo documentation to the Township office
verifying the preconstruction conditions within the right-of-way.
(a) The area that will be disturbed shall be photo documented in
its entirety with color videotape or color film. Photo
documentation shall be compatible with the Township viewing
equipment.
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:319
(b) The permittee may submit color slides or color prints in lieu of
videotape or film, if each slide or print is clearly labeled and
arranged to verify the surface condition of each successive 25
linear feet of area that will be disturbed.
(c) The date of photo documentation shall be identified on each
cartridge, reel, slide or print.
I. Highway occupancy permit. Scope of permit. The permit is binding
upon the permittee, its agents, contractors, successors and assigns.
(1) The permittee is responsible for causing compliance with the terms
and conditions of the permit by its employees, agents and
contractors.
(2) The permit shall be located at the work site and be available for
inspection by a police officer or representative of the Township.
(3) The permit shall be maintained by the permittee as a permanent
record and remain in effect, subject to the permit conditions and
this article as long as the permittee's facilities authorized by the
permit occupy the right-of-way.
(4) The permittee is liable to the Township for failure to comply with
the permit and this article. The liability of the permittee to the
Township does not preclude the permittee or the Township from
bringing an action against the permittee's contractor,
subcontractor, engineer, architect, assignee, agent, workers,
employees or other persons.
(5) Additional restrictions. Work authorized by the permit is subject to:
(a) Applicable laws, rules and regulations.
(b) The conditions, restrictions and provisions of the permit.
(c) Work within the public right-of-way is restricted to 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. On heavily traveled
roads, the restriction of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. may be imposed.
(6) Work to conform to Township standards. Work shall conform to
Township standards, including the following:
(a) The work shall be done at a time and in a manner consistent
with the safety of the public and conform to requirements and
standards of the Township, including, but not limited to PA
DOT Publication 408.
(b) Highway materials shall be obtained from PA DOT-approved
sources which are identified in current PA DOT Publication
Numbers 34, 35, 41 and 42. Upon request, the permittee shall
make available for review certifications for backfill and
restoration materials placed within the improved area.
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:320
(c) If it is found by the Township that the work is not being done or
has not been properly performed, the permittee shall promptly
take the necessary steps, at its own expense, to place the work
in condition to conform to the requirements or standards of the
Township.
(d) If a dispute arises between the permittee and the Township's
inspector, the Township's inspector has the authority to
suspend work until the question at issue may be referred to
and decided by the Township Engineer.
(7) Permittee responsibilities. Permittee responsibilities include the
following:
(a) The permittee shall pay the costs and expense incident to or
arising from the project, including the prescribed fees for the
project, the cost of making and maintaining temporary
restoration of the disturbed areas and making permanent
restoration. The permittee shall reimburse the Township for
inspection cost which the Township deems necessary to incur
within 30 days after receipt of the Township's invoice.
(b) In the event of failure or neglect by the permittee to perform
and comply with the permit, the Township may immediately
revoke and annul the permit and order and direct the
permittee to remove structures, equipment or property
belonging to the permittee or its contractors, or both, from the
legal limits of the right-of-way and to restore the right-of-way
to its former condition. If the Township determines that the
structure, equipment or property poses a threat to the public
safety and the permittee fails to remove it after notice from the
Township to do so, the Township Solicitor or his attorneys are
authorized to enter an amicable action of ejectment and
confess judgment against the permittee. The attorney is
authorized to issue forthwith a writ of possession with a clause
of fieri fascias for costs, without leave of court.
(c) At the end of a workday, an opening in the right-of-way shall be
covered, backfilled or protected. If work is stopped on a
project, other than at the end of a normal workday, the
permittee shall promptly backfill the opening and restore the
surface, and work may not be resumed until the permittee is
prepared to proceed with the work to its completion. If the
permittee fails to backfill the opening or proceed until
completion of the work, the Township reserves the right to do
the work upon notice to the permittee, where practicable, and
shall be reimbursed for the costs by the permittee within 30
days after receipt of the Township's invoice.
(d) If the permittee, after making an opening in the surface to
place or repair a facility or for another purpose, fails to restore
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:321
a portion of the right-of-way, the Township reserves the right
to do the work upon notice to the permittee, if practicable, and
the permittee shall reimburse the Township for the costs within
30 days after receipt of the Township's invoice.
(e) If backfill or restoration work will be performed for the
permittee by a contractor, the permittee shall identify to the
Township both its contractor and its inspector-in-charge who
shall be assigned to monitor backfill and restoration work
performed within the improved area. The permittee's
inspector-in-charge, as well as the permittee, is responsible for
ensuring the work is performed in compliance with the permit,
this article, and PA DOT Publication 408.
(f) The permittee shall notify the Township office, at least three
full workdays prior to the start of work when the permit
identifies that the permitted work will be inspected on a more
than spot-inspection basis.
(g) The storage of equipment or materials within the right-of-way
is prohibited after hours of operation.
(8) Altering drainage is prohibited. Altering drainage shall be
prohibited by the following conditions.
(a) Unless specifically authorized by the permit, the permittee may
not:
[1] Alter the existing drainage pattern or the existing flow or
drainage water.
[2] Direct additional drainage of surface water toward, onto,
or into, or in any way affect the highway right-of-way or
highway facilities.
(b) The permit does not authorize the permittee to direct, divert or
otherwise drain surface waters over the property of another
property owner.
[1] The permit does not relieve the permittee from acquiring
the consent, permission or other authorization from a
property owner who may be adversely affected by
drainage alterations.
[2] The permittee is responsible for damage caused to
property owners as a result of work done under the permit.
(c) A permit will not be issued to authorize the discharge of water
into the right-of-way unless the water is surface drainage.
(9) Equipment damaging highway. A highway shall be protected in
accordance with the following:
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:322
(a) To protect the right-of-way, equipment shall have rubber
wheels or runners and have rubber, wood or similar protective
pads between the outriggers and the surface unless otherwise
authorized by the permit.
(b) If other than rubber-equipped machinery, the pavement and
shoulders shall be protected from equipment damage by the
use of matting or other suitable protective material, unless the
permittee requests, in writing, a waiver from the use of
protective material thereby acknowledging its obligation and
commitment to repair or reconstruct the right-of-way area, if
damaged, to its former condition.
(c) If the equipment damages the right-of-way area, the permittee
shall restore the damaged area to its former condition in a
manner authorized by the Township.
(d) The Township office may authorize the permittee to restore the
pavement or shoulder from superficial surface damage with a
seal coat or surface treatment.
(10)Work zone traffic control. Maintenance and protection of traffic
shall be carried out by the permittee under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6123 (as
amended), (relating to erection of traffic-control devices while
working), the approved traffic control plan and the applicable
provisions of PA DOT Chapter 203 (relating to work zone traffic
control).
(11) Indemnification of the Township for property and personal injury
will be governed as follows:
(a) The permittee shall fully indemnify and save harmless and, if
requested, defend the Township, its officers, agents and
employees of and from liability for damages or injury to
persons or property in a claim or suit seeking to impose
liability on the Township, its officers, agents or employees,
arising out of an act or omission of a contractor, agent, servant,
employee or person engaged or employed in, about or upon the
work, by, at the instance of or with the approved consent of the
permittee, including a failure of the permittee or a person to
comply with the permit or this article.
(b) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Township
certificates of insurance evidencing the types and amounts of
coverage specified by Township staff.
(12) Insurance. The permittee shall obtain, prior to the start of work, a
policy of insurance, issued by an insurer having a certificate of
authority and a licensed agent authorized to transact the business
of insurance in this commonwealth, in accordance with the
following conditions:
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:323
(a) The permittee or its contractor shall obtain insurance for
public liability and property damage, in form, amount and
duration satisfactory to the Township to cover a loss that may
be incurred for construction, reconstruction, repair, relocation
or installation of the permitted structure or facilities.
(b) If blasting is authorized by permit, the insurance coverage
shall include property damage and personal injury occasioned
by blasting. In addition, the insurance policy shall provide
coverage for damage to the highways, highway structures and
appurtenances or other Township property and shall be in an
amount satisfactory to the Township.
(c) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Township
certificates of insurance evidencing the insurance coverage
required.
(d) The permittee's obligations to indemnify the Township and
obtain insurance to secure indemnification and its obligations
to restore the highway and obtain a bond relating to
restoration are separate obligations from obtaining insurance
for the purposes required.
(13) Maintaining structure or facility. As long as the permittee operates
and leaves in place structures or facilities in, upon or along the
right-of-way, the permittee shall maintain and keep them in good
order and repair.
(14) Damaged structure or facility to be repaired. If a structure or
facility becomes damaged, the permittee shall promptly have it
removed, repaired or otherwise made safe. The permittee is
responsible for repair or restoration of the portion of the highway
damaged by a structure or facility. The permittee's obligation to
repair or restore the highway necessitated by a damaged structure
or facility under this paragraph is separate from the obligations to
restore the highway and obtain a bond relating to the restoration
and maintenance of the highway.
(15) Damage to highway. Responsibility of the permittee for restoration
of the highway includes the following:
(a) If there is a failure of the highway, including a slope or other
appurtenance thereto, in the area of the permitted work within
two years after the acknowledged completion of the permitted
work and there is not similar failure of the highway beyond the
area of the permitted work, the permittee has absolute
responsibility to make temporary and permanent restoration of
this area unless the permittee delivers clear and convincing
evidence to the Township office demonstrating that the
highway failure was caused by another person.
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:324
(b) In situations where the permittee has the responsibility to
restore the highway, including slope or any other appurtenance
thereto, the permittee has the duty to restore the improved
area in accordance with the permit. If the permittee fails to
restore the improved area properly, the Township will have the
authority to do the work at the expense of the permittee. The
permittee shall reimburse the Township for the costs within 30
days after receipt of the Township's invoice.
(c) The obtaining of a bond, other security or an agreement to
secure restoration costs does not relieve the permittee of the
restoration obligations imposed. The obtaining of a bond, other
security or an agreement will not act as a release of the
permittee from liability under principles of tort law with
respect to a failure of the highway in the permitted area
occurring after the expiration of the bond, other security or
agreement.
(16) Future highway changes. If in the future the highway is altered for
public convenience or necessity, the permittee shall at its own cost
and expense, change or relocate all or a part of the structures or
facilities authorized by the permit which interfere with the highway
alterations or which is inconsistent with the purpose of the highway
alterations.
(17) Acknowledgment by inspector. Acknowledgment, by the inspector
of the Township that all or part of the permitted work has been
completed does not constitute approval or acceptance of the work
or agreement that the work was performed in accordance with the
permit. Acknowledgment of completion by the inspector will not act
as a release of the permittee or waiver by the Township of its right
to seek performance or restitution from the permittee.
J. Special conditions for subsurface operations.
(1) Drilling, boring, driving or tunneling across improved area.
Drilling, boring, driving or tunneling across improved areas shall
comply with the following conditions:
(a) When crossing under an improved area, the opening for a
utility shall be drilled, bored, driven or tunneled a minimum
depth of three feet from the surface to the top of the opening.
[1] If the utility or its casing is 30 inches or greater in
diameter, the bored cylindrical space surrounding either
an uncased facility or a facility casing shall be filled with
grout, in a manner authorized by the Township office.
[2] Jet or other non-mechanical boring methods are
prohibited. Water may be used under low pressure only to
cool the drill bit and to facilitate removal or cuttings from
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:325
the bore opening, if retrievable liquids is immediately
removed from the boring pit.
(b) No openings for the purpose of placing utilities facilities or
other structures under the improved area by drilling, boring,
driving or tunneling may be made closer than three feet to the
edge of the shoulder, unless the permit authorized a lesser
clearance.
(c) A utility or other structure crossing under the improved area
shall be constructed to assure the safety of the traveling public
and to preclude the necessity of entering upon the improved
area to effect future maintenance or replacement.
(2) Trenching across the improved area. Trenching across an improved
area may be performed only when specifically authorized by the
permit, in accordance with the following:
(a) The top of every utility shall be installed at least three feet
beneath the surface.
(b) Trenching across the improved area may be authorized by the
permit where drilling, boring, driving or tunneling are not
feasible because:
[1] The subsurface is solid rock, as documented with
satisfactory evidence such as drill records, or where
boring was attempted without success.
[2] There are other facilities located longitudinally under the
improved area and their location precludes methods other
than trenching, as documented with a detailed plan.
[3] Adjacent development in a very congested urban area
makes the construction of a tunneling or boring shaft
impossible.
(c) Not required because of one of the following: The highway is
unpaved.
(d) When trenching is authorized by the permit, the trenching
operation shall be performed by one of the following methods:
[1] Utility placed in one piece across highway:
[a] Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
[b] The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth and bridged with steel plates.
[c] Traffic shall be shifted to the bridged half of the
pavement.
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:326
[d] The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to
the required depth.
[e] The facility shall be placed full width.
[f] The open trench shall be backfilled with restored halfwidth
in accordance with the section.
[g] Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the
pavement.
[h] The bridging shall be removed and the remaining half
of the trench shall be backfilled and restored in
accordance with this section.
[2] Utility placed in more than one piece across highway:
[a] Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
[b] The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth, the facility placed and the trench
backfilled and restored in accordance with this
section.
[c] Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the
pavement.
[d] The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to
the required depth, the facility placed and the trench
backfilled and restored in accordance with the
provisions of the section.
[3] The permittee shall protect its openings to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians.
[4] The permit may authorize the placement at depths less
than three feet of traffic signal detectors or the highway
facilities which are not capable of operating more than
three feet below the surface.
(e) Openings parallel to the highway. Requirements for openings
parallel to the highway are as follows:
[1] A utility shall be placed outside the pavement and shoulder
unless there is not feasible space outside the pavement
and shoulder for placing the facility; in which case
occupancy within the pavement or shoulder may be
authorized by the permit.
[2] The top of a utility facility shall be installed at least three
feet beneath the surface.
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:327
[3] On an unpaved highway, the near edge of the opening shall
be at least 12 feet from the general center line of the
traveled highway, or as authorized.
[4] No opening may be made for more than 200 linear feet at
one time, unless authorized by the permit.
[5] The permittee shall protect its openings to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians.
(f) Daily stoppage of work requirements. Daily stoppage of work
requirements include the following:
[1] Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, work
within the pavement or shoulder shall be stopped prior to
peak traffic hours that may exist on a particular highway
on a particular day and as specified in the permit.
[2] At the end of each workday, an opening in the right-of-way
shall be addressed in one of the following ways:
[a] Covered with steel plates or bridges over openings
which are less than six feet in either length or width.
The plates or bridging shall be extended a minimum of
18 inches from each edge of the opening and shall be
secured in a safe manner.
[b] Backfilled to the bottom elevation of the pavement or
base course, or to the original surface elevation if
outside the pavement and shoulder, and protected in
accordance with PA DOT regulations Chapter 203
(relating to work zone traffic control) and an approved
traffic control plan until the surface is restored to its
former condition.
[c] Protected under PA DOT regulations Chapter 203 and
an approved traffic control plan, if the permittee has
delivered certificates of insurance.
[3] The permittee shall protect its opening to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians.
(g) Plowing of utility installations shall comply with the following:
[1] No plowing will be permitted within the right-of-way,
unless authorized by the permit.
[2] Plowing operations will not be authorized in the pavement
or paved shoulder.
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:328
[3] Plowing operations in unpaved shoulders are not allowed
from December through March, inclusive, or at other
times when there is frost in the top three feet beneath the
surface.
[4] No plowing is authorized within three feet from the edge
of the pavement. A greater distance shall be attained
whenever possible.
[5] The opening shall be a minimum depth of three feet. If this
depth cannot be consistently maintained, the proper depth
shall be achieved by trenching.
[6] The utility shall be installed under any structures that are
less than three feet deep. Disturbed structures shall be
repaired or replaced by the permittee.
[7] The disturbed area shall be restored in conjunction with
the plowing operation. Heaved surfaces shall be scarified
to a depth of at least four inches, extending at least one
foot on either side of the heaved area for the entire length
of heaved area. The disturbed area shall then be graded,
backfilled where necessary, and compacted until the
disturbed area is restored to a condition at least equal to
that which existed before plowing. Disturbed shoulders
shall also be restored.
(h) Disposition of materials. The responsibility of the permittee for
disposition of materials is as follows:
[1] The permittee shall keep the improved area free of
material which may be deposited by vehicles traveling
upon or entering onto the highway during the performance
of work authorized by the permit.
[2] The permittee is responsible for controlling dust
conditions created by its own operations.
[3] Excess material and material that is not suitable for
backfill shall be promptly removed and properly disposed
of outside the right-of-way as the work progresses.
[4] Other material shall be stored so that there will be no
interference with the flow of highway drainage.
[5] The permittee is not authorized to close a portion of the
pavement or shoulder to traffic for the primary purpose of
storing material. If the permittee stores material on the
pavement or shoulder, the permittee thereby
acknowledges its obligation and commitment to repair or
reconstruct the pavement and shoulder, if damaged, to its
former condition, in a manner authorized by the Township
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:329
office. Delivered material may not be stored overnight on
the pavement.
[6] The Township may authorize the permittee to restore the
pavement or shoulder from superficial surface damage
with a seal coat or surface treatment.
(i) Backfilling. An opening shall be backfilled by the permittee in
accordance with the following:
[1] The opening may first be backfilled with fine aggregate
material, meeting the requirements of PA DOT regulations,
§ 703.1 of Publication 408, or granular material to protect
the facility, placed to a height not to exceed one foot over
the top of the facility, if the material is compacted in not
more than four-inch loose layers or as authorized under
Publication 408. To help protect its facility from future
excavations, the permittee is encouraged to place a
permanent colored ribbon under subsection at least one
foot above its facility. If the facility is nonmetallic, the
permittee is also encouraged to place a metallic ribbon at
a depth from which the ribbon can be sensed by typical
metal-locating instruments.
[2] The opening shall then be backfilled with 2A modified.
[3] Backfill shall be compacted as follows:
[a] General rule. Backfill material shall be placed in loose
layers not to exceed eight inches if vibratory
compaction equipment is used. Each layer shall be
thoroughly compacted to 97% to 100% compaction.
[b] Existing pavement elevation. Compaction shall be
completed to the bottom elevation of the existing
pavement.
[4] The Township may require the permittee to have material
proposed for use as backfill and compacted material
tested, at the expense of the permittee, for conformance to
the applicable gradation and compaction requirements of
Publication 408.
[5] Test holes shall be backfilled, as soon as safely possible,
with material authorized by the Township. The Township
office may authorize test holes in the pavement or
shoulder to be restored with a one-foot cut back of the
surrounding surface.
(j) Restoration of flexible base pavement. Base and surface
restoration of flexible base pavements shall be performed
under this subsection and as specified in the permit. Prior to
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:330
replacement of the base course, one foot outside of each edge
of the opening shall be sawed, in a neat straight line, to the
top elevation of the existing aggregate subbase or stone base
course, and the detached material shall be removed. Other
surface opening methods such as cutting may be authorized
if the methods result in the opened pavement having a neat
straight vertical line.
[1] Exposed vertical and horizontal surfaces shall be prepared
under PA DOT regulations, § 401.3 (f) of Publication 408.
[2] The base course shall consist of bituminous concrete
meeting the requirements of PA DOT regulations, § 305 of
Publication 408 or other base course material authorized
by the Township office. The base course material shall
have a minimum depth of five inches or a depth equal to
the existing base course, whichever is greater.
[3] The binder course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting
the requirements of PA DOT regulations, § 421 of
Publication 408. The binder course shall have a minimum
depth of two inches or a depth equal to the existing binder
course, whichever is greater.
[4] The wearing course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting
the requirements of PA DOT regulations, § 420 of
Publication 408; material meeting the requirements of PA
DOT regulations, § 422 of Publication 408. The wearing
course shall have a minimum depth of one-and-one-halfinch
ID-2 or a depth equal to the existing wearing course,
whichever is greater.
(k) Temporary pavement restoration of a pavement or paved
shoulder may be required by the Township office prior to
permanent restoration, under the following:
[1] Temporary pavement restoration shall be completed
before traffic is allowed to travel on the disturbed area.
The temporary pavement may be kept in place for up to six
months or as specified in the permit and properly
maintained.
[2] The temporary pavement shall be removed and permanent
restoration performed.
(l) Appurtenances to underground installations. Requirements
relating to appurtenances to underground installations shall
include:
[1] The top of every manhole, valve box or other access to the
facility shall be approximately one inch below the surface
in which it is located.
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:331
[2] The surface surrounding manhole covers, valve boxes, or
other facility located in paved shoulders shall be paved
with five inches bituminous concrete base course a
distance of at least two feet around the structure to
prevent washouts.
[3] A manhole, including those cast in place, shall be
constructed in compliance with current industry standards
and PA DOT regulations § 713.2 (c) of Publication 408.
(m) Additional restoration shall be required as follows:
[1] Disturbed portions of the highway, including but not
limited to slopes and appurtenances and structures, such
as guide rails, curbs, signs, markings, drain pipes,
driveways and vegetation, shall be restored by the
permittee to a condition at least equal to that which
existed before the start of work authorized by the permit,
if the restoration is consistent with the Roadway
Construction Standards. Additional restoration may also
be require, upon written notification, to restore the
structural integrity of the pavement or shoulder.
[2] If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous
concrete surface and the Township's wearing course is less
than five years old, the permittee shall, in addition to the
restoration conditions outlined in the permit and in this
section, overlay the pavement in accordance with the
following conditions:
[a] When a longitudinal or transverse opening longer
than 10 linear feet has been made in the pavement,
the permittee shall overlay the traffic lanes for the
entire length of highway that was opened, in a manner
authorized by the Township.
[3] If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous
concrete surface and the wearing course is over five years
old, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration
conditions outlined in the permit and in this section,
overlay the pavement in accordance with the following
conditions:
[a] When two or more transverse openings have been
made, the permittee shall overlay traffic lanes, for the
entire length of highway between the openings, in a
manner authorized by the Township.
[b] When four or more emergency openings have been
made by the same permittee, the permittee shall
overlay traffic lanes, for the entire length of highway
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:332
between the openings, in a manner authorized by the
Township.
[c] If disturbed lanes adjacent to undisturbed lanes are
overlaid, the edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw
cut or milled to a depth of 1 1/2 inches or the depth of
the existing surface course, whichever is less, for the
length of the opening to insure a smooth joint, with
proper elevation and cross section. A full width
overlay may be authorized on various highways
instead of saw cutting or milling the disturbed lane.
[d] If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlaid,
the shoulder shall be raised, with material and in a
manner authorized by the Township for the type of
existing shoulder, so that the overlaid pavement and
shoulder edges are at the same elevation.
[4] Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
[a] If more than 100 linear feet of longitudinal or
transverse openings, or both, are made in the
pavement, the Township may require the permittee to
overlay traffic lanes for the entire length of highway
that was opened if the Township office determines that
the ride ability or structural integrity of the pavement
has been impaired by the openings.
[5] Aggregate used in a bituminous overlay wearing course
shall comply with skid resistance level (SRL) criteria
specified in PA DOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 2,
Chapter 11.
[6] If an opening is made in a bituminous concrete pavement
within three feet from the edge of pavement or other
longitudinal joint or opening, the surface restoration shall
be extended to the edge of pavement or other longitudinal
joint or opening.
[7] At each end of an overlay, the permittee shall install a
paving notch, under PA DOT regulations, Roadway
Construction Standard RC-28, by milling, planning or
other authorized method and provide a minimum ten-foot
transition.
[8] The transition areas at each end of an overlay shall follow
the contour of the surrounding surface.
[9] When pavement markings on more than 100 linear feet of
highway are covered or destroyed by the permitted work,
including overlays, they shall be replaced with temporary
pavement markings, under PA DOT regulations § 203.72
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
1:333
(relating to temporary pavement markings), before
opening the disturbed pavement to traffic. When the
pavement surface is restored, pavement markings that
were covered or destroyed shall be replaced in their
former location.
[10] Sealing. Restored openings in the pavement or paved
shoulder shall be sealed using rubberized sealer under PA
DOT regulations § 401.3(j)(3) of Publication 408 in the
case of bituminous concrete or PA DOT regulations,
§ 501.3(n) of Publication 408 in the case of cement
concrete.
[11] Pavement marking shall be restored using epoxy paint for
straight lines and thermoplastic paint for arrows, "onlys,"
stop bars, etc.
K. Special conditions for aboveground facilities.
(1) General rule. A permit will not be issued to install aboveground
facilities at a location which the Township determines to have a
high accident potential.
(2) Location of aboveground facilities.
(a) New poles and other aboveground facilities shall be installed
outside the highway clear zone as near the right-of-way line as
practicable, under the permit and applicable provisions of PA
DOT regulations, Design Manual, Parts 2 and 5.
(b) Replacement of poles and other aboveground facilities shall
comply with the permit and applicable provisions of PA DOT
regulations, Design Manual, Part 5.
(c) Installation of poles and other aboveground facilities in
locations where highway guide rail or curb exists shall comply
with the permit and applicable provisions of PA DOT
regulations, Design Manual, Parts 2 and 5.
(d) Installation of poles, guys and other aboveground facilities
shall comply with applicable provision of the Federal Highway
Program Manual, Volume 6, Chapter 6, Section 3; the
A.A.S.H.T.O. Policy of the Accommodation of Utilities on
Freeways; and PA DOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 5.
(3) Location of wires, cables or conductors. A wire, cable, or conductor
which overhangs a portion of the right-of-way shall be placed to
provide a minimum vertical clearance of 18 feet over the pavement
and shoulder, except where the National Electrical Safety Code
requires vertical clearances in excess of 18 feet due to voltage or
span lengths.
(4) Guys. A guy shall be placed and insulated in the following manner:
§ 201-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-2
1:334
§ 201-3. Penalties and enforcement.
(a) A guy shall be placed to avoid interference with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(b) A guy shall be insulated or grounded in compliance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
(5) Identification of poles. A pole shall bear the name or initials of the
facility owner and the pole number assigned by the facility owner.
(6) Seismograph-vibriosis method. Seismograph-vibriosis method shall
comply with the following:
(a) Seismograph operations by other than vibriosis method will
not be permitted.
(b) A permit will not be issued to authorize seismograph
operations within limited access highway right-of-way.
(c) Wherever possible, seismograph operations shall be performed
entirely off the pavement and shoulder to lessen interference
to traffic.
(7) Modular concrete replacement units, metal reinforcing collars and
similar devices.
(a) Modular concrete replacement units, metal reinforcing collars
and similar devices may not be placed in Township right-of-way
unless located:
[1] Thirty feet or more beyond the edge of pavement under PA
DOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 2, Chapter 12.
[2] At the top of a slope (2:1 or greater) or at least eight feet
beyond the toe of the slope.
[3] Beyond parallel drainage ditches.
[4] Beyond the specified deflection distance for the type guide
rail in front of the location, under PA DOT regulations,
Design Manual, Part 2.
(b) No permit will be issued for the placement of a new facility, or
for the repair, modification, reinforcement or replacement of
an existing facility, by modular concrete replacement units,
metal reinforcing collars or similar devices unless the facility is
located in compliance with Subsection K(7)(a).
L. Bridge occupancy. License required. No person may attach a utility
facility to Township bridge or modify an existing facility until the owner
of the utility facility has obtained a permit from the Township.
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-3
1:335
A. General rule. Violation of this article or the permit requirements
constitutes grounds for imposition of the following penalties:
(1) Upon receipt of oral or written notice of violations from the
authorized representative of the Township or a Township police
officer, the permittee shall cease to perform any further work in the
permitted area except to restore the area to a safe condition. No
further work may commence in the permitted area until the
violations have been remedied. Where the permittee has received
oral notice of the violations, written notice shall be sent to the
permittee within 10 days of receipt of the oral notice.
(2) The Township may revoke of the applicant's permit or emergency
permit card.
(3) The applicant may be required to remove facilities installed without
a permit or in violation of the provisions of this article.
(4) Fines, imprisonment or other penalties may be imposed.
(5) The Township may take other action as may be deemed necessary
or proper after consultation with the Township Solicitor.
B. Additional grounds for revocation shall be as follows:
(1) The Township may revoke a permit whenever it determines that the
permitted facility is not being maintained, is in violation of a
condition of the permit or this article, constitutes a hazard to traffic
or interferes with the proper use of the highway by the Township or
the public.
(2) The Township may revoke a permit for nonpayment of a fee
authorized by the Schedule of Fees, including default of the check
submitted for payment.
C. Modification of conditions.
(1) General rule. When a term or condition of this article cannot be
met, an applicant may request, in writing, that the Township modify
that term or condition if it is not required by law, under the
following:
(a) The applicant has done all that can reasonably be done to
comply with the term or condition.
(b) The proposed modification satisfies the intent of the term or
condition to be modified.
(c) The proposed modification represents the minimum feasible
deviation from the term or condition to be modified.
(d) The reason for the requested modification is infeasibility of
meeting the exact terms or conditions of this article rather
than mere economic benefit to the applicant.
§ 201-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-3
1:336
§ 201-4. Excavation.
Prior to any excavation, the pavement shall be cut vertically and in a
straight line, preferably with a pavement saw, equal to the width of the
trench. The trench shall be as narrow as possible to provide adequate
working space, but shall not exceed the outside diameter of the barrel of
the pipe plus 16 inches. Side walls of the trench shall be as nearly vertical
as possible.
§ 201-5. Blasting.
(2) Modification granted. If a requested modification is granted, the
permit will specify the allowable modification. A permit issued
under authority of this section shall be signed only by the Director
of Public Works or Township Manager. The granting of a
modification will be predicated on the applicant's complying with
the following:
(a) Unless the applicant is excused in writing, executing a hold
harmless and indemnity agreement acceptable to the
Township.
(b) Unless the applicant is excused in writing, obtaining bonds
satisfactory to the Township to guarantee highway restoration
and maintenance costs.
(c) Unless the applicant is excused in writing, obtaining public
liability insurance for personal injury and property damage on
behalf of the Township, its officers, agents and employees, in a
form and amount acceptable to the Township for the life of the
facility.
(d) Permit conditions, which may include use restrictions, special
traffic control devices or safety features.
(e) Third parties. The modification of a term or condition by the
Director of Public Works does not create rights in a third party,
nor does a waiver act as a modification of the common law duty
of the applicant to relocate its facilities upon demand by the
Township to another location within the right-of-way at the sole
cost of the applicant.
A. Must be in accordance with PA DOT Publication 408.
B. If blasting is necessary, the Township may require a full-time inspector.
The expense of that inspector shall be reimbursed back to the Township
by the developer or contractor within 30 days of invoice.
C. If roadway is raised or damaged, the Township will require those
sections to be repaired to Township standards.
§ 201-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-5
1:337
§ 201-6. Backfilling.
D. If blasting is required, the Township will require the contractor and/or
developer to post bonding for the protection of the roadways.
E. If 50% or more of a roadway is damaged, the Township will require base
restoration and an overlay of the entire roadway.
F. No predrilling or blasting may be performed within the right-of-way
unless authorized by a permit and until the permittee provides
insurance for property damage and public liability.
G. The blaster's license number shall be furnished upon request.
H. No blasting will be permitted within 50 feet of the nearest part of a
bridge, box or culvert.
I. The permittee's obligation for restoration of the highway shall include
failure of the highway occasioned by blasting.
A. Backfill material.
(1) Existing improved rights-of-ways. Within the right-of-way, must be
2A modified or equivalent, full depth and compacted, in accordance
with Subsection C(3).
(2) Proposed new construction of roadways. Within the right-of-way,
must be 2A modified or equivalent, full depth and compacted in
accordance with Subsection C(3).
B. As an alternative, the Township will accept suitable material, as defined
by PA DOT Publication 408, to be used as backfill in new road
construction only with the following conditions: If 2A modified stone is
not used, the construction and the backfill will be subject to full-time
inspection by the Township Inspector as well as full-time soil
compaction tests by an independent soil scientist, all at the expense of
the owner/developer/contractor.
C. Sanitary sewer.
(1) Any sanitary sewer that is constructed within the legal right-of-way
of any existing road shall be backfilled with a minimum of two feet
of No. 8 stone over the pipe then backfilled with 2A modified stone
to the subgrade of the road.
(2) Within the cartway of a new road, a minimum of two feet of No. 8
(1/2 inch, clean) stone must be placed over the pipe, 2A modified
stone shall then be placed to the subgrade of the road. As an
alternative, the pipe may be backfilled with No. 8 clean stone two
feet above the pipe, and the balance of the backfill may be suitable
material as defined by PA DOT regulations, Publication 408. If 2A
modified stone is not used, the construction of the sanitary sewer
and backfill will be subject to full-time inspection by both the Sewer
§ 201-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-6
1:338
§ 201-7. Pavement replacement; road restoration.
Authority and the Township Inspector as well as full-time soil
compaction tests by an independent soil scientist.
(3) Compaction. After the pipe has been placed and properly bedded
and backfilled with approved material by the Township to a depth
of two feet above the top of the pipe in accordance with the job
requirements and specifications, the remainder of the trench shall
be backfilled in eight-inch-maximum layers to within six inches of
the pavement surface. Each layer shall be compacted to a density
equal to the requirements of PA DOT regulations, Publication 408,
and shall be inspected and confirmed by approved testing devices.
Tamping shall be done with mechanical equipment, tamping rollers
or vibrating compactors, depending upon field conditions. Of more
importance is that it be done carefully to ensure a thoroughly
tamped backfill. The last 2 1/2 inches shall be cold-patched until
final restoration. Compaction by puddling or jetting with water
shall not be permitted or acceptable.
A. Prior to placement of the subbase and pavement, the existing pavement
and base course shall be cut back 12 inches from the edge of the trench.
The cut shall be vertical and to a straight line. Streets with asphalt
pavement surfaces shall be cut with a pavement saw.
(1) Transverse trenches.
(a) The permanent pavement replacement on all transverse
trenches (trenches crossing the normal direction of traffic)
shall consist of a five-inch-thick bituminous concrete base
course, a two-inch ID-2 binder course, and a one-and-one-halfinch-
thick ID-2 bituminous wearing course, all in accordance
with PA DOT regulations, Publication 408.
(b) After the BCBC has cooled and set up, and immediately prior to
replacement of the surface course, the vertical surfaces of the
existing pavement and the surface of the base course shall be
sprayed or painted with a tack coat of type No. 1 emulsified
asphalt. Application shall be in accordance with PA DOT
regulations § 460.3, Publication 408.
(c) The surface course shall be properly placed and compacted
with a ten-ton roller even with the existing road surface.
(d) The joint between the new paving and the existing paving shall
be sealed with an application of Class BM-1 petroleum asphalt.
(2) Longitudinal trenches. The permanent pavement replacement on
all longitudinal trenches (trenches parallel to the normal direction
of traffic) shall consist of a five-inch-thick bituminous concrete base
course, a two-inch ID-2 binder course, and a one-and-one-half-inchthick
ID-2 bituminous wearing course, all in accordance with PA
§ 201-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-7
1:339
§ 201-8. Schedule of inspections.
In order to receive a certificate of completion, the following work items
must be inspected during construction.
DOT regulations, Publication 408. All other requirements shall be
as specified for transverse trenches.
B. Road restoration. If a utility project (installation) is being done in
conjunction with a road reconstruction project, the Sewer Authority
and the Public Works Director shall coordinate the restoration work.
A. Work zone traffic control.
B. Subgrades.
C. Subbase.
D. Base course.
E. Wearing course.
F. Utility backfill (compaction tests required).
§ 201-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-8
1:340
ARTICLE II
Removal of Snow and Ice
[Adopted 12-14-1987 by Ord. No. 100; amended in its entirety
9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-249]
§ 201-9. Definitions.
§ 201-10. Public nuisance.
The allowance or permitting of or the causing of snow or ice to lie upon,
remain upon or be piled or accumulated upon the sidewalks, or to shovel,
plow, throw or otherwise deposit snow or ice into or upon any street within
the Township in a manner which allows the snow or ice to remain on such
street of the Township shall constitute a public nuisance.
§ 201-11. Responsibility to clear sidewalk.
It shall be the duty of all persons (as defined in this article), not later than
24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall or the formation of ice, to
clear or cause to be cleared a pathway on the sidewalk of their respective
properties or sidewalks on land abutting their property (either in the front,
rear or sides of the property) in the event of snow, ice or the formation of
ice, in accordance with this article. Such pathway shall not be less than 30
inches in width and shall be thoroughly cleared to that extent of snow and
ice or other obstructions within 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall
or the formation of ice.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular
include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular, and
words used in the present tense include the future. The word "shall" is
always mandatory.
B. The following words, terms and phrases as used in this chapter shall
have the meanings given herein:
PERSON or PERSONS — Any individual or individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, company or organization that is the owner,
tenant, occupant or occupiers of occupied property or premises or
the person in charge of unoccupied property or premises and vacant
ground within the Township.
SIDEWALK — The footway or that part of the sidewalk area that is
paved.
SIDEWALK AREA — The area between the curbline and the side of the
right-of-way.
STREET — Any highway or street (public or private) within the
Township of Montgomery opened for public use.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 201-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-12
1:341
§ 201-12. Method of snow and ice removal.
§ 201-13. Deposits on sidewalks.
No person, in removing or causing to be removed snow or ice from the
sidewalks, in accord with this article, or otherwise, shall throw or cause to
be thrown or blown snow or ice into the abutting street but shall throw or
cause to be thrown or blown such snow into the area inside the sidewalk
lane or between the sidewalk and the curb or otherwise dispose of and
remove said snow.
§ 201-14. Undedicated streets.
The owner, developer, or general contractor of all undedicated streets
in the Township is hereby required to have such streets kept clear of
snow or ice, or the formation of ice, in accord with this article. If such
undedicated streets are in a development, the owner, developer, or general
contractor shall have the sidewalks and pavements abutting any homes in
the development that have not been sold or rented by the owner, developer
or general contractor, as well as the undedicated streets, at all times kept
clear of snow or ice, or the formation of snow, in such a manner that the
streets, sidewalks and pavements shall be safe for pedestrian and vehicular
traffic in accord with this article.
§ 201-15. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Code
Enforcement Officer or Police Department as a public nuisance.
A. Snow or ice removed from sidewalk areas shall be placed on the
abutting property.
B. If there shall be an excessive amount of snow or ice, and there is no
longer any place on the abutting property to shovel the snow, then it
may be placed along the curbline. It is hereby declared to be unlawful
to shovel, plow, throw or deposit snow or ice into or upon any street
within the Township in a manner which allows the snow or ice to remain
on such street.
C. Should the snow or ice on the sidewalk be frozen so hard that it cannot
be removed without injury to the pavement or damaging the base of the
footpath, the person charged with the responsibility of the snow and ice
removal shall cause the area abutting or adjacent to the sidewalk to be
thoroughly cleared of snow and ice or covered with salt or sand or
similar substance or material.
D. It shall be illegal to throw or pile any snow around or upon any fire
hydrant.
§ 201-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-16
1:342
§ 201-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No.
12-256]
Any person, firm or corporation cited for violating any portion of this article
shall be issued a fine not to exceed $600 per violation. Enforcement shall be
by a civil enforcement proceeding before a District Justice, in accordance
with the Second Class Township Code, as amended. The Township shall
initiate the civil enforcement proceeding by complaint or by such other
means as may be provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. In
addition to or in lieu of civil actions before a District Justice, the Township
may also enforce this article in equity. In such an enforcement proceeding,
any person, firm or corporation determined by the District Justice to have
violated this article shall be liable for the initial fine imposed, as well as
additional daily fines for continuing violations, including failure to timely
pay, all court costs and reasonable Township fees, including attorney fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement proceeding. A separate
violation shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation is
found to exist or for each section of this article which is found to have been
violated. All fines and penalties collected for the violation this article shall
be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 201-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-16
1:343
Chapter 205
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 34.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 72.
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 183.
Sewers — See Ch. 187.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 201.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 201-16 MONTGOMERY CODE § 201-16
1:344
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Added 3-3-1975 by Ord. No. 18A]
§ 205-1. Title and purpose.
§ 205-2. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above-stated purpose. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall prevail.97
§ 205-3. Compliance and guaranty required.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Montgomery Township Land Subdivision Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to assure sites suitable for
building purposes and human habitation and to provide for the
harmonious development of the Township, for the coordination of
existing streets with proposed streets, parks or other features of the
Township Official Plan of Streets and Alleys, for adequate open spaces
for traffic, recreation, light and air and for the proper distribution of
population, thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens of the Township.
A. Subdivision of a lot or construction, opening or dedication of a street.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected and no
street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm drain, water main or other facilities
in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or
dedicated for public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon except in strict accordance with this chapter
and the subdivision regulations adopted hereunder.
B. Sale of lots, issuance of building permits or erection of building. No lot
in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect, alter or repair any
building upon land in a subdivision may be issued and no building may
be erected in a subdivision, as herein defined, unless and until a
subdivision plan has been approved and, where required, recorded and
until the required improvements in connection therewith from the lot or
building to an existing improved street have either been constructed or
the Township has been assured, by means of a proper completion
guaranty in the form of a bond or the deposit of funds or securities in
97.Editor's Note: Original Section 3 of Article I, Definition of Subdivision and Land
Development, as amended, which immediately followed this section, now appears in
Article II of this chapter. See § 205-6.
§ 205-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:345
§ 205-4. Preparation and revision of regulations.
The subdivision regulations adopted hereunder to carry out the intent
and purpose of this chapter shall include definitions, design standards for
streets, alleys, sidewalks, blocks, lots, recreational areas and community
assets, monuments, storm drains, culverts, bridges, sanitary sewers and
other improvement construction requirements; plan requirements and
processing procedures for both preliminary plan and final plan, including
record plan and improvement construction plan; and conditions of
acceptance by the Township of sanitary sewers, streets and other
improvements. Such regulations shall be prepared and approved by
resolution of this Board and, when so approved, shall have the same force
and effect as provisions of this chapter. Said regulations may be amended,
modified or repealed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.98
escrow sufficient to cover the cost of the required improvements, in
accordance with the subdivision regulations enacted hereunder, that
the improvements will subsequently be installed.
C. In all cases where a building permit or grading permit is required but
no subdivision or land development application and review is required
under the provisions of this chapter, the Township may require, as a
condition to the issuance of the permit, the deposit of funds in escrow
sufficient to cover the estimated cost of repairs to curbs, sidewalks,
street trees, streetlights or other public improvements caused by the
necessity for construction vehicles to access the job site. The funds held
in escrow shall be returned to the applicant at such time as the
Township determines that construction has been completed and no
damage has been caused to any public improvement. In the event that
damage does occur, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to pay
for the cost of repair regardless of the amount placed in escrow. If funds
remain in the escrow account after the repairs have been made, then
the Township shall return the balance of the escrow account to the
applicant. [Added 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-9S]
98.Editor's Note: Original Section 7, Penalty, which followed this section, was deleted
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1.
§ 205-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-4
1:346
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 205-5. Word usage. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural
include the singular. The word "person" indicates a corporation, an
unincorporated association and a partnership, as well as an individual. The
word "building" indicates "structure" and shall be construed as if followed
by the words "or part thereof." The word "street" indicates "road" and
"land," and "watercourse" includes "drain," "ditch" and "stream."
§ 205-6. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of these regulations, have the meanings indicated:
ALLEY — A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way, municipally
or privately owned, on which no dwelling or store fronts, serving as the
secondary means of access to two or more properties.
ANCHORING — The fastening of the mobile home to its mobile home stand
in order to prevent upset or damage due to wind, erosion, flooding or other
natural forces.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
04-1775; amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS]
BUFFER — An area designed and functioning to separate the elements
and uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition between them.
Unless otherwise specified, buffers may be included as part of the required
setbacks and yard areas. Buffers are divided into three types.
SCREEN BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or man-made
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density to
A.
§ 205-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:347
BUILDER — A person who, by contract or other agreement, is charged
with the responsibility of construction of buildings or other structures or of
making any construction improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING — Any structure which has enclosing walls, floor and roof, is
permanently affixed to the land, including mobile homes which are properly
secured to the ground, and has one or more floors or stories. A “building”
shall not include such structures as billboards, signs, fences or structures
with interior surfaces not normally accessible to human use, such as gas
tanks or similar structures. Notwithstanding the above, for the purposes of
the Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance,99 a "building" shall be defined
as a gas or liquid storage tank. Buildings are further classified by type of
use for which they are constructed, such as an agricultural, commercial,
industrial, public, institutional or residential building; or as a combined- use
building when a mix of the foregoing uses is contained in the same building;
or as an accessory building.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot, so designated on a
subdivision plan, between which line and the ultimate right-of-way line
of the street on which the lot abuts a building may not be erected. The
provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance100 shall fix the minimum
setback line.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Any part of a development used jointly by the
occupants of the development, including but not limited to open space,
recreation facilities, roadways, parking areas, storage buildings and
maintenance facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Any area of land and/or water designed for
joint use and recreational enjoyment of tenants and/or owners occupying
a development, excluding common parking areas, roadways, storage
effectively block the view from one side to another during all seasons of
the year and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sides.
SOFTENING BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and density
to ease and soften but not essentially block the view from one side to
another; and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors between the
sides.
B.
OPEN BUFFER — A buffer normally comprised of grass, ground cover
and/or possibly other landscaping material having a specified depth
but not necessarily having significant vertical components to achieve a
certain height or density, the purpose of which is to achieve adequate
spacing and attractive landscaping between two or more actively used
areas.
C.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-6
1:348
buildings and similar facilities not primarily intended for recreational
benefit. The common open space shall be essentially free of buildings.
COMMON PARKING — Any parking area used by three or more dwelling
units and having space for six or more motor vehicles.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montgomery County Conservation
District.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, alteration or relocation of a building or structure, including the
placement of mobile homes.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER — A minor commercial facility
generally containing no more than five units and occupying no more than
three acres, designed to serve everyday needs of residents in its immediate
vicinity, and whose commercial goods and hours of operation encourage
short stops for specific items rather than extensive shopping trips. Its
primary component is a drugstore or a small food and household goods
store, but not a supermarket, and the center may contain a few other
establishments as well, such as a beauty shop, laundry and dry cleaning
establishments or similar facilities.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across a block in
connecting two of the bounding streets.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with access closed at one end and with
a vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original ground
and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also, the
material removed in excavation.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.[Added
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development or who seeks to undertake any
regulated earth disturbance activity.[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1; 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved
real estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land
development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other
structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration
such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or
storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in
this chapter, development encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F; amended
9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS]
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted or
maintained.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
§ 205-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:349
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including but not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials. All earth disturbance activities are governed
by the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, defined below, and
the existing provisions of the Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. [Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
EASEMENT — A right granted to use certain land for a special purpose.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements. Accelerated erosion is the removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and the natural processes,
at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site
which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom
(excluding normal agricultural activity).
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped
surface and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom; the difference
in elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point
of higher elevation in the final grade; the material used to make a fill.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land area.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
FLOOD, BASE — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other
ordinances have been prepared; for purpose of this chapter, the onehundred-
year flood, as referenced in the current Montgomery Township
Flood Insurance Study, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Federal Insurance Administration.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No.
18F]
FLOOD, BASE ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation, as
referenced in the current Montgomery Township Flood Insurance Study,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal
Insurance Administration. Within the approximated floodplain, alluvial soils
floodplain or areas determined to be floodplain by the Township Engineer,
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be established as a point on the
boundary of the approximated floodplain nearest to the construction site in
question.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
§ 205-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-6
1:350
FLOOD ELEVATION, REGULATORY — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.[Added 4-23-1984 by
Ord. No. 18F]
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that has one chance in 100 or
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year; for
the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as
defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance
Administration, in the Flood Insurance Study, Montgomery
Township.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
FLOODPLAIN — That area defined in the Township Zoning Ordinance101
as the Floodplain Conservation District; the floodplain definition contained
therein is made part of this chapter by reference.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land adjoining a stream,
river or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation
during a one-hundred-year flood or any area subject to the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source.[Added
4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures are set forth in
floodproofing regulations published by the Office of the Chief Engineers,
United States Army, Publication No. EP 1165 2 314 (June 1972, and as
subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures for all new construction
and substantial improvement of structures shall satisfy the requirements of
the Completely Dry Spaces (W1) and Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) classes
referenced in these regulations. In said publications where reference is
made to below or above the BFD (base flood datum), it shall be interpreted
as meaning below or above the base flood elevation. Said regulations are
contained in the Building Code of Montgomery Township, as
amended.102[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
GRADE[Added 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS] —
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under § 205-28 hereof.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any materials that do not permit the natural
absorption and permeation by soils of rain or other surface water, to include
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of excavation.
B.
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 205-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:351
but not be limited to all concrete, asphalt, and similar paving products,
earthen materials (brick, stone), chemical treatment of soils or artificial
ground covers as may be used in the construction of roads, walks,
driveways, parking areas, patios and recreation facilities.[Added
9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to
be impervious surfaces. [Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
IMPROVEMENT — Grading, paving, curbing, streetlights and signs, fire
hydrants, wells, water mains, sanitary sewers, on-lot sewage disposal, storm
drains, sidewalks, crosswalks and street shade trees.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — See definition of "subdivision and land
development."[Amended 3-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-46]
LOT — A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or building
development.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit or in
two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, provided
with the necessary utility connections, patio and other appurtenances
necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home which is leased
by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home installed and/or
erected on the lot for the exclusive use of its occupants, though it may
instead be designed, developed and used for a modular or conventionally
built single-family detached home rather than a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved in compliance with the requirements of
the Mobile Home Park District for the placement of mobile homes,
conventionally built or modular single-family detached homes, or
combinations thereof, for nontransient use; consisting of two or more
mobile home lots and 15 acres or greater in size.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved and prepared for the placement of the mobile home.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family or multifamily dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory-produced
three-dimensional sections into an integral living unit, whose construction
materials and specifications conform to those of conventionally built units.
MOTOR HOME — A travel trailer which combines the living section and the
power source into a single unit.
§ 205-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-6
1:352
NPDES — ational Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government’s system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
04-177S]
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point
where the Township’s storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, available for parking of one
motor vehicle not less than 10 feet wide nor less than 20 feet in length,
exclusive of passageway, driveways or other means of circulation or access.
A garage or garage area shall not meet the requirement of a parking space
except where provided as part of the parking plan for garden apartments
and townhouses.
PARKING SPACE, ALL-WEATHER — A parking space having adequate base
stone and paved with cement, asphalt or other material with like qualities.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
PLAN, FINAL — A plan consisting of an improvement construction plan and
a record plan.[Added 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
PLAN, IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor showing the horizontal details, profile and
typical cross section of a street and its appurtenances to be constructed or
installed.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Montgomery Township Planning
Commission.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary plan prepared by a registered
engineer, surveyor or architect showing lot lines and areas, zoning
classification, deed restrictions, easements, right-of-way lines and other
information pertaining to the lots and the streets on which the lots abut in
their proposed subdivision.
PLAN, RECORD — A plan prepared for recording by a registered engineer
or surveyor, showing ultimate right-of-way lines, easements, rear lot lines
and any other relevant information.
PLAN, SKETCH — A plan prepared by a registered engineer, surveyor,
planner, architect or landscape architect that is submitted for informal
discussion of a proposed subdivision or land development of a tract of land
prior to the submittal of a preliminary plan.[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord.
No. 18N]
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from
which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations
at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
§ 205-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:353
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted or
maintained.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
QUALIFYING SITE — Any lot, tract or parcel of land or series of lots, tracts
or parcels of land joined together where grading work is continuous and
performed at the same time.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
04-177S]
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102,
or the Clean Streams Law.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-1775;
amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, alley, crosswalk, sanitary or storm sewer, stream or drainage ditch or
for another special use. The usage of the term right-of-way for land plotting
purposes in the Township of Montgomery shall mean that every right-of-way
hereafter established and shown on a final record plan is to be separate and
distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included
within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. These rights-ofway
that involve maintenance by the Township of Montgomery shall be
dedicated to public use by the subdivider of the plan on which such rights
of-way are established.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting roadbanks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
RUNOFF — That part of the precipitation, as well as any other flow
contributions, which appears in surface streams of either perennial or
intermittent form.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — Runoff that
can be anticipated upon maximum development of the tributary area of
the watershed located upstream from the subject tract, as permitted by
prevailing zoning and/or the applicable municipal comprehensive plans, and
a rainfall with an average frequency of occurrence as designated by the
Township.
SECTIONAL HOME — See "modular home."
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred
to as "sediment."
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, township streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
§ 205-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-6
1:354
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.[Added
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
SEWER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances
from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding
sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view along the center
line of a street from the driver's eye height of five feet to the furthest visible
point four inches above the street surface.
SKIRTS — Panels specifically designed for the purpose of screening the
underside of a mobile home by forming an extension of the vertical exterior
walls of the mobile home and covering the entire distance between the
bottom of the exterior walls and the ground elevation below.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical, physical or structural treatment of a
mass of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise improve its
engineering properties.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Work on the proposed construction and/or
development shall begin within six months after the date of issuance of
the building permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Code Enforcement Officer. Construction and/or
development shall be considered to have started with the preparation of
land, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers
or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under
proposed subsurface footings or the installation of sewer, gas and water
pipes or electrical or other service lines from the street. Time extensions
shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant
at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration which sets forth sufficient
and reasonable cause for the Code Enforcement Officer to approve such a
request.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
STREET — A general term used to describe the right-of-way, municipally or
privately owned, serving as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel and
furnishing access to abutting properties and space for sewers and public
utilities.
RURAL — A street used primarily as the principal means of access to
adjacent agricultural properties.
A.
§ 205-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:355
SUBDIVIDER — A person who is the registered owner or authorized agent
of the registered owner of the land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT[Added 3-3-1975 by Ord. No.
18A] —
RESIDENTIAL — A street used primarily as the principal means of
access to adjacent residential properties.
B.
SECONDARY — A street connecting local residential streets to each
other or community facilities and to the primary or major
thoroughfares, principally serving neighborhood traffic.
C.
MAJOR — A street connecting districts and centers of communities and
serving large volumes of fast-moving through traffic, preferably located
outside of or bounding the residential neighborhood.
D.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling shall be exempted. [Amended 6-29-1989 by Ord. No. 18P]
A.
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of three or more
lots or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of
an existing street or extension of municipal facilities or the creation or
installation of any public improvements.
B.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract or parcel
of land not a part of a prior subdivision into not more than two lots,
tracts or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of lease, transfer of ownership or the act of building structures and
installing site improvements for residential use. Such lots shall front
on an existing public street or suitable means of access to a public
street not involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal
facilities or the creation of any public improvements and shall not
adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel from
which it is to be taken or adjoining property and shall conform with all
provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance103 and this
chapter and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
C.
LAND DEVELOPMENT [Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 18P]
(1) Any of the following activities:
D.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-6
1:356
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F] —
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, either before
the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged
and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential
buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a
single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of
the number of occupants or tenure; or
[1]
The division or allocation of land space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing
or prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose
of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
[2]
(a)
(b) A subdivision of land.
The following types of development are excluded from the
definition of land development:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semi-detached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm
buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building.
(b)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For purposes of this Subsection D(2)(c), an
"amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by proper authorities.
(c)
(2)
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a structure listed on a National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
B.
§ 205-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:357
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels or conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TENURE — The form of occupancy of a unit, i.e., fee simple sale, rental,
condominium, cooperative, etc.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost eight inches.[Amended
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 18M]
TOWNSHIP — Montgomery Township, 1001 Stump Road, Montgomeryville,
Pennsylvania 18936.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S]
TRACT AREA — The total acreage within the lot lines, excluding that area
continuously covered by water and rights-of-way of existing public roads.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle requiring a separate power
source for pulling it, which may include living, sleeping, eating and sanitary
facilities, but which is designed for vacation travel and not for long-term or
permanent occupancy.
WATER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the
mobile home.
WATERCOURSE — A perennial or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek,
channel, ditch or culvert for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER RISER PIPE — The water riser pipe is that portion of the water
service pipe which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates
at a designated point at each mobile home lot.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.[Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
04-177S]
§ 205-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-6
1:358
ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 205-7. Exceptions.
The standards of design in this article should be used to judge and ascertain
the adequacy of subdivision proposals. Where the Supervisors determine
that the literal application of any of these standards in any case would cause
an undue hardship or be plainly unreasonable and unnecessary, they may
grant such reasonable exceptions as, in their opinion, will not be contrary
to the public interest. The Township Engineer and the Township Planning
Commission may recommend such reasonable exceptions to the design
standards of this article if the Engineer or Planning Commission determines
that an undue hardship would be caused in any case.
§ 205-8. Construction of facilities; inspection.
§ 205-9. General standards.
The following principles of land subdivision, general requirements and the
minimum standards of design shall be observed by the subdivider, developer
and builder at all instances:
A. The subdivider, developer or builder shall construct and install, with no
expense to the Township, the streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers and storm drains, streetlights, fire hydrants, street
signs, shade trees, monuments, lot pins and other facilities and utilities
specified in this article. Construction and installation of such facilities
and utilities shall be subject to inspection by appropriate Township
officials during the progress of the work.
B. Prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or a grading permit
associated with a land development as defined in this chapter, the
developer and the builder shall attend a preconstruction meeting with
representatives of Montgomery Township. The consent of the developer
and the builder to the reasonable directions of the Township's
representatives at the preconstruction meeting shall be a condition
precedent to the issuance of a building permit and/or grading permit.
[Added 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 18T; amended 4-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-9S]
A. No building or structure, as these terms are defined in the Montgomery
Township Zoning Ordinance,104 shall be constructed on low-lying land
subject to periodic flooding or upon land naturally poorly drained, nor
shall such land be developed for any other uses which may involve
danger to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-9
1:359
§ 205-10. Streets and roads.
In accordance with the Second Class Township Code,106 all new streets and
culs-de-sac and widened portions of all existing rights-of-way intended for
public use shall be dedicated to the Township, county or state, subject to
final acceptance based on compliance with the following requirements:
B. Where no public water supply is available to the subdivision, the
Supervisors may require the subdivider, developer or builder to obtain
from the District Sanitarian of the Pennsylvania Department of Health
certificates of approval as to the quality and adequacy of the water
supply proposed to be utilized by the subdivider, developer or builder
and approval of the type and construction methods to be employed in
the installation of the individual water supply system.
C. Where the subdivision is inaccessible to sanitary sewers, the
Montgomery Township Sanitation Code shall govern.105 The
Supervisors may require the subdivider, developer or builder to obtain
from the District Sanitarian of the Pennsylvania Department of Health
certificates of approval of the sewage disposal facilities proposed to be
provided by the subdivider, developer or builder. The results of the
greater number of percolation tests determined by either three
percolation tests or one test for each three acres, performed according
to the Township Sanitation Code, shall be submitted with any
subdivider's plan.
D. Proposed subdivision shall be coordinated with the existing nearby
neighborhood so that the community as a whole may develop
harmoniously.
E. Improvement construction requirements will be completed under
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways, the
Pennsylvania Department of Health or other appropriate agencies or
the specifications included herein, whichever specifications shall result
in the highest and strictest standards.
A. Street system.
(1) Conformance with Township development plans. The development
plan shall conform to such plan or plans for the Township as shall
have been prepared and adopted by the Township Planning
Commission.
(2) Principals of design for residential streets. Local residential streets
in a new development should be so laid out so as to discourage
through traffic, but provisions for the extension and continuation of
major streets into and from adjoining areas is required. If a
subdivision abuts a present or proposed primary or major
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 183, Sewage Disposal Systems, and Ch. 187, Sewers.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 205-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-10
1:360
thoroughfare, marginal interceptor streets running parallel to the
thoroughfare should be provided.
(3) Relationship to topography. At all times the street layout should be
logically related to the topography of the land and as may be
approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) Intersections along major streets.
(a) Where the center lines of minor streets opening into opposite
sides of a major thoroughfare are within 200 feet of each other,
they shall be made to coincide by curving or angling the minor
streets.
(b) Intersecting minor and secondary streets shall not empty into
the same side of a major thoroughfare at intervals of less than
800 feet.
(5) Provisions of streets for future development. If the lots resulting
from the original development are large enough for resubdivision
or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable access and
street openings for such an eventuality shall be provided.
B. Street alignment.
(1) Curvature. The minimum radius at the center line for curves on
primary roads shall be 500 feet; for secondary roads, it shall be 300
feet; and for local residential streets, it shall be 150 feet. Shorter
radii may be permitted on the recommendation of the Township
Engineer. Proper super elevation shall be provided for curves less
than 600 feet in radius on major and secondary thoroughfares.
(2) Tangents between curves. Except for local streets, there shall be a
tangent of at least 100 feet measured at the center line between
reverse curves.
(3) Sight distance on horizontal and vertical curves. Proper sight
distance should be provided with respect to both horizontal and
vertical alignment. Measured along the center line, this should be
400 feet for primary roads, 200 feet for secondary roads and 100
feet for local roads.
C. Street grades.
(1) Minimum and maximum grades. There shall be a minimum grade of
at least 1% on all streets; a maximum grade of 7% on major and
secondary thoroughfares and 10% on local streets for distances of
1,500 feet maximum. Grades shall be measured along the curb or
flow lines of the street. Grades in excess of 5% are, in general, to be
avoided.
(2) Changes of grade. Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade
exceeding 1% and should be designed for maximum visibility.
§ 205-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-10
1:361
Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas.
Where the grade exceeds 7%, such leveling areas shall have a
minimum length of 50 feet within which no grade shall exceed a
maximum of 4%. The grade of actual intersections shall not exceed
1% in any direction.
D. Right-of-way width, paving width and curbing.
(1) Street.
(a) All streets, public and private, shall have curbs. The minimum
widths of the right-of-way and the paving and the requirements
for curbing shall not be less than those of an existing street of
which the new street is to be a continuation nor less than the
following: [Amended 8-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-24]
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Paving
Width
(feet)
Major 80* 40*
Secondary 60 40
Residential 50 26
Rural 50 26
*NOTE: Or more, as may be required.
(b) The minimum right-of-way width for development along
existing streets will correspond with the ultimate right-of-way
width for these streets.
(2) Cul-de-sac.
(a) The minimum widths of the right-of-way and the paving and the
requirements for curbing on culs-de-sac shall be not less than
the following:
§ 205-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-10
1:362
Number of
Families
Served by Culde-
Sac (when
property
thereon is
completely
subdivided)
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Paving
Width
(feet) Curbing
5 or more 50 30 with
frontages of
100 or less;
24 with
frontages
over 100
Required for
all frontages
4 50 30 Required for
all frontages
1 to 3 50 30 Required for
all frontages
(b) A cul-de-sac will not be approved when a through street is
practicable. A cul-de-sac shall not be more than 500 feet long.
A cul-de-sac street having a right-of-way of 50 feet or more in
width shall have a circular turnaround with a minimum rightof-
way radius of 62 feet and an outer paving radius of 50 feet.
[Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 18W]
(3) Temporary turnaround. Where it is proposed that a road be
constructed to an abutting property line with the intention that
such a road will be extended onto the adjoining property at a future
date, a temporary circular turnabout shall be built wholly within
the right-of-way. The right-of-way width will be a minimum of 50
feet, and the radius of the turnabout shall be at least 35 feet.
(4) Additional width requirements. Additional widths may be required
by the Township:
(a) Where necessary for public safety and convenience.
(b) For parking in commercial or multiple-family residential areas.
(c) Where old roads do not provide the proper widths and
additional dedication is necessary.
E. Street intersections.
(1) Multiple intersections. Multiple intersections involving the junction
of more than four roadways shall be avoided, and where such
avoidance is impossible, such intersections shall be designed with
extreme care for both vehicular and pedestrian safety.
§ 205-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-10
1:363
(2) Minimum angle of intersection. Right-angle intersections shall be
used whenever practicable, especially when local streets empty
into major or secondary thoroughfares; there shall be no
intersection angle, measured at the center line, of less than 60º
minimum.
(3) Radii of pavement and right-of-way at intersections. Street
intersections shall be rounded with tangential arcs at the pavement
edge (curbline) and right-of-way lines as listed below. Where two
streets of different right-of-way widths intersect, the radii of
curvature for the widest street shall apply.
Type of Street
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection
of Pavement Edge
or Curbline
(feet)
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection
of Right-of-Way Line
(feet)
Major 40* 20*
Secondary 30 20
Residential 20 10
Rural 20 10
*NOTE: Or more, as may be required.
(4) Sight line at intersections. Proper sight lines should be maintained
at all intersections of streets. Measured along the center line, there
should be a clear-sight triangle of 75 feet from the point of
intersection. No building or present or future obstruction will be
permitted in this area.
F. Other requirements.
(1) Half street. The dedication of half streets at the edges of a new
subdivision is prohibited. If circumstances render this
impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of
the remaining half of the street must be furnished by the
subdivider, developer or builder. When there exists a half street in
an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided by
the proposed development.
(2) Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access or egress are
prohibited. New streets shall be provided through to the boundary
lines of the development if it adjoins acreage suitable for future
development.
(3) Street names. Streets that are extensions of or obviously in
alignment with existing named streets shall bear the names of the
existing streets. All street names are subject to the approval of the
Township Supervisors.
§ 205-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-10
1:364
G. Multifamily, commercial and industrial driving access. The
requirements for driveways shall be the standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation regarding access to and occupancy of
highways by driveways and local roads (Pennsylvania Code, Title 67,
Chapter 441, as amended). Driveway access to state highways shall be
subject to the permit process of that Department. Driveway access to
Township roads shall be subject to the Township's permit process. All
driveways shall be subject to the standards, requirements and
processing of this section. [Added 8-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-24]
(1) Driveways shall be so located as to provide adequate sight distance
at intersections with streets.
(2) Driveways shall be located in a manner which will not cause the
following upon roadways with which they intersect:
(a) Interference to the traveling public on such roadways;
(b) A hazard to the free movement of normal highway traffic; or
(c) Areas of undue traffic congestion on the highway.
(3) Driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere with or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance and drainage of the highway.
(4) Driveways shall be located as far from street intersections as is
reasonably possible but not less than 100 feet.
(5) Choice of streets. When streets of different classes are involved,
the driveway shall provide access to the street of lesser
classification.
(6) Pavement widths and grade. Driveway paving widths and grades
shall be as follows:
Land Use
Paving
Width
(feet)
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Multifamily/residential 26 10
Commercial/industrial 26 10
(7) Stopping areas. Regardless of the driveway classification, all
driveways shall be provided with a stopping area within which the
grade shall not exceed 6%. The stopping area shall be measured as
follows:
(a) The length of the stopping area shall be a minimum of 20 feet
or the length of the longest vehicle anticipated to use the
driveway, whichever is greater.
§ 205-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-10
1:365
(b) Stopping areas shall be measured from the ultimate right-ofway
lane.
(8) Clear-sight triangles. Clear-sight triangles shall be provided where
driveways intersect streets.
(9) Driveways should be posted with signs reading "No parking by
order of the Fire Marshal."
H. Parking and loading areas. [Added 8-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-24]
(1) Off-street automobile parking facilities shall be provided for all
uses of land, structures and buildings, as well as for any expansion
of such uses or increase in the intensity of use in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter 230, Zoning.
(2) Angled or perpendicular parking shall not be permitted along
public or private streets. No parking areas shall be located within a
public street ultimate right-of-way. Parked vehicles in off-street
parking spaces shall be prevented from intruding on travel lanes,
walkways, public streets or adjacent properties by means of walls,
curbs, wheel stops or other appropriate means.
(3) Dead-ended parking areas shall be discouraged when the required
parking capacity can be accommodated in a layout that permits
more convenient vehicular movements. Dead-end parking lots shall
provide for turning movements of emergency vehicles.
(4) Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the
following table. All parking spaces shall be marked with all-weather
paint with double parallel lines to be a minimum of six inches apart
to separate each space.
Parking Stall Aisle Width
Land Use
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Depth
(feet)
Width
(feet)
One-
Way
(feet)
Two-
Way
(feet)
Multifamily/
residential
90 20 10 26 26
Commercial/
industrial
90 20 10 22 22
(5) Aisles where illegal parallel parking is possible shall be posted "No
Parking by Order of Fire Marshal."
(6) Off-street loading areas. In addition to off-street parking areas, offstreet
loading areas shall be provided for all retail business and
wholesale and industrial uses requiring the regular delivering or
shipping of goods, merchandise or equipment to the site by
semitrailer truck. All loading space shall be located on the same lot
§ 205-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-10
1:366
as the principal use(s) it serves. Off-street loading areas shall
comply with the following:
(a) Required loading space shall be available for the loading and
unloading of vehicles and shall not be used for the parking
requirements or in conducting the use.
(b) The location and size of loading areas shall be adequate for the
safe parking of trucks, and maneuvering space shall be
provided so that ingress and egress can be accomplished on
the lot without backing into a public street.
(c) The loading spaces shall be compatible with vehicular
circulation in adjacent areas based upon its location and the
schedule of its use.
(d) Two or more establishments may use a common loading and
unloading facility, upon approval of the Board of Supervisors
and upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer and/
or Planning Commission.
(e) In the case of shopping centers and other large-scale uses
having frequent truck deliveries or pickups, the circulation
pattern for service vehicles shall be physically separated from
automobile parking areas and parking access driveways.
(7) Handicapped parking.
(a) All multifamily, commercial, office, public and industrial uses
shall provide parking spaces for the physically handicapped.
The minimum number of handicapped spaces as part of their
parking requirements shall be as follows:
Total
Parking Spaces
Handicapped
Parking Spaces
1 to 10 *
11 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 and up 2% of total spaces
§ 205-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-10
1:367
§ 205-11. Utility easements and alleys.
§ 205-12. Blocks.
Total
Parking Spaces
Handicapped
Parking Spaces
*NOTE: For parking lots of 10 spaces or fewer, one oversized
space shall be provided, and a ramp shall be provided.
However, the oversized space need not be marked as a
handicapped space and may be used by the general public.
(b) Required off-street parking spaces for the physically
handicapped shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide by 20 feet
long and shall be paved with an impervious gravel-free surface.
Side-by-side spaces shall be marked as 1 1/2 times the
standard width.
(c) Parking spaces for the physically handicapped should
generally be located on the shortest possible route to an
accessible entrance to the building. The first parking space in
rows of parking near such entrances may be reserved for
handicapped parking. Ramps shall be provided for convenient
access from parking spaces to accessible entrances and to
sidewalks. Such spaces shall be placed to permit severely
handicapped persons to get out of a vehicle from either side.
(d) The pavement shall be marked with the international symbol of
accessibility. An aboveground sign shall be clearly visible from
the driveway to designate each physically handicapped
parking space.
A. Easements. Easements at the rear of lots for utility lines, such as sewer,
water, gas mains or other utilities, are to be avoided. However, if the
Township Supervisors determine that such easements may be located
and provided at the rear of lots, a minimum easement of 10 feet from
the rear of each lot must be provided.
B. Alleys. Alleys are prohibited in residential developments. In commercial
or industrial districts without expressly designed loading areas, alleys
with a minimum width of 22 feet shall be required. Where such alleys
dead-end, they shall be provided with a turnabout having a radius of not
less than 30 feet, unless the Township Supervisors determine that a
larger radius is needed.
A. Length. All blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum length of 600
feet.
B. Width. Whenever practicable, blocks shall be at least two lot depths of
the minimum size permitted under the applicable zoning classifications.
§ 205-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-12
1:368
§ 205-13. Lots.
§ 205-14. Recreational areas and community assets.
Whenever practicable, provision shall be made for suitable open spaces
for parks, playgrounds and recreational areas. Due consideration shall be
given to the preservation of natural features, including large trees, groves,
waterways, scenic points, historic spots and other community assets.
§ 205-15. Monuments and lot pins. [Amended 11-25-1991 by Ord.
No. 18V]
C. Crosswalks. In large blocks with interior parks, in exceptionally long
blocks, at bus stops or where access to a school, park, playground,
church or shopping center is necessary, a crosswalk with a minimum
right-of-way of 10 feet and a paved walk six feet in width shall be
provided and maintained by the abutting owners.
A. Area. All lots shall be no smaller than the minimum lot area
requirements of the applicable zoning classification.
B. Width. The width of a lot shall be that width in feet specified for the
applicable zoning district.
C. Frontage. Every lot shall have frontage along the ultimate right-of-way
line of a street.
D. Side lines. Whenever practicable, the side lines of a lot shall be at right
angles or radial to the right-of-way line.
E. Building lines. Building lines for all lots shall be in conformance with
the minimum front, side and rear yard requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
F. Lot numbers. For purposes of development, each subdivision may have
an overall system of lot numbers, the number one being assigned to a
lot in the first section to be developed. (Such system of lot numbers
shall not be confused with the regular house or building numbering
system based on a Township-wide plan).
G. Building numbers. House or building numbers shall be assigned by the
Township based on an overall street plan. Numbers will be assigned in
such a way as to allow for vacant parcels and future development.
A. Permanent monuments. Permanent reference monuments of precast
concrete or a durable stone 20 by five by five inches with forty-fivedegree
beveled edges shall be set by the subdivider, developer or
builder at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original
tract to be subdivided, at all street intersections and such intermediate
points as may be required and at all property corners of land being
dedicated to Montgomery Township. Such monuments shall be located
so that the top surface is at final grade.
§ 205-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-15
1:369
§ 205-16. Street grading.
All streets shall be graded the full width of the right-of-way to the grades
shown on the street profile and cross-section plan submitted and approved
with the preliminary plan. They shall be inspected and checked for accuracy
by the Township Engineer or the municipal authority having jurisdiction
over the local roads involved. Typical recommended sections are attached
hereto.107
§ 205-17. Paving and curbing. [Amended 1-25-1988 by Ord. No. 18I;
11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 18R]
The pavement and curbing for all streets and all commercial and industrial
parking areas and driveways into and out of said parking areas shall be
installed as shown on the preliminary plan, and in accordance with the
following:
B. Lot pins. All lot corner markers shall be permanently located by a threefourths-
inch metal pin with a minimum length of 30 inches, located in
the ground so that the top is at final grade.
A. Pavement construction. [Amended 8-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-36;
10-27-1997 by Ord. No. 97-84S]
(1) Rural and residential roads. Rural and residential roads covered by
these regulations shall have a thickness of not less than 9 1/2
inches, which shall consist of three inches of compacted 2A
modified stone subbase, five inches superpave 25.0mm base course
and 1 1/2 inches superpave 9.5mm wearing course conforming to
the current specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. [Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-207S]
(2) Major and secondary roadways. All major and secondary roadways
covered by these regulations shall have a thickness of not less than
16 inches, the subbase of which shall consist of six inches of
compacted 2A modified stone, a base course of seven inches of
superpave 25.0mm base course, a one-and-one-half-inch superpave
25.0mm binder course and a one-and-one-half-inch superpave
9.5mm wearing course, or approved equivalent, conforming to the
current specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. [Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-207S]
(3) Commercial, industrial and multifamily parking areas. All
commercial, industrial and multifamily car parking areas shall have
a thickness of not less than 8 1/2 inches, which shall consist of six
inches crushed aggregate base course, 1 1/2 inches superpave
25.0mm binder course and a one-inch superpave 9.5mm wearing
course conforming to the current specifications of the Pennsylvania
107. Editor's Note: These drawings are on file in the Township offices.
§ 205-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-17
1:370
Department of Transportation. [Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No.
06-207S; 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS]
(4) Commercial, industrial and multifamily driveways (mostly car use).
All commercial, industrial and multifamily driveways carrying
mostly cars shall be constructed in accordance with the residential
road standards. As an alternative, the driveway may be constructed
with a thickness of not less than 10 1/2 inches, which shall consist
of eight inches of crushed aggregate base course, 1 1/2 inches of
superpave 25.0mm binder course and a one-inch superpave 9.5mm
wearing course conforming to the current specifications of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. [Amended
3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-207S; 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
16-297ZS]
(5) Commercial and industrial driveways and loading area (highvolume
truck use). [Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-207S]
(a) All commercial and industrial driveways and loading areas
used primarily for truck access and loading shall be
constructed in accordance with the primary and secondary
road standards.
(b) As an alternative, the driveway and loading area may be
constructed with a thickness of not less than 12 1/2 inches,
which shall consist of 10 inches crushed aggregate base
course, 1 1/2 inches of superpave 25.0mm binder course and a
one-inch superpave 9.5mm wearing course conforming to the
current specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. [Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
16-297ZS]
(6) All paving shall be constructed both as to materials and
workmanship in accordance with the current specifications and
standards promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation now in force or hereafter revised and on an
approved firm subgrade. [Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No.
06-207S]
(7) Where parking spaces abut and are perpendicular to paved
walkways the design shall provide for placement of bollards spaced
five feet on center, a minimum of 16 inches from the front face of
the curb, edge of parking space across the width of all the parking
spaces. [Added 11-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-311ZS]
B. Cross gutters. Where appropriate, the Supervisors may require
concrete cross gutters at intersections where the street grade is 1 1/2%
or less. Such cross gutters shall be a minimum of six feet wide and
constructed of eight-inch concrete reinforced with No. 4 mesh.
§ 205-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-17
1:371
§ 205-18. Storm and surface drainage.
All storm sewers and drainage facilities, such as gutters, storm drains,
bridges and culverts, shall be installed and the land graded for adequate
drainage as shown on the grading plan submitted and approved with the
preliminary plan.
C. Crown. All pavements, except where super elevated for curves, shall
have a minimum slope from center of road to gutter of 1/8 inch per foot
and a maximum slope of 1/4 inch per foot.
D. Curbs. All curbs shall be straight concrete. All curb cuts shall be
included in the initial installation. All curbs shall be installed in
accordance with the Pennsylvania State Department of Transportation
specifications.
(1) Where required. Concrete curbs shall be placed along all streets,
whether the street is existing or proposed, and along all
commercial, industrial and multifamily driveways and parking lots.
(2) Construction requirements. The minimum specification for the
construction of concrete curbs shall be a seven-by-eight-byeighteen-
inch concrete curb in accordance with the specifications
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408.
(3) Concrete curing. Concrete shall be properly cured with white
curing compound as specified by Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Form 408.
(4) Curb detail. Concrete curbs shall be constructed in accordance
with the standard detail design specifications set forth in Appendix
A to Ordinance No. 18, as amended.108 [Added 3-9-1992 by Ord.
No. 18W]
A. Storm drains.
(1) When required. Storm drains and appurtenances shall be required
to be constructed by the subdivider to take surface water from the
bottom of vertical curves, the grades of which slope on both sides
toward the bottom; to lead water away from springs; to avoid the
use of cross gutters at street intersections and elsewhere when the
concentration of surface water determined using the Rational
method and computed according to the zone principle of runoff for
rectangular areas will exceed three cubic feet per second, based on
excessive short duration rainfall of average frequency of once in 10
years for this region, and on present zoning or proposed zoning,
whichever involves the greatest concentration of population. When
submitting a plan for approval involving the construction of storm
drains, the designer's computations shall be submitted in duplicate
to facilitate the checking of design.
108. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-17 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-18
1:372
(2) Location. When installed within the rights-of-way of streets or
alleys, they shall be located between the curb and property lines.
(3) Size and grade. Storm drains shall be designed to conform to the
following requirements:
(a) The minimum internal diameter shall be 15 inches and the
minimum grade shall be 1/2 of 1%.
(b) Any closed conduit, when flowing full, shall have a minimum
velocity of 3.5 feet per second and a maximum velocity of 15
feet per second. Manning's formula will be used in computing
velocities.
[1] All channels, closed or open, shall meet the following
criteria:
Velocity
(feet per second)
Type
of Channel
Manning's
“n” Value Maximum Minimum
Earth .013 5 3.5
Rubble-lined .015 10 3.5
Poured
concrete
.02 15 3.5
R.C.P. or
V.C.P.
.03 15 3.5
[2] If other types or materials of construction are proposed to
be used and approved, the Township Engineer will furnish,
on request, appropriate "n" values to be used, taken from
Hydraulic and Excavation Tables of the Bureau of
Reclamation.
(4) Manholes. Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in
horizontal or vertical alignment, shall be spaced not more than 300
feet apart on pipe of 24 inches internal diameter or less and not
more than 450 feet apart on lines of larger internal diameter than
24 inches. When approved by the Township Engineer, inlets may be
substituted for manholes.
(5) Changes in direction. When special circumstances warrant, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, changes in direction may be
accomplished by constructing the lines on a curve in lieu of
constructing manholes.
(6) Inlets. Inlet spacing and the type used shall be so arranged that
95% of the gutter flow, computed as runoff in Subsection A(1)
above, will be captured. No inlet smaller than the City No. 1 open
§ 205-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-18
1:373
mouth inlet will be used, with width of mouth of four feet eight
inches. Multiple inlets may be used, and under appropriate
conditions, multiple combined inlets may be required. Gutter
depressions will be used as shown on Township Standard Plates.109
Inlets at street intersections shall be placed on the tangent and not
on the curved sections.
(7) Castings. Manhole and inlet castings, together with their covers or
gratings, shall conform to Township standards as may be currently
in effect.
(8) Stormwater roof drains. Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not
discharge water over a sidewalk but shall extend under the
sidewalk to the gutter. Where storm drains pass in front of a
structure or are otherwise accessible, the roof drains shall be
connected thereto.
(9) Sump pump discharge drains. A standard four-inch underdrain
shall be placed between the property line and the curbline where it
has been determined by the Township that sump pump water finds
its way across sidewalks and/or into the cartway. Sump pumps will
be connected into the underdrain pipe and will connect to the
storm sewer system. This drain may be required by the Board of
Supervisors at any time prior to dedication of the public
improvements to the Township. [Added 4-22-1991 by Ord. No.
18S]
B. Bridges and culverts. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to support
the expected loads, to provide adequate capacity and to the full width of
the right-of-way. Approval of the Water and Power Resources Board of
the Commonwealth is required where the area drained upstream of the
point under consideration exceeds 1/2 of one square mile. Refer to
Subsection A(3)(b)[1] above for "n" values and velocities. When
submitting a plan involving the construction of bridges or culverts,
there shall be submitted, in duplicate, copies of the designer's
computations, both as to hydraulic and structural design.
C. Streams and watercourses. Changes to natural streams shall be made
only when specifically applied for and approved. Realignment must
conform to proper hydraulic design and shall involve the dedication of
rights-of-way of adequate width to make feasible future maintenance.
Approval of the Water and Power Resources Board of the
Commonwealth is required in the case of stream realignment where the
area drained upstream of the point under consideration exceeds 1/2 of
one square mile. Refer to Subsection A(3)(b)[1] above for "n" values and
velocities. When submitting a plan involving the construction or
realignment of watercourses, there shall be submitted, in duplicate,
copies of the designer's hydraulic computations.
109. Editor's Note: The Township Standard Plates are on file in the Township offices.
§ 205-18 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-18
1:374
D. Stormwater management. [Amended 11-22-1982 by Ord. No. 18D;
4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 18S; 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 18T; 1-10-1994
by Ord. No. 94-31; 8-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-37; 11-12-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-220Z; 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS]
(1) Stormwater management facilities will be required if one of the
following conditions is present:
(a) Runoff from the development will exceed the capacity of
downstream stormwater facilities.
(b) Runoff from the development would exceed the peak runoff
from the existing conditions. One single-family dwelling not
requiring subdivision is exempt from this requirement.
(c) Runoff from a proposed parking facility or building would
increase the peak runoff from the existing condition.
(d) The development falls under the jurisdiction of the Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance (Chapter 206).
(2) The design criteria for the stormwater management facility shall be
agreed upon by the Township Engineer. Developers are encouraged
to investigate all measures to reduce and retain water. All
reasonable methods will be considered.
(3) Stormwater management facilities will be designed as follows:
(a) Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to satisfy
all standards and regulations described in Chapter 206, the
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(b) (Reserved)
(c) The emergency spillway must be designed to carry a onehundred-
year storm after development.
(d) Detention basin side slopes shall be gently graded to permit
ease of maintenance and shall not exceed 4:1 (four-foot run to
one-foot rise).
(e) The bottom slopes of detention basins should not be less than
2%.
(f) Stormwater management facilities must be designed for the
greater of either the total impervious cover or the maximum
impervious surface ratio permitted within the respective
zoning district per the Township Zoning Ordinance.110 In the
event a zoning district does not specify an impervious cover
ratio; a minimum impervious cover ratio of 40% of the gross
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-18
1:375
§ 205-18.1. (Reserved)111
§ 205-19. Sanitary sewers and waste disposal.
site area shall be the basis for design of the stormwater
management facilities.
(4) Location, maintenance and responsibility.
(a) Stormwater facilities may be located on individual lots. The
maintenance and ownership of these facilities will be the
responsibility of the lot owner. The responsibility for
maintenance of any such facility shall be clearly noted on the
subdivision plans and shall appear on any deed conveying said
lot from developer to another party.
(b) Stormwater facilities may be located to serve multiple lots. In
this case, the ownership, maintenance and responsibility of the
facility may, in the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, be
either that of a homeowners' association, lot owners'
association or of Montgomery Township. The responsibility for
maintenance of any such facility shall be clearly noted on the
subdivision plans and shall appear on any deed conveying said
lot from the developer to another party.
(c) Permanent access, at least 15 feet wide, to the stormwater
facility from a public right-of-way must be provided.
(d) A minimum four-foot-high fence, to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer, must be installed around the top of all
facilities, public or private.
(e) The facility must be constructed per the approved plan.
(f) The development and the facility must have been fully
completed for one year prior to the dedication.
(g) The facility and the upstream watershed area subject to
development must be stabilized.
(h) Sufficient funds shall be provided the Township, the interest of
which shall be used to maintain the facilities.
E. In addition to the above, an applicant shall comply with the stormwater
management regulations set forth in Chapter 206, the Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance. [Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
04-177S; amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS]
111. Editor’s Note: Former § 205-18.1, Stormwater Management, added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
04-177S, was repealed 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS. See now Ch. 206, Stormwater
Management.
§ 205-18 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-19
1:376
§ 205-20. Water.
All water mains and lines as indicated on the preliminary plan shall be
installed from each lot to the municipal supply. Where no public supply is
available, it must be furnished by the developer on a project or individual
lot basis. If wells are installed on each lot and the lot also contains its own
A. Sewers. Wherever practicable, sanitary sewers shall be installed and
connected to the Township Sanitary Sewer System. In areas not
presently served by public sanitary sewers, the Township Supervisors
may require, in addition to installation of temporary individual on-site
sewage disposal facilities, the installation and capping of sanitary
sewer mains and house connections, if studies by the Township
Supervisors indicate that extension of public sanitary sewer trunks or
laterals to serve the property subdivision appears probable or
necessary to protect public health.
(1) Size and grade. Sanitary sewers shall have a minimum inside
diameter of eight inches and a minimum grade of 0.5%.
(2) Manholes. Manholes shall be located at intervals of 250 feet and at
each change of line or grade. In exceptional cases, the interval may
be extended to not more than 300 feet. Manhole frames, covers,
buckets and steps shall be according to the Township requirement.
(3) Laterals. Lateral connections shall be extended to the right-of-way
whenever their need can be anticipated. Each building shall have a
separate connection to the sewer, except that garages accessory to
dwellings may be connected to the dwelling line.
B. On-lot disposal systems. If public sewage disposal is not available and
the sewage treatment is on a project or individual lot basis, such private
facilities must be installed by the subdivider, developer or builder under
direct supervision of the State or Local Health Officer.
(1) Necessary tests and inspection. Such Officer shall require
percolation tests, soil samples and other data to determine the size
and extent of facilities needed. During the installation of such
facilities and before final coverage, the State or Local Health
Officer and his officers shall make inspection and checks to assure
that all requirements and specifications have been met. They shall
be granted free access to the development area at all times during
this period.
(2) Certificate of approval. After assuring that all requirements and
specifications have been met, the State or Local Health Officer
shall then issue a certificate of approval to the Secretary of the
Township as a requirement to final plan approval.
(3) Proximity to wells. In no instance shall a septic tank tile field or
other effluent disseminating system be located nearer to a drilled
well than 50 feet.
§ 205-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-20
1:377
sewage disposal facilities, the well shall be a drilled cased well, installed
and located under the supervision of the State and Local Health Officer.
Such Officer or his representatives shall inspect and check the well installed
for conformance with standards, shall ascertain an ample supply of pure
water and shall issue to the Secretary of the Township a certificate of
approval as a requirement to final plan approval.
§ 205-21. Hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be located at accessible points throughout the
subdivision when a public water supply is available. Hydrants shall be
spaced according to the standards of the Second Class Township Code112
and the recommendation of the Board of Fire Underwriters, and in no event
shall any hydrant be located more than 600 feet from any dwelling.
§ 205-22. Sidewalks. [Amended 11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 18R;
3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 18W]
A. Where required. Sidewalks shall be required at any location where the
Supervisors shall determine that sidewalks are necessary for public
safety or convenience.
B. Construction requirements. The minimum specification for sidewalks
shall be concrete at a minimum of four feet in width and four inches
thick, except at driveway crossings where sidewalks shall be increased
to six inches thick with steel mesh. Concrete shall be 4,000 pounds per
square inch (psi), 6% air-entrained concrete with a minimum cement
content of 564 pounds at a maximum of five-inch slump. [Amended
3-10-1997 by Ord. No. 97-71S]
C. Concrete curing. Concrete shall be properly cured with white curing
compound as specified by Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Form No. 408. After 30 days, and also one month prior to dedication to
the Township, all sidewalks shall be sealed with a water-repellent
coating by rolling or spraying. [Amended 3-10-1997 by Ord. No.
97-71S]
D. Sidewalk detail. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance
with the standard detail design specifications set forth in Appendix A to
Ordinance 18, as amended.113
E. Driveway apron detail. Driveway aprons shall be constructed in
accordance with the standard detail design specifications set forth in
Appendix A to Ordinance 18, as amended.114
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
113. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
114. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-20 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-23
1:378
§ 205-23. Street names and signs.
All street names shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors upon
approval of the subdivision plan. Street name signs, approved by the
Township Supervisors, shall be placed at street intersections by the
subdivider, developer or builder.
§ 205-24. Streetlighting. [Amended 6-8-1987 by Ord. No. 18H;
11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 13-276S]
§ 205-25. Shopping centers. [Added 9-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-60;
amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 96-68115]
Each shopping center or retail land development of 50,000 square feet or
more shall submit a unified land development plan, in compliance with the
following standards (refer to Figure 205-25 for illustration116):
A. Streetlighting shall be installed along each street in each subdivision
and along each street front abutting a public street in each land
development by the developer and at the expense of the developer,
unless specifically waived by the Board of Supervisors.
B. A developer shall submit a plan showing compliance with this chapter
and the Montgomery Township street lighting specification, including
the type and location of each streetlight to be installed. This plan shall
also specify the supplier and installer of such lights. The plan will be
submitted for review and approval by the Township. No streetlights
shall be installed prior to such review and approval. The Township's
street lighting specifications may be amended and/or supplemented
from time to time by Board resolution.
C. Upon final approval of construction and dedication of all public
improvements, the developer shall dedicate the streetlights to the
Township and shall assign all applicable warranties to the Township.
D. All streetlights shall be mounted on metal streetlight standards or poles
designed for such purpose and shall be constructed in accordance with
Township street lighting specifications.
A. Entrance and interior circulation driveways. Entrance and interior
circulation driveways shall minimize hazards and confusion by limiting
access points and forming a coordinated system of internal circulation.
(1) Entrance driveways.
(a) The primary function is to provide access to distribution
driveways which lead to and from parking aisles. A secondary
function may be to provide access to storefront driveways.
115. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 205-25, Planting.
116. Editor's Note: Figure 205-25, Illustration of Shopping Center Design Standards, is located
at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-25
1:379
(b) Not more than two entrance driveways may be located along
each street frontage of the shopping center. Vehicular access
to all uses and building within the shopping center shall be
from interior driveways only, with no independent driveway
access to public streets.
(c) Entrance driveway separation distances.
[1] The primary entrance driveway, intended to carry the
largest volume of traffic, shall be located at least 500 feet
from any street intersection of an arterial road and 350
feet from an intersection of streets of a lower classification
or other entrance driveways.
[2] Other entrance driveways shall be located at least 250 feet
from any street intersection or intersection of other
entrance driveways with a street.
(d) To reduce hazards and congestion, no driveway intersections
shall be permitted along primary entrance driveways within
150 feet of the ultimate right-of-way of the street from which
access is taken and 100 feet for other entrance driveways.
(e) Primary entrance driveways shall be a minimum of 30 feet
wide and other entrance driveways shall be a minimum of 28
feet wide for two-way traffic, widened appropriately for turning
lanes at intersections. Right-turn-only entrance drives shall be
a minimum of 15 feet wide for each right-turn movement.
(2) Distribution driveways.
(a) The primary function is to distribute traffic between entrance
driveways and parking aisle driveways. Distribution driveways
should be generally parallel to the storefront driveway.
(b) Parking is prohibited along distribution driveways.
(c) Minimum cartway width: 26 feet.
(3) Parking aisle driveways.
(a) The primary function is to provide direct access to parking
spaces within parking areas.
(b) Excessively long parking aisle driveways shall be divided by
distribution driveways at intervals of 25 parking spaces (each
side).
(c) Minimum cartway width: 22 feet.
(4) Storefront driveways.
(a) The primary function is to provide access to storefronts of
principal buildings for dropoff and pickup and to facilitate
§ 205-25 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-25
1:380
internal traffic flow from other driveways. To reduce
interference with pedestrian traffic crossing the storefront
driveway, storefront driveways shall not be used as entrance
driveways.
(b) Parking is prohibited along storefront driveways, but dropoff
and pickup areas shall be provided as pull-off lanes in
convenient locations, a minimum of six feet wide by 75 feet
long.
(c) Minimum cartway width: 30 feet.
(5) Service driveways.
(a) The primary function is to provide access to loading and other
service facilities while minimizing interference with customer
traffic circulation.
(b) Only employee parking may be located along these driveways,
to the side or rear of principal buildings.
(c) Minimum cartway width: 30 feet.
(6) Driveways around buildings. All shopping center or other major
commercial developments shall have driveways on all sides of
buildings to allow complete circulation around buildings for cars,
service vehicles and emergency vehicles.
B. Parking lots.
(1) Parking lot units. For safety, efficiency and appearance, parking
lots shall be divided into units of not more than 150 parking spaces
each, in compliance with the driveway standards of § 205-25A,
above, and the parking area landscaping requirements in
Subsection C, below.
(2) Parking location. Sufficient parking for each use shall be located
convenient to each use without creating adverse effects on the
overall design of the center and its vehicular circulation system.
Parking areas may not be separated from the buildings they serve
by public streets, utility corridors or major internal driveways,
except for the storefront driveway.
C. Additional landscaping. In addition to the planting requirements of
§ 205-52, herein (street trees, softening buffers, screen buffers, etc.),
the following shall apply to shopping centers with more than 500
required parking spaces (paved plus reserve):
(1) Parking lot landscaping.
(a) The requirement of § 205-52D(1)(g) shall be modified so that
the parking area shall be divided by continuous islands
perpendicular to the parking spaces every 186 feet (six rows of
§ 205-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-25
1:381
§ 205-25.1. Development regulations. [Added 9-30-1996 by Ord. No.
96-60; amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 96-68]
parking at 120 feet, plus three parking aisle driveways at 66
feet). These divider islands shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide.
Planting shall comply with the softening buffer requirements
of § 205-52B(4) and (5), herein. Landscaped islands along
primary entrance driveways shall also comply with these
requirements.
(b) One additional large landscaped area shall be provided per 250
parking spaces to provide attractive focal points within the
parking lots. Each area shall be a minimum of 1,800 square
feet (10 parking spaces) and contain a minimum of five shade
trees or flowering trees, plus 10 flowering shrubs. Areas may
be combined to form fewer, larger landscaped areas when
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Storefront landscaping. A minimum of 25% of the area between the
curbline of the storefront driveway and the principal buildings
(stores) shall be landscaped with ornamental plant materials,
including flowering and evergreen trees and shrubs.
(3) Softening buffers. A softening buffer shall be provided and
maintained along all road frontages, primary entrance driveways
and boundaries of each retail center, including along the preserved
expressway corridor, in compliance with the planting requirements
of § 205-52B of the Township Code. Street trees, as required by
§ 205-52A, need not be provided.
(4) Screen buffers. A screen buffer shall be provided and maintained
along all boundaries that abut existing residential development, in
compliance with the planting requirements of § 205-52C, herein.
(5) Calculation of minimum landscaped coverage. The landscaped
areas required herein may be included in calculation of the
minimum landscaped or green area required in zoning.
D. Walkways. In addition to sidewalks for building access, walkways shall
be provided for access to remote parking areas, transit stops and
existing or proposed Township trails.
E. Transit facilities. Where deemed appropriate by the Board of
Supervisors, driveways shall be constructed sufficient to carry public
transit buses. In addition, bus stops and shelters may be required,
convenient to the principal buildings, or with direct pedestrian access
to the principal buildings.
A. The developer shall be required to widen the existing paved road
frontage abutting the commercial site, install curbing along the same,
install turning lanes and/or build acceleration and deceleration lanes to
provide for the safe and efficient ingress and egress of motor vehicles,
§ 205-25 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-25.1
1:382
as deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors and approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when required, and in
compliance with the Traffic Management Study as required herein.
B. To the greatest extent feasible, design of buildings, parking and service
areas shall minimize disruption of a site's natural features and utilize its
aesthetic values to enhance the character of the development.
C. Phased development shall be planned so that the foregoing
requirements and intent of these regulations shall be fully complied
with by the development of any phase.
§ 205-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-25.1
1:383

ARTICLE IV
Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 205-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons, to protect property and to promote the public welfare by
regulating and controlling the grading, excavating, removal or destruction
of topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover or land.
§ 205-27. Interpretation.
The provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this article
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this article shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this article, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall prevail.117
§ 205-27.1. Compliance with stormwater management. [Added
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 04-177S; amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
16-297ZS]
In addition to full compliance with Article IV, Erosion and Sediment Control,
an applicant's erosion and sediment control measures must comply with
Chapter 206, the Montgomery Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance.
§ 205-28. Grading permit.
A. Permits required. No person shall commence or perform any grading,
excavation, fill, topsoil removal or removal of vegetative cover without
first having obtained a grading permit from the Township Zoning
Officer upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer. A separate
grading permit shall be required for each site. One permit may cover
both an excavation and any fill made on the same site. A grading permit
will not be required, however, in the following situations, but in all other
respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply:
(1) An excavation which does not exceed 20 cubic yards total of
material removed.
(2) A fill which does not exceed 20 cubic yards of material deposited.
(3) An excavation below finished grade for the basements and footings
of a single-family residence, swimming pool or underground
structure authorized by building permit, an excavation for a
driveway between a single-family residence site and street or the
117. Editor's Note: Original § 210D, Definitions, as amended, which immediately followed this
section, now appears in Article II of this chapter. See § 205-6.
§ 205-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-28
1:385
grading of such excavated materials into the site from which
excavated, and including the provision of additional topsoil as may
be required for seedbed preparation.
(4) The Township may require the applicant to file a certificate of
insurance before the grading permit is issued. The amount of
insurance shall be prescribed by the Township based on the risk
involved, and the insurance shall be written by a company licensed
to do business in Pennsylvania. It must be noted on the grading
permit that neither the issuance of the grading permit nor
compliance with the permit shall relieve any person from any
responsibilities for damage to persons or property otherwise
imposed by law, nor shall the permit pose any liability upon the
Township for damages to persons or property. [Added 4-19-1993
by Ord. No. 93-9S]
B. No grading permit for any development site shall be issued until there
has been a site examination and approval by the Township Engineer.
[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 18M]
C. Permit fees. Before issuing a grading permit, the Township Secretary,
or designated Code Enforcement Official, shall collect a permit fee,
which permit fee shall be determined and set by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors, which shall, from time to time by resolution, review and
set the fees to be charged as a permit fee for a grading permit.
[Amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 18E; 4-19-1993 by Ord. No.
93-9S]
D. Topsoil standards. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 18M]
(1) Residential development. The developer shall strip back from each
residential lot and retain on each residential lot all topsoil from the
lot. There shall be no release of excess topsoil permitted until each
lot shall be graded with a minimum of eight inches of topsoil after
examination by the Township Engineer.
(2) Commercial/industrial development. After final grading there shall
be a minimum of eight inches of topsoil on the entire site other than
that portion of the site where there are buildings or other
impervious surface coverage. There shall be no release of excess
topsoil from the site until examination by the Township Engineer.
(3) The developer is not required to import topsoil to the site if an
eight-inch final depth cannot be achieved. In cases where the
original site has less than eight inches of topsoil at the start of
grading activities, the total amount available will become the
minimum topsoil requirement. No topsoil will be allowed to be
released from the site. [Added 3-23-1992 by Ord. No. 18X]
E. Expiration of permit. Every grading permit shall expire by limitation
and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not
been commenced within six months or is not completed within two
§ 205-28 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-28
1:386
§ 205-29. Erosion and sediment control.
years from the date of issue, provided that the Township Engineer
may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual
difficulties have prevented the work's being started or completed within
the specified time limits, grant reasonable extensions of time, and
provided that the application for extension of time is made before the
date of expiration of the permit.
F. Denial of permit; appeal.
(1) The Township Zoning Officer shall deny a grading permit where, in
his opinion, the work as proposed by the applicant may endanger
any property or any street or alley or fails to meet Township
standards. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to
endanger any property or streets or alleys or create hazardous
conditions, the Township Zoning Officer shall give due
consideration to possible saturation by rains, earth movements,
runoff of surface waters and subsurface conditions such as the
stratification and faulting of rock and the nature and type of the soil
or rock.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall promptly consider appeals from the
provisions of this section or from the determinations of the
Township Engineer, and the Board shall make determinations of
alternative methods, standards or materials when, in its opinion,
strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter is not
necessary. Any applicant or permit holder shall have the right to
appeal to any court of competent jurisdiction from any decision or
determination of the Board of Supervisors.
A. General.
(1) For qualifying tracts, no changes shall be made in the contour of
the land; no grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the
topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be
commenced until such time that a plan or proposal for minimizing
erosion and sedimentation has been processed with and reviewed
by the Montgomery Township Planning Commission or there has
been a determination by the Township Engineer that such plans are
not necessary.
(2) Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall,
as a minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the
Montgomery County Soil and Water Conservation District as
contained in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, June
1970. The Township Engineer or other officials, as designated, shall
ensure compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of
which are available from the District or the Secretary of
Montgomery Township.
§ 205-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-29
1:387
B. Principles. The following measures are effective in minimizing erosion
and sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in the control
plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where deemed necessary by the Township, the
rate of surface water runoff will be structurally retarded.
(9) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris drains, sediment basins, silt
traps or similar measures.
(10)On all areas to be paved, the base shall be installed immediately
upon final grading of the road.
C. Grading for drainage. In order to provide more suitable sites for
building and other uses, to improve surface drainage and to control
erosion, the following requirements shall be met:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding,
and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding, except where approved
by the Board of Supervisors on the recommendation of the
Township Engineer.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to adequately
handle the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet,
such as a curbed street, storm drain or natural watercourse. Where
§ 205-29 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-29
1:388
drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from
buildings, they shall be sodded or planted as required and shall be
of such slope, shape and size as to conform with the requirements
of the Township.
(3) Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in
swales or watercourses.
(4) Excavations and fills.
(a) Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than 2:1 unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved
by the Board of Supervisors when handled under special
conditions.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping
surfaces of fills.
(c) Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(d) Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(e) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(f) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(g) Grading will not be done in such a way so as to divert water
onto the property of another landowner without the expressed
written consent of the affected landowner.
(h) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control will be exercised.
(i) Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or
bridges.
(j) Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil
or earth, the grading permit shall be subject to the following
additional limitations and requirements:
[1] The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of
time, said time limit to be determined by the Township
Engineer and to be specified on the grading permit.
[2] Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and
exposed surfaces of the fill to a depth not less than four
inches and sufficient to conceal all materials other than
clean soil or earth within the fill. Where the nature of the
§ 205-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-29
1:389
§ 205-30. General responsibilities.
fill requires, the Township Engineer may require clean soil
or earth to be placed over the top and exposed surfaces of
the fill to a depth sufficient to conceal all materials at the
end of each day's operations.
[3] No grading permit shall be issued for the filling of
materials other than clean soil or earth until a faithful
performance bond in the amount of the Township
Engineer's estimated cost of adequately covering such fill
with clean soil or earth has been furnished to the
Township. Such bond shall be executed by a corporate
surety or by the principal, as the Township may require,
and shall be subject to the approval of the Township
Solicitor as to form. In lieu of said bond, a cash deposit in
said amount may be made with the Township or with a
bank or trust company, approved by the Township
Solicitor, which shall act as escrow agent.
(k) Notice to adjacent property owners. Before commencing any
excavation or fill which will affect an adjoining property or
structures thereon, the person making or causing the
excavation to be made shall give written notice to the owners
of said adjoining properties or structures not less than 14 days
before such excavation is to be made. Adjoining properties and
structures shall be protected as provided in the Township
Building Code.118,119
A. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the person,
corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to remove it
from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to
repair any damage at his expense as quickly as possible.
B. Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
subdivision of land development is the responsibility of the developer
until they are accepted by the Township or some other official agency,
after which they become the responsibility of the accepting agency.
C. It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity doing
any act on or across a communal stream, watercourse or swale or upon
the floodplain or right-of-way thereof to maintain, as nearly as possible
in its present state, the stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or rightof-
way during the pendency of the activity and to return it to its original
or equal condition after such activity is completed.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
119. Editor's Note: Original § 210G, Destruction of Trees, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 18G.
§ 205-29 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-30
1:390
D. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
entirely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to their
point of open discharge at the property line or at the communal
watercourse within the property.
E. No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow of,
alter or construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or
commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal
stream or watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the
Township or, when necessary, the Pennsylvania Department of Forests
and Waters.
F. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of said watercourse and of such width as will be adequate
to contain the maximum rate of runoff from the fully developed area
upstream.
G. Each person, corporation or other entity which makes any surface
changes shall be required to:
(1) Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it to the point of
discharge into the common natural watercourse of the drainage
area.
(2) Handle existing and potential off-site runoff through his
development by designing to adequately handle storm runoff from
a fully developed area upstream.
(3) Pay his proportionate share (i.e., the proportion that the area of his
land bears to the area of the fully developed drainage area) of the
total cost of off-site improvements to the common natural
watercourse based on a fully developed drainage area.
(4) Provide and install at his expense, in accordance with Township
requirements, all drainage and erosion control improvements
(temporary and permanent) as required by the erosion and
sediment control plan or proposal.
H. The Township will assume the responsibility for maintaining an open
and free flowing condition in all minor streams, watercourses and
drainage systems constructed or improved in accordance with the
Township design criteria which are necessary for proper drainage, in
the discretion of the Township, if adequate right-of-way exists or can be
acquired.
I. The Township shall be required to:
(1) Assess and collect the cost of off-site improvements to the common
natural watercourse, except those required to existing state roads.
Collection may be delayed until the assessed land is approved for
development.
§ 205-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-30
1:391
§ 205-31. Escrow fund. [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 18L]
§ 205-32. Other design standards; review and approval of plans.
(2) Acquire easements for such common natural watercourse
improvements.
(3) Supervise such improvements to completion.
A. Before accepting dedication of a retention basin, the Township shall be
paid by the developer a required escrow fund according to the schedule
set forth in Subsection B.
B. Calculation of fund: [Amended 12-6-1993 by Ord No. 93-29;
1-25-1999 by Ord. No. 98-103S]
Annual lawn maintenance:
Dedicated area (acres) of detention basin lot x $900/year =
plus
Annual fence maintenance:
Length of fence (feet) x $15 (if chain link) x 1.10 ÷ 30 years =
or
Length of fence (feet) x $10 (if post & rail) ÷ 15 years Length x 0.12
plus
Annual tree maintenance:
Length of fence (feet) ÷ 30 (feet) x $25/year =
Detention basin escrow fund = (annual lawn maintenance + annual
fence maintenance + annual tree maintenance) ÷ .06
A. The Board of Supervisors, in its consideration of all preliminary plans of
subdivision and land development, shall condition its approval upon the
execution of a formal agreement to provide erosion and sediment
control measures as required by this article.
B. The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment
control measures shall be in accordance with the standard
specifications on file with the Township, including specifications for the
following:120
(1) Debris basin (pages 56 through 70).
(2) Grade stabilization structure (pages 52 through 55).
(3) Grassed waterway or outlet (pages 47 through 51).
(4) Mulching (pages 26 through 36).
120. Editor's Note: Page references in this Subsection B are to the Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook of June 1970, available from the Township Secretary.
§ 205-30 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-32
1:392
(5) Sodding (pages 26 through 36).
(6) Temporary cover for critical areas (pages 9 through 12).
(7) Temporary diversion (pages 37 through 41).
(8) Permanent diversion (pages 42 through 46).
(9) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on prepared
seedbed (pages 13 through 18).
(10) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on unprepared
seedbed (pages 19 through 22).
(11) Drainage, main or lateral (pages 84 through 87).
(12) Drain (pages 71 through 83).
C. Stream channel construction on watersheds with drainage areas in
excess of 320 acres, or in those cases where downstream hazards exist,
will conform to the criteria established by the Power and Water
Resource Board, Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters.
D. Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation, as approved,
shall be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements, as
required under the Montgomery Township Subdivision Regulations.
E. The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion and
sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the final plats of
subdivision or land development and become a part thereof.
F. At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer to ensure conformance with the
plan as approved. During the construction, further consultative
technical assistance shall be furnished, as required, by the Township
Engineer and the Montgomery County Soil and Water Conservation
District. During this development phase, the Township Zoning Officer
shall inspect the development site and enforce compliance with the
approved plans.
G. No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved or a
building permit issued unless there has been a plan approved by the
Board of Supervisors that provides for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation consistent with this article and all fees required herein
have been paid or provided for and the required improvements have
been installed in strict accordance with Township standards and
specifications or the Township is assured by means of a proper
completion guaranty in the form of a bond or a deposit of funds in
escrow sufficient to cover the cost of improvements as estimated by the
Township.
§ 205-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-32
1:393
§ 205-33. Violations and penalties.
§ 205-34. Other remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, the proper official of this Township, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township any appropriate
action or proceeding at law or in equity, whether by legal process or
otherwise, to prevent such unlawful work and to restrain and abate such
violations.
H. Permission for clearing and grading prior to recording of plats may be
obtained under temporary easements or other conditions satisfactory to
the Township.
I. In the event that the developer proceeds to clear and grade prior to
recording plats, without satisfying conditions specified under
Subsection G above, the Board may revoke the approval of the
preliminary plan.
A. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this article
has been served by the Township Zoning Officer or any other person
designated by him, such violation shall be discontinued immediately.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable,
on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $500 for each and
every offense, and whenever such person shall have been notified by
the Township Zoning Officer or by service of a summons in a
prosecution or other written notice that he is committing such
violations of this article, each day that he shall continue such violation
after such notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by
a like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like
fines or penalties are now by law collected.
§ 205-32 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-34
1:394
ARTICLE V
Flood Damage Prevention
[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
§ 205-35. Areas of special flood hazard; purpose.
Those areas defined as "floodplain" by the Floodplain Conservation District
of the Township Zoning Ordinance121 shall be subject to the requirements
and restrictions contained in the Zoning Ordinance and the following
additional regulations which are intended to conform to the requirements
of Section 60.3d of the National Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 90-448, and
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act P.L. 851, No. 166 of 1978.122
It is the purpose of these regulations to:
§ 205-36. Restrictions on development in areas of flood hazard.
The following requirements shall apply for all subdivision and land
developments proposed in Montgomery Township:
A. Regulate any subdivision or land development of floodplain land areas
that is permitted or as a result of an approved variance in order to
promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Require that each subdivision lot or development site in floodplain
areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate access; and
that public facilities which serve such sites be designed and installed to
preclude flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision and
development of unprotected floodplain areas.
D. Maintain the certification of Montgomery Township and the eligibility of
the property owners in Montgomery Township for the benefits of the
National Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 90-448.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, when it is deemed necessary for health,
safety or welfare of the present and future population of the area and
necessary to the conservation of water, drainage and sanitary facilities,
restrict subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the
floodplain of any stream or drainage course.
B. No subdivision or land development shall be approved if the proposed
development or improvements will, individually or collectively, increase
the established flood level or regulatory flood elevation (where
available).
C. If the Board of Supervisors determines that only a portion of a proposed
plan can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
122. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 205-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-36
1:395
§ 205-37. Excavation and grading.
Where any excavation or grading is proposed or where any existing trees,
shrubs or other vegetative cover will be removed, the developer shall
consult the Montgomery County Conservation District representative
concerning plans for erosion and sediment control and a report on the soil
characteristics of the site in order to determine the type and magnitude
of development the site may safely accommodate. Before undertaking any
excavation or grading, the developer shall conform to all pertinent laws,
regulations and ordinances of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
Montgomery Township.
§ 205-38. Storm drainage facilities.
shall require that development proceed consistent with this
determination.
D. When a developer does not intend to develop the plan himself and the
Board of Supervisors determines that additional controls are required
to ensure safe development, it may require the developer to impose
appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall
be inserted on every deed and noted on the record plan.
E. Any new construction and substantial improvements, including the
placement of prefabricated buildings, located in flood-prone areas shall
be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure, be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage and be
constructed by methods and practices minimizing flood damage.
F. Prospective developers shall consult with the Code Enforcement Officer
to make a determination as to whether or not the proposed subdivision
or land development is located within an identified floodplain.
G. Where not prohibited by this chapter or any other codes or ordinances,
land located in a floodplain may be subdivided or developed in
accordance with this chapter and any other codes or ordinances
regulating such development.
A. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of a onehundred-
year storm without risk to persons or property. The drainage
system shall ensure drainage at all points along streets and ensure
conveyancy of drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal
sites.
B. The Board of Supervisors may require in a floodplain, an underground
storm sewer system to accommodate one-hundred-year floods and a
secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods.
Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage
plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of
increased peak runoff onto adjacent properties.
§ 205-36 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-39
1:396
§ 205-39. Changes in watershed.
Any development which creates a significant change in the characteristics
of the watershed, thus increasing volume and/or velocity of surface water
runoff due to the decrease in retention and infiltration of stormwater,
shall not be permitted until guaranties are made of erosion, sedimentation,
inundation and water drainage from peak periods of precipitation to provide
for controlled disposal of excess surface water. Such improvements must
satisfy the requirements and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, Bureaus of Water Quality Management and Dams
and Encroachments.
§ 205-40. Elevation of streets.
The finished elevation of proposed streets within floodplain area shall be
a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation or regulatory flood
elevation, where available. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without increasing flood heights onto lands of other
property owners.
§ 205-41. (Reserved)123
§ 205-42. Sewers.
A. Within floodplain areas:
(1) New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and all
appurtenances thereto, including but not limited to pumping
stations, shall be floodproofed up to a point 1 1/2 feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
B. The Board of Supervisors may prohibit installation of sewage disposal
facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such systems will not
function due to high groundwater, flooding or unsuitable soil
characteristics. The Board of Supervisors may require that the
developer note on the plan and in any deed of conveyance that on-site
sewage disposal systems are prohibited in designated flood-prone
areas.
C. The Board of Supervisors may prescribe adequate methods for waste
disposal. If a public sanitary sewer system is located within or near the
proposed subdivision or land development, the Board of Supervisors
shall require the developer to connect to this system where practical,
based upon the recommendation of the Montgomery Township Sewer
123. Editor’s Note: Former § 205-41, Elevation of new construction and improvements, as
amended, was repealed 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-297ZS.
§ 205-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-42
1:397
§ 205-43. Water supply.
All new or replacement water systems in floodplain areas, whether public
or private, shall be floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the established
base flood elevation or regulatory flood elevation, where available. If there
is an existing public water supply system within or near the subdivision or
land development, the Board of Supervisors shall require the developer to
connect to this system where practical and shall prescribe the procedures
to be followed by the developer in connecting to said system.
§ 205-44. Elevation of other utilities.
All other new or replacement public or private utilities and facilities shall
be elevated or floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the established base
flood elevation or regulatory flood elevation, where available.
§ 205-45. Erosion and sedimentation.
The Board of Supervisors, in its consideration of any preliminary plan
of subdivision and land development, shall condition its approval upon
the execution of measures designed to prevent accelerated soil erosion
and resulting sedimentation, as required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources. All applicable regulations and permit
requirements of said Department, as stipulated in its Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual, shall be followed by all parties engaged in
earth-moving activities.
§ 205-46. Natural watercourses.
All continuously flowing natural watercourses shall be maintained in their
natural state, except that removal of debris and correction of severe erosion
shall be required.
§ 205-47. Intermittent watercourses.
Authority Engineer, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed
by the developer in connecting to said system.
A. Intermittent watercourses shall be maintained essentially at their
existing alignments and gradients except that they may be improved by
minor regrading and shall either be planted in grass or provided with
water erosion preventive improvements such as riprap. Paving of such
watercourses shall not be allowed, nor shall piping, except under roads,
driveways and walkways.
B. Intermittent watercourses often are significant elements of the
headwaters of larger streams and are usually small in size. Therefore,
developers should be encouraged to design and build around and with
respect for these drainageways, and the Board of Supervisors may
allow rerouting of these drainageways only when serious
§ 205-42 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-47
1:398
considerations so warrant or when the site drainage will be improved
by such proposed alignment changes.
§ 205-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-47
1:399

ARTICLE VI
Landscaping
[Added 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 18G; amended 1-25-1988 by Ord. No.
18J; 1-9-1989 by Ord. No. 18K; 5-14-1990 by Ord. No. 18Q;
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; 9-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-48;
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-63; 6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 02-158ZS;
10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 02-160S; 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-241S]
§ 205-48. Intent.
The intent of these regulations is to promote practical community
development by retarding erosion and sedimentation and stimulating
groundwater recharge, to retard glare and heat pollution, to stimulate
air purification and oxygen regeneration, to provide for noise abatement,
to assist in vehicular and pedestrian control, to maintain the Township's
natural amenities, and to provide for the harmonious development of
contiguous properties in different zoning districts by providing certain
minimum landscaping requirements for all future land developments.
§ 205-49. General requirements.
A. The standards of design of this article should be used to judge the
adequacy of subdivision or land development proposals. Where, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, the literal application of these
standards in certain cases would work undue hardship or be plainly
unreasonable, the Township Landscape Architect, Township Shade Tree
Commission, or Township Engineer may recommend to the Board of
Supervisors such reasonable exceptions as will not be contrary to the
public interest. The Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust the
standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing
substantial conformance with the objectives of the regulations.
B. The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements. The Board of Supervisors reserve the right, in any case,
to request that the requirements listed herein exceed these standards if
conditions so warrant.
C. It is required that all landscape plans be prepared by a landscape
architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and familiar
with this Landscape Article in order to promote the proper use and
arrangement of plant materials. These plans shall be reviewed by
appropriate Township staff members and consultants and approved by
the Township Board of Supervisors.
D. (Reserved)
E. All plant material shall meet the standards of the American Standard
for Nursery Stock by the American Nursery and Landscape Association
(2004), or most recent edition, and the height, spread and/or caliper for
trees and shrubs listed in § 205-56, Recommended plant list. A note
shall be added to the landscape plan stating this.
§ 205-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-49
1:401
§ 205-50. (Reserved)
§ 205-51. Landscape plan requirements.
F. All plant material shall be installed in accordance with the standards
outlined in Appendix C of this chapter.124 Appropriate details must be
included on the plans. All plant material shall be pruned in accordance
with ANSI A300 pruning standards.
G. Guaranty. All plant material shall be guaranteed for 18 months from the
day of final approval of the landscape installation by the Township
Landscape Architect, Township Shade Tree Commission, or the
Township Engineer. Any plant material 25% or more of which is dead
shall be considered dead. A tree shall be considered dead when the
main leader has died or 25% of the crown is dead. Any dead plant
material shall be replaced and installed according to the approved
planting practices.
H. The developer shall contact the Township in writing to request a final
inspection for acceptance at the end of the guaranty period. These
inspections will be performed when plant materials are in full leaf only
(May 1 through November 15). All guaranty escrow funds will be
released upon acceptance at the end of the guaranty period. The
guaranty will be extended until 30 days after receipt of the request
letter following May 1. Should the end of the guaranty period occur
after November 15, the guaranty period shall be extended to May 15.
I. Nonconforming uses. Whenever there is a nonconforming use, the
nonconforming use must comply with the most restrictive landscape
requirements for either the land use or the zoning district in which it is
located or the zoning district which would normally permit the
nonconforming use.125
A. The landscape plan will show the following information:
(1) Plan scale, date, North arrow and location map with zoning district
designations for the site and adjacent properties.
(2) Property lines, setback lines, easements and the adjacent zoning
district(s).
(3) Location of all existing and proposed buildings.
(4) Location of all existing and proposed roads, parking, service areas
and other paved areas.
(5) Location of all outside storage and trash receptacle areas.
124. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
125. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection J, Size, species and quality standards, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-298S.
§ 205-49 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-51
1:402
(6) Location of sidewalks, berms, fences, walls, freestanding signs and
the site lighting.
(7) Stormwater management facilities. The design of discharge
structures, headwalls and wingwalls shall be shown and slopes
shall be detailed enough so that it is clear that no slopes are
greater than the four-to-one ratio permitted by § 205-18D(3)(d).
(8) Location of existing and proposed underground, surface and abovegrade
utilities such as utility lines, utility easements, transformers,
hydrants, manholes and mechanical equipment.
(9) Location of existing individual trees with trunks eight inches in
diameter or more, measured at 4 1/2 feet (diameter at breast
height - DBH) above the ground. Trees in hedge rows, groves and
woodlands with trunk diameters of eight inches in diameter or
more may be shown by indicating the outer canopy or dripline of
the tree grouping. Existing trees shown as masses must be labeled
with an approximate quantity and caliper (refer to § 205-53) as
calculated. This information may be shown on the existing features
plan.
(10) Location, caliper and common name of all trees greater than 23
inches in caliper measured 4 1/2 feet (DBH) above the ground. All
such trees shall be shown on the existing conditions plan or
landscape plan whether these trees exist in open areas, hedge rows
or continuous wooded areas.
(11) A replacement tree plant schedule using the trees proposed for
replacement of existing trees of eight-inch-or-greater caliper
destroyed by development. The schedule shall indicate the
botanical and common name, height, spread, caliper, quantity and
special remarks for all proposed replacement trees. This may be
made a part of the general plant schedule.
(12) A plant schedule listing all new plant materials (trees, shrubs, and
ground cover) proposed for planting. This schedule shall indicate
the botanical and common name, height, spread, caliper, quantity
and special remarks for all proposed plant materials. All plant
material proposed as a part of the subject subdivision and/or land
development project to meet the minimum article requirements as
noted herein shall be included in this schedule. Supplemental
plantings proposed in addition to the required plantings are not
required to be included. Any plantings not included in the plant
schedule shall not be used to meet article requirements for street
trees, softening buffers, screen buffers, parking area landscaping,
additional landscaping for shopping centers, stormwater
management facility landscaping, individual lot landscaping, steep
slope landscaping, and/or replacement trees.
§ 205-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-51
1:403
§ 205-52. Planting requirements.
Street trees, softening buffers, screen buffers, parking area landscaping,
stormwater management facility landscaping, individual lot landscaping
and other landscaping shall be provided according to the standards listed
under § 205-49, General requirements, and the following specific planting
requirements:
(13) Plans will be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50
feet and show all existing and proposed contours at a minimum of
two-foot intervals.
(14) Details for the planting, mulching, saucering and staking of trees,
the planting of shrubs and any other details which depict other
related installations shall be in accordance with the requirements
of this article, including those outlined in Appendix C.126
(15) Existing natural features such as water bodies, floodplain,
wetlands, rock outcroppings, and slopes in excess of 15%.
(16) Location of all proposed plant species to include trees, shrubs,
ground cover, perennials and lawn. All plant material proposed as a
part of the subject subdivision and/or land development project to
meet the minimum article requirements as noted herein shall be
included in this plan. Supplemental plantings that are proposed in
addition to the required plantings are not required to be included.
Any plantings not included as a part of the landscape plan shall not
be used to meet article requirements for street trees, softening
buffers, screen buffers, parking area landscaping, additional
landscaping for shopping centers, stormwater management facility
landscaping, individual lot landscaping, steep slope landscaping,
and/or replacement trees.
(17) Information, in the form of notes or specifications, concerning
planting and lawn areas. Such information shall specify the quality
requirements and material for planting, seeding, sodding, ground
cover, mulching and the like.
(18) A detailed cost estimate shall be attached to the final landscape
plan submission for the preparation of the land development
agreement. This estimate shall show the value of all proposed
landscaping. Unit costs for plant material shall include costs for
materials, labor and guaranty and shall be so stated on the
estimate provided.
(19) Limits and details of temporary fencing to be used for protection of
existing trees and shrubs during construction.
A. Street trees.
126. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-51 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-52
1:404
(1) When required. Street trees shall be required for any subdivision or
land development where suitable street trees do not exist as part of
the design and construction of:
(a) New streets.
(b) New sidewalks or pedestrian ways.
(c) Existing streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, highways, bicycle
trails or pathways when they abut or lie within the subdivision
or land development.
(d) Access and/or private driveways to residential developments
serving four or more dwelling units.
(2) Location.
(a) Street trees shall be spaced to permit the healthy growth of
each tree, but in no instance shall they be closer than 40 feet
on center nor farther than 50 feet on center for each side of the
street.
(b) Street trees shall be planted no closer than one foot outside the
legal or ultimate street right-of-way, whichever is greater.
Street trees shall be planted no closer than six feet to any
public sidewalk. Where small street trees are to be planted in
accordance with the requirements of § 205-56B, they shall be
permitted to be planted no closer than five feet to any public
sidewalk. [Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-298S]
(c) At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 50 feet to
the intersection of the curb.
(d) Where trees exist along a roadway, the existing shade trees
over four inches in caliper within 10 feet of the legal or
ultimate right-of-way, whichever is greater, may be utilized to
meet the street tree requirement. (The caliper of existing trees
is measured at a height of 4 1/2 feet DBH above ground level.)
Where such existing street trees are over 75 feet apart, new
shade trees shall be planted between those existing street
trees at no greater than 50 feet on center and no less than 25
feet from any existing tree.
(e) When appropriate due to existing groups of trees at or near the
street right-of-way, street trees may be grouped in an informal
arrangement. If this method of street tree arrangement is
selected, the distance between tree groupings or other street
trees may not exceed 80 feet and the number of trees shall be
equivalent to the three trees per 100 linear feet of street
frontage per side.
(f) Street trees are not to be planted beneath utility lines. If utility
lines are present, the street tree row is to be moved to a
§ 205-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-52
1:405
distance not less than 15 feet nor more than 25 feet away from
the line of the poles. Where this is not possible due to space
limitations or other reasons, a lower-growing species shall be
provided from the list of Recommended Small Street Trees
in § 205-56B, but shall still be located the greatest feasible
distance from the utility line. [Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-298S]
(3) Street trees shall be a species listed in § 205-56A or § 205-56B.
[Added 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 16-298S]
B. Softening buffers.
(1) Definition. A "softening buffer" is a mixed perimeter landscape
planting intended to provide an informal separation between
neighboring developments. It is not intended to be an impenetrable
screen.
(2) When required.
(a) Softening buffers are required in all zoning districts and for all
uses.
(b) The buffer area shall be used for no purpose other than
planting of trees, shrubs and lawn to meet planting
requirements and may include a wall or fence that meets the
standards outlined in § 230-148, Fences and walls, of the
Montgomery Township Zoning Code.127 Any wall or fence shall
be constructed in such a manner that it will not conflict with
sight lines or conflict with the character of the abutting
district.
(c) The applicant shall not be required to provide a buffer yard
planting if existing planting, topography or man-made
structures are acceptable to the Board of Supervisors.
(d) Within the buffer area, no slopes shall be steeper than one foot
in height for each four feet in width (slope of 25%).
(e) A softening buffer is not required where a screen buffer is
provided.
(3) Location.
(a) Softening buffers shall be aligned adjacent and parallel to the
entire property perimeter, including rights-of-way, but may be
sited on any position of the property if permitted by the Board
of Supervisors. Plant material used in the softening buffer shall
be located within 20 feet of the property line or within 20 feet
of the legal or ultimate right-of-way lines, whichever is farther
from the street center line, and may be grouped informally.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-52 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-52
1:406
(4) Quantity.
(a) In all zoning districts, four shade trees and eight shrubs shall
be included for each 100 feet of property perimeter.
(5) Plant material requirements.
(a) Not more than 20% of plants shall be evergreen.
(b) (Reserved)
(c) All plant material used shall meet minimum height
requirements as stated in § 205-56, Recommended plant list.
(d) Refer to § 205-56 for recommended plant material.
C. Screen buffers.
(1) Definition. A "screen buffer" is a predominantly evergreen
perimeter landscape planting intended to provide a formal visual
separation between neighboring developments. A "screen buffer" is
intended to be an impenetrable visual screen. However, it is not
intended to be a monocultural planting.
(2) When required.
(a) Refer to Table 2 for requirements in each zoning district or
land use.128
(b) In addition, all truck loading, outside storage areas,
mechanical equipment and trash receptacles shall be screened
from view from streets and abutting residential areas in
accordance with the standards for screen buffer size and type
[§ 205-52C(4)(a) and (b) below].
(3) Location.
(a) The screen buffer is to provide a visual barrier between
adjacent land uses. The screen buffer shall be aligned adjacent
and parallel to side and rear property lines and right-of-way
boundaries or may be sited in any position on the property if
permitted by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Screen buffers shall be located within 20 feet of the property
lines or within 20 feet of the legal or ultimate right-of-way
lines, whichever is farther from the street center line.
(c) A screen buffer may be required adjacent to the front yard or
street right-of-way if a residential district is the adjacent land
use.
128. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-52
1:407
(d) The screen buffer shall be arranged to provide clear-sight
triangles at street intersections and shall not obstruct sight
distance requirements of the Township. The screen planting
shall be continuous and shall be broken only at points of
vehicular or pedestrian access.
(4) Screen buffer size and type.
(a) Trees used for screen buffers shall be composed of 100%
evergreen varieties. Shrubs may be a combination of
evergreen and deciduous varieties. The required plant material
shall be so arranged as to provide immediate visual screen of
50% and at least eight feet in height at the time of planting.
Where the screen buffer planting requires more than 50 trees,
no more than 1/2 of these trees will be of a single variety.
(b) Walls, fences and/or earth berms may be used in combination
with plant material subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors and in conformance with § 230-148, Fences and
walls, of the Zoning Ordinance.129
(c) Screening shall consist of evergreen trees in double rows,
staggered 10 feet to 15 feet on center. The spacing will depend
on the type of trees used; pine: 15 feet; arborvitae: five feet;
spruce: 15 feet; American holly: 10 feet; fir: 15 feet. Evergreen
or deciduous shrubs may be used to supplement the evergreen
trees.
D. Parking area landscaping.
(1) Requirements and design standards.
(a) Refer to Table 1 for requirements in each zoning district or
land use.130
(b) (Reserved)
(c) A maximum of 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a row
without a landscape island of 15 feet in width. If required, this
island shall contain not less than 290 square feet of planting
area.
(d) Raised continuous concrete curbing shall be required around
all planting islands. In addition, raised planter islands shall be
placed at the end of each row of parking spaces beginning and/
or terminating at an internal circulation drive.
(e) One shade tree shall be placed in each 290 square feet of
planting island. The use of salt-tolerant species is encouraged.
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
130. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-52 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-52
1:408
(f) When parking areas are located within 100 feet of a public
street, the perimeter of the parking area that is adjacent to the
public street shall be softened by a continuous low hedge
around the outside perimeter. Required buffer shrubs may not
be used to meet this requirement.
(g) For any land use where the total number of parking spaces
exceeds 100, the parking area shall be divided by continuous
islands perpendicular to the parking spaces every 124 feet.
This is four rows of parking at a total width of 80 feet and two
aisles at a total width of 44 feet. These divider islands shall be
a minimum of 20 feet wide. Four shade trees and eight shrubs
shall be required per 100 linear feet of landscape island.
Entrance driveways shall be 20 feet wide and shall contain on
each side four shade trees and eight shrubs per 100 linear feet.
Snow storage areas shall be provided and planting design shall
consider pedestrian circulation.
(h) (Reserved)
(i) One additional large landscaped area shall be provided per 250
parking spaces to provide attractive focal points within the
parking lots. Each area shall be a minimum of 2,000 square
feet (10 parking spaces) and contain a minimum of five shade
trees or flowering trees, plus 10 flowering shrubs. Areas may
be combined to form fewer, larger landscaped areas when
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
E. Additional landscaping for shopping centers. In addition to the other
requirements of § 205-52, the following shall be required for shopping
centers.
(1) Storefront landscaping. One shade tree, One ornamental/flowering
tree, and four deciduous and/or evergreen shrubs shall be required
per 100 linear feet of street frontage. Storefront landscaping may
be located at any reasonable location on the site so long as the
plantings are visible from the street right-of-way and are not
located within any required rear yard. These requirements shall be
in addition to any required street trees and softening buffers.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) (Reserved)
(4) Calculation of minimum landscaped coverage. The landscaped
areas required herein may be included in calculation of the
minimum landscaped or green area required by zoning.
F. Stormwater management facility landscaping.
(1) Whenever a detention basin or retention pond is provided, such
facility shall conform to the requirements set forth in § 205-18D,
§ 205-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-52
1:409
Stormwater retention and detention, the standard specifications on
file with the Township and the landscaping requirements of this
section.
(2) The facility shall be so designed that the planting in and adjacent to
it shall not have a negative effect on the hydrological function of
the facility.
(3) Drainageways, detention basins and retention ponds should be
aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the adjacent land use.
Creative grading and innovative stormwater management facility
forms are encouraged. Where stormwater management facilities
adjoin existing woodlands, it is recommended that plantings be
selected to blend with the natural surroundings.
(4) Basin floors.
(a) Floors dry most of the year shall be landscaped in one or a
combination of the following:
[1] Seeded or sodded lawn.
[2] Seeded in low-maintenance wildflowers and meadow
grasses.
[3] Wildflower sod.
[4] All-season ground cover.
(b) Basin floors, portions of a floor or channels which are wet most
of the year shall be landscaped in one or a combination of the
following:
[1] Wet habitat grasses and ground covers.
[2] Seeded in wildflower mix for wet areas.
(5) Stormwater management facility slopes. Slopes shall be seeded in
PennDOT Formula "L" modified seed mix or an appropriate
naturalized seed mix.
(6) Stormwater management facility perimeter plantings. There shall
be a minimum of one shade tree and two shrubs for each 30 linear
feet of stormwater management facility perimeter. To promote
diversity, up to 50% of the shade trees may be substituted with an
option of two flowering trees or two evergreen trees. No tree
planting shall be placed on the fill area of the berm.
G. Individual lot landscaping.
(1) When required.
(a) Individual lot landscaping includes those areas of the site not
covered by § 205-52A through F above.
§ 205-52 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-52
1:410
(b) Refer to Table 1 for requirements in each zoning district or
land use.131
(2) Location.
(a) Trees specified under this section shall be planted either on the
lot or within the general open space of the subdivision, at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
(b) They may be planted in the front, side or rear yard of the
property.
(3) Size and type.
(a) Trees shall be a minimum of three inches in caliper and of the
recommended species listed in § 205-56.
(b) Refer to Note 1 on Table 1132 for substitutions of plant type.
H. Steep slope landscaping.
(1) When required. Steep slope landscaping includes disturbed areas
of the site with slopes in excess of one foot vertical to six feet, eight
inches, horizontal (6.67:1, slope of 15%).
(2) Sodded lawn. Sodded lawn is required on slopes of 6.67:1 (15%) or
greater, except where ground cover plantings have been provided.
(3) Ground cover plantings.
(a) Ground cover plantings are required on slopes of three to one
or greater (one foot vertical to three feet horizontal, 33%).
(b) Refer to § 205-56, Recommended plant list, and planting
practices for recommended ground covers.
(4) Supplemental plantings.
(a) Supplemental plantings of shrubs, ornamental trees,
evergreen trees and shade trees may be planted as a part of
steep slope landscaping.
(b) Supplemental plantings may be applied toward the
replacement tree requirements of § 205-54, except where
these plantings are required by other sections of this chapter.
I. Landscaping of other areas. Any area not used for buildings, structures,
paved areas, planting beds or screening shall be planted in an allseason
ground cover or lawn and other landscape materials in
accordance with the landscape plan. Existing vegetative materials shall
be preserved wherever possible.
131. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
132. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter
§ 205-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-52
1:411
§ 205-53. Preservation and protection of existing trees.
J. Existing vegetation. In cases where preserved natural features existing
on site duplicate or essentially duplicate the planting requirements of
this chapter, these requirements may be waived or amended by the
Board of Supervisors.
A. All subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out in such a
manner so as to preserve the healthy trees and shrubs on the site
whenever possible.
(1) Every effort should be made to preserve any individual tree or trees
of significant size or historical value as determined by the Township
Shade Tree Commission, Township Landscape Architect,
Montgomery Township Historical Society, or Board of Supervisors.
B. During the construction of any site, trees and shrubs, as defined herein,
shall be protected by snow fencing or similar protection fencing to
ensure that there is no encroachment within the area of their dripline
by changing grade, trenching, stockpiling of building materials or
topsoil or the compaction of the soil and roots by any motor vehicle,
unless the following regulations are met:
(1) The root area within the dripline of any tree or group of trees may
be encroached upon to a maximum of 1/4 of the total root area.
(2) Existing trees whose root area (dripline) has been encroached upon
by more than 1/4 of the total area will not be considered to be
preserved and must be replaced.
(3) At the direction of the Township Engineer, Township Shade Tree
Commission or Township Landscape Architect, existing trees which
have not been adequately protected are to be removed and
replaced.
C. Tree preservation requirements.
(1) On all parts of the site, except for those areas within the legal or
ultimate right-of-way, whichever is greater, of existing streets, all
trees shall be protected in accordance with the following
requirements:
Tree Size
(inches) Amount of Preservation Required*
8 to 23 60%
Over 23 to 48 60%
Over 48 100%
§ 205-52 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-53
1:412
*NOTE: The preservation percentage required for trees in the
eight-inch-to-twenty-three-inch range shall be calculated on a
tree-for-tree basis. The preservation percentage for all trees over
23 inches to 48 inches and over 48 inches shall be calculated
based upon the total caliper-inches of trees in the size range.
(2) Trees which are diseased and should be removed for safety or for
the protection of other healthy trees, as determined by a certified
arborist, may be removed and will not be subject to the
requirements for tree preservation or tree replacement if the
report of the arborist is submitted to and approved by the
Township.
(3) Tree removal necessary to accommodate public utilities or public
facilities to be constructed or installed by the Township or the
Township Authority shall be exempt from tree preservation
standards.
(4) Tree replacement/reforestation procedures. In the event that an
applicant removes more than 40% of the trees of eight inches to 23
inches in caliper, or more than 40% of the caliper-inches of the
trees over 23 inches to 48 inches in caliper, then the applicant shall
be required to reforest the lot in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) The total number of trees removed in excess of the required
preservation rate for eight-inch-to-twenty-three-inch trees
shall be replaced at a rate of 1:1.
(b) The total number of trees removed in excess of the required
preservation rate for over twenty-three-inch-to-forty-eight-inch
trees shall be replaced based on the following formula:
[1] The total caliper-inches removed in excess of the amount
permitted shall be multiplied by 0.60 to determine the
total number of caliper-inches of trees to be replaced on
the lot.
[2] The amount of caliper-inches determined above shall then
be divided by three to determine the total gross number of
trees to be planted on the site for reforestation.
(c) Replacement trees shall meet the following specifications:
[1] Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
caliper.
[2] Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height.
[3] Two flowering trees may be substituted for one deciduous
tree, provided that the minimum size of the flower trees
shall be eight feet in height.
§ 205-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-53
1:413
§ 205-54. Replacing trees destroyed by development.
[4] Ten shrubs may be substituted for one deciduous tree,
provided that the minimum size of the shrubs shall be 24
inches for evergreen and 30 inches for deciduous shrubs.
[5] Up to 25% of the new trees to be planted may be of the
evergreen variety.
[6] Trees required to be planted under these replacement/
reforestation procedures shall be in addition to any/all of
the trees required by the planting requirements of
§ 205-52 above.
[7] At the discretion of the Township, the required
replacement trees may be planted on other lands within
the Township.
(5) Trees over 48 inches in caliper shall be preserved.
A. (Reserved)
B. Calculation and estimation of existing trees shall be performed before
any clearing commences and shall be performed in the presence of the
Township Engineer, Township Shade Tree Commission or Township
Landscape Architect and shall be based on the following procedure:
(1) Trees greater than 23 inches, as measured at 4 1/2 feet (DBH)
above natural grade, will be documented individually and noted on
the landscape plan or existing conditions plan.
(2) The quantity of all trees eight inches and over standing in masses of
over 20 trees shall be estimated by the following method:
(a) Three one-hundred-foot-by-one-hundred-foot-square areas will
be staked out in locations acceptable to the owner/developer
and the Township Engineer, Township Shade Tree Commission
or Township Landscape Architect.
(b) The quantity of trees in each area will be counted and the
totals averaged to determine the average number of trees per
10,000 square feet of wooded area.
(c) This average quantity per area will be used to determine both
the quantity of trees being removed and the quantity of trees to
remain in large masses.
C. Calculation and estimation of existing trees remaining after
construction shall be performed by the Township Engineer, Township
Shade Tree Commission or Township Landscape Architect based on a
procedure similar to that noted above.
§ 205-53 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-54
1:414
§ 205-55. Performance bond.
§ 205-56. Recommended plant list. [Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
16-298S]
The following is the recommended list of trees, shrubs and ground cover
for use in Montgomery Township. The Board of Supervisors may permit
other planting types if they are hardy to the area, not subject to blight
or disease and of the same general character and growth habit as those
listed below, and are not identified by the Pennsylvania Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) as invasive. Plants included on
the DCNR "watch list" as potentially invasive, and any associated varieties,
hybrids, and cultivars of invasive species, will not be permitted. Plants
listed below that may be added to DCNR's list of invasive plants after
the adoption of this section shall not be permitted. The size requirements
listed herein for shade trees, evergreen trees, ornamental trees, deciduous
shrubs, evergreen shrubs and ground cover are the minimum acceptable
sizes at the time of installation. Size and grading standards for all plants
shall conform to those specified by the American Nursery and Landscape
Association's American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2014 or
latest edition.
D. An estimated quantity of replacement trees required is to be shown on
the landscape plan or on a schedule as replacement trees to be
contributed to the Township. Refer to § 205-51.
E. (Reserved)
A. No building permit shall be issued unless a performance bond or other
surety approved by the Township Solicitor has been filed with the
Township. Such surety shall be in an amount equal to the cost of
purchasing, planting, maintaining, and replacing all vegetative
materials for a period of 18 months after written acceptance of the
landscape installation by the Township.
B. This condition may be satisfied through a land development agreement
with sufficient and appropriate financial guaranties suitable to the
Board of Supervisors.
A. Street trees: minimum of three inches in caliper, 14 feet to 16 feet in
height with a full branching structure. All main branches shall be
pruned to a height of eight feet above the ground. Street trees shall
have a single, straight trunk and unpruned central leader free of
codominant stems within the lower half of the crown, and shall be free
of disease and mechanical damage.
(1) The following street trees shall be located a minimum of six feet
from sidewalks and roadways.
Acer rubrum - Red maple
Carpinus betulus - European hornbeam
§ 205-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-56
1:415
Cercidiphyllum japonica - Katsuratree
Gingko biloba - Gingko (Male varieties only)
Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden raintree
Liquidambar styraciflua var. 'Rotundiloba' - Seedless sweetgum
Metasequoia glyptrostroboides - Dawn redwood
Nyssa sylvatica - Blackgum
Ostrya virginiana - American hophornbeam
Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth oak
Quercus alba - White oak
Quercus borealis - Northern red oak
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet oak
Quercus imbricaria - Shingle oak
Quercus lyrata - Overcup oak
Quercus montana - Chestnut oak
Quercus palustris - Pin oak
Quercus phellos - Willow oak
Quercus rubra - Red oak
Tilia cordata - Littleleaf linden
Tilia tomentosa - Silver linden
Ulmus spp. - Elm (Dutch elm disease resistant varieties only)
Zelkova serrata - Japanese zelkova
(2) The following street trees shall be located a minimum of 10 feet to
12 feet from sidewalks and roadways.
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple
Carya glabra - Pignut hickory
Carya ovata - Shagbark hickory
Celtis occidentalis - Hackberry
Cladrastis kentukea - Yellowwood
Fagus grandifolia - American beech
Fagus sylvatica - European beech
Gleditsia triacanthos var. 'inermis' - Thornless honeylocust
Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky coffeetree (fruitless forms)
Liriodendron tulipifera - Tulip poplar
Magnolia acuminata - Cucumbertree magnolia
Platanus x acerifolia - London planetree
§ 205-56 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-56
1:416
B. Small street trees: the following trees are suitable for use where street
trees are to be planted in the vicinity of overhead utility lines in
accordance with the requirements of § 205-52A(2)(f), or where a front
yard setback of 25 feet or less is required. The Board of Supervisors
may permit the use of small street trees where it is determined that
limiting circumstances make the use of small street trees appropriate.
Small street trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper, 12 feet to
14 feet in height, and shall have a full branching structure. All main
branches shall be pruned to a clearance height of six feet above the
ground. Small street trees shall have a single, straight trunk and
unpruned central leader free of codominant stems within the lower half
of the crown, and shall be free of disease and mechanical damage. All
street trees shall be located a minimum of five feet from sidewalks and
roadways.
Acer campestre - Hedge maple
Acer griseum - Paperbark maple
Carpinus caroliniana - American hornbeam
Cercis canadensis - Eastern redbud
Chionanthus virginicus - Fringetree
Cornus florida - Flowering dogwood
Cornus kousa - Kousa dogwood
Cornus mas - Cornelian cherry
Cornus x 'Rutban' - Aurora dogwood
Cotinus coggyria - "Smoke tree"
Crataegus crusgalli var. inermis - Thornless cockspur hawthorn*
Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorn*
Crataegus viridis 'Winter King' - Winter king hawthorn*
Malus spp. - 'Adirondack,' 'Prairifire,' or 'Professor Sprenger'*
Oxydendrum arboreum - Sourwood
Prunus spp. - 'Autumnalis,' 'Kwanzan,' 'Okame,' or 'Yoshino'*
Syringa reticulata 'Ivory Silk' or 'Summer Snow'
Styrax japonicas - Japanese snowbell
Tilia cordata 'Halka'
* Other disease-resistant varieties permitted where the average
landscape size does not exceed 35 feet in height.
C. Shade trees: minimum of three inches in caliper, 14 feet to 16 feet in
height with a full branching structure. All main branches shall be
pruned to a height of seven feet above the ground. Trees shall have a
single, straight trunk and unpruned central leader free of codominant
stems within the lower half of the crown, and shall be free of disease
§ 205-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-56
1:417
and mechanical damage. All trees shall be located a minimum of six feet
from sidewalks and roadways.
Acer rubrum - Red maple
Acer saccharinum - Silver maple
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple
Carya glabra - Pignut hickory
Carya ovata - Shagbark hickory
Celtis occidentalis - Hackberry
Cercidiphyllum japonica - Katsuratree
Cladrastis kentukea - Yellowwood
Fagus grandifolia - American beech
Fagus sylvatica - European beech
Gingko biloba - Gingko (male varieties only)
Gleditsia triacanthos var. 'inermis' - Thornless honeylocust
Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky coffeetree (fruitless forms)
Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden raintree
Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweetgum, including var. 'Rotundiloba'
Liriodendron tulipifera - Tulip poplar
Metasequoia glyptrostroboides - Dawn redwood
Nyssa sylvatica - Blackgum
Ostrya virginiana - American hophornbeam
Platanus x acerifolia - London planetree
Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth oak
Quercus alba - White oak
Quercus bicolor - Swamp white oak
Quercus borealis - Northern red oak
Quercus coccinea - Scarlet oak
Quercus falcata - Southern red oak
Quercus imbricaria - Shingle oak
Quercus lyrata - Overcup oak
Quercus macrocarpa - Burr oak
Quercus montana - Chestnut oak
Quercus muehlenbergii - Chinkapin oak
Quercus palustris - Pin oak
Quercus phellos - Willow oak
Quercus rubra - Red oak
Quercus shumardii - Shumard oak
§ 205-56 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-56
1:418
Taxodium distichum - Bald cypress
Tilia americana - American basswood
Tilia cordata - Littleleaf linden
Tilia tomentosa - Silver linden
Zelkova serrata - Japanese zelkova
D. Evergreen trees: minimum eight feet to 10 feet height, single leader
with no codominant stems, symmetrically branching to the ground, and
free of disease and mechanical damage.
Abies concolor - White fir
Chamaecyparis thyoides - Atlantic white cedar
Ilex opaca - American holly
Juniperus virginiana - Eastern redcedar
Picea abies - Norway spruce
Picea glauca - White spruce
Picea mariana - Black spruce
Picea pungens - Colorado spruce
Pinus banksiana - Jack pine
Pinus echinata - Shortleaf pine
Pinus resinosa - Red pine
Pinus rigida - Pitch pine
Pinus strobus - White pine
Pinus taeda - Loblolly pine
Pinus thunbergii - Japanese black pine
Pinus virginiana - Virginia scrub pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii - Douglas fir
Thuja occidentalis - Eastern arborvitae
Tsuga canadensis - Eastern hemlock
E. Ornamental/flowering trees: minimum 1 1/4 inches caliper, eight feet to
10 feet height and full branching structure. Trees shall have a single,
straight trunk and unpruned central leader free of codominant stems
within the lower half of the crown, and shall be free of disease and
mechanical damage. Clump, shrub and multistem forms shall be
permitted at a minimum height of eight feet to 10 feet and a minimum
root ball diameter of 28 inches to 32 inches.
Acer campestre - Hedge maple
Acer griseum - Paperbark maple
Acer pennsylvanicum - Striped maple
§ 205-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-56
1:419
Amelanchier arborea - Downy serviceberry
Amelanchier canadensis - Serviceberry
Amelanchier laevis - Allegheny serviceberry
Asimina triloba - Common pawpaw
Betula lenta - Sweet birch
Betula nigra - River birch
Betula papyrifera - Paper birch
Betula populifolia - Gray birch
Carpinus caroliniana - American hornbeam
Cercis canadensis - Eastern redbud
Chionanthus virginicus - Fringetree
Cornus florida - Flowering dogwood
Cornus kousa - Kousa dogwood
Cornus mas - Cornelian cherry
Cornus x 'Rutban' - Aurora dogwood
Cotinus coggyria - "Smoke Tree"
Crataegus crusgalli var. inermis - Thornless cockspur hawthorn*
Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorne*
Crataegus viridis 'Winter King' - Winter king hawthorn*
Diospyros virginiana - Common persimmon
Halesia carolina - Carolina silverbell
Larix laricina - American larch
Magnolia tripetala - Umbrella magnolia
Magnolia virginiana - Sweetbay magnolia
Magnolia x soulangeana - Saucer magnolia
Malus spp. - 'Adirondack,' 'Prairifire,' or 'Professor Sprenger'*
Oxydendrum arboreum - Sourwood
Prunus spp. - 'Autumnalis,' 'Kwanzan,' 'Okame,' or 'Yoshino'*
Ptelea trifoliata - Wafer-ash
Sassafras albidum - Common sassafras
Styrax japonicas - Japanese snowbell
Syringa reticulata - 'Ivory Silk' or 'Summer Snow'
Tilia cordata 'Halka'
Taxodium distichum - Baldcypress
* Other disease-resistant varieties permitted.
§ 205-56 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-56
1:420
F. Deciduous shrubs: minimum acceptable container classes #5, #7, #10,
with a thirty-inch minimum height, symmetrically branched to the
ground, and free of disease and mechanical damage.
Aesculus parviflora - Bottlebrush buckeye
Alnus rugosa - Speckled alder
Alnus serrulata - Smooth alder
Aronia arbutifolia - Red chokecherry
Aronia melanocarpa - Black chokecherry
Callicarpa americana - American beautyberry
Calycanthus florida - Sweetshrub
Castanea pumila - Allgheny chinquapin
Ceanothus americanus - New Jersey tea
Cephalanthus occidentalis - Buttonbush
Clethra alnifolia - Summersweet clethra
Comptonia peregrina - Sweetfern
Cornus amomum - Silky dogwood
Cornus racemosa - Gray dogwood
Cornus sericea - Redosier dogwood
Corylus americana - American filbert
Cotinus obovatus - American smoke tree
Euonymus americanus - Strawberrybush
Fothergilla gardenii - Dwarf fothergilla
Fothergilla major - Large fothergilla
Hamamelis vernalis - Spring witch hazel
Hamamelis virginiana - Common witch hazel
Hydrangea arborescens - Smoothleaf hydrangea
Hydrangea quercifolia - Oakleaf hydrangea
Hypericum prolificum - Shrubby St. John's wort
Ilex verticillata - Winterberry holly
Itea virginica - Virginia sweetspire
Leucothoe racemosa - Sweetbells leucothoe
Lindera benzoin - Spicebush
Myrica pennsylvanica - Northern bayberry
Physocarpus opulifolius - Eastern ninebark
Rhododendron spp. - Native deciduous azalea and rhododendron
varieties
Rhus glabra - Smooth sumac
§ 205-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-56
1:421
Rosa carolina - Carolina rose
Rosa palustris - Swamp rose
Rosa virginiana - Virginia rose
Salix discolor - Pussy willow
Sambucus canadensis - Elderberry
Spiraea japonica 'Anthony Waterer' - Anthony Waterer spiraea
Spiraea x vanhouttei - Vanhoutte spiraea
Styrax americanus - American snowbell
Symphoricarpos albus - Snowberry
Symphoricarpos orbiculatus - Coralberry
Viburnum acerifiolium - Mapleleaf viburnum
Viburnum carlesii - Koreanspice viburnum
Viburnum cassinoides - Witherod viburnum
Viburnum dentatum - Arrowwood viburnum
Viburnum lentago - Nannyberry viburnum
Viburnum prunifolium - Blackhaw viburnum
Viburnum trilobum - American cranberrybush viburnum
G. Evergreen shrubs: minimum acceptable container classes #5, #7, #10,
with a twenty-four-inch minimum height and eighteen-inch minimum
spread, symmetrically branched to the ground, and free of disease and
mechanical damage. Spreading evergreen shrub forms shall be
permitted at a minimum twenty-four-inch spread and in minimum
acceptable container classes #5, #7, and #10.
Ilex glabra - Inkberry holly
Juniperus communis - Common juniper
Kalmia latifolia - Mountain laurel
Leucothoe fontanesiana - Drooping leucothoe
Pieris floribunda - Mountain andromeda
Rhododendron spp. - Native evergreen azalea and rhododendron
varieties
Taxus canadensis - Canadian yew
H. Ground cover plants:
(1) Heavily rooted herbaceous plants provided in minimum four-inch
pots and spaced at a maximum of 12 inches on center, and free of
disease and mechanical damage.
Asarum canadense - Wild ginger
Hemerocallis hybrids - Daylilies
§ 205-56 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-56
1:422
§ 205-57. through § 205-63.
Liriope muscari - Liriope
Liriope spicata - Lily turf
Pachysandra procumbens - Alleghany pachysandra
(2) Woody ground cover plants to be provided in minimum two-gallon
containers with a minimum 15 inches spread. Plants shall be
spaced at a maximum of 36 inches on center, and shall be free of
disease and mechanical damage.
Juniperus horizontalis - Creeping juniper
Rhus aromatica 'Gro Low'
Xanthorhiza simplicissima - Yellowroot
(3) Basin floor coverings:
Grass: PennDOT Formula "L" modified seed or other naturalized
mix
Naturalized seed mix
Wildflower sod
§ 205-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-57
1:423

ARTICLE VII
Mobile Home Regulations
[Added 7-26-1977 by Ord. No. 18C]
§ 205-64. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be followed in the construction or
alteration of all mobile home parks (as defined in this chapter) planned
for tracts of land 15 acres or greater in size in accordance with Article X
(Mobile Home Park District) of the Township Zoning Ordinance.133 These
regulations are in addition to those set forth in Article X of the Township
Zoning Ordinance and other applicable regulations of this Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance as referenced herein;
compliance with all regulations of both chapters is required unless the
subdivision and land development provisions are waived by the governing
body or zoning variances are granted by the Township Zoning Hearing
Board.
§ 205-65. Use regulations.
The uses allowed within a mobile home park shall be as specified in § 230-55
of the Township Zoning Ordinance.134
§ 205-66. Application procedure.
All applications for Mobile Home Parks shall follow the procedures
established in § 230-56 of the Township Zoning Ordinance.135 No application
for subdivision or land development approval for the construction of a
mobile home park will be accepted until the governing body has given use
approval pursuant to the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
§ 205-67. Site design.
All regulations of §§ 230-59 through 230-61 of the Township Zoning
Ordinance136 shall be adhered to in mobile home parks. In addition thereto,
the following regulations shall apply:
A. Arrangement of structures and facilities. The tract, including mobile
home stands, patios, other dwellings and structures and all tract
improvements, shall be organized in relation to topography, the shape
of the plot and the shape, size and position of structures and common
facilities. Special attention shall be given to new mobile home designs
and to common appurtenances that are available.
B. Adaptation to tract assets. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling or
structure shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum disturbance of
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-67
1:425
the land and a minimum elevation difference between the floor level of
the unit and the ground elevation under it. Existing trees and shrubs,
rock formations, streams, floodplains, steep slopes and other natural
features of the tract shall be preserved to the maximum extent
practical. Favorable views shall be emphasized by the plan.
C. Courts and spaces. Groups or clusters of units so placed as to create
interior spaces and courtyards shall be incorporated whenever feasible.
D. Orientation. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a variety
of orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many units with
their long sides facing the street rather than their ends, in order to
provide variety and interest. Site layout shall be designed to ensure that
mobile home units are offset to block long uninterrupted vistas between
the units.
E. Street layout. Gridiron layouts and street patterns unrelated to the
topography of the site are to be avoided.
F. Roadways.
(1) Standards. All applicable standards for streets and roads contained
in the Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of 1964, and as subsequently amended, shall be adhered
to for all public roads in and abutting mobile home developments.
In those developments wherein the roads are to be maintained as
private internal roadways owned and maintained by the mobile
home park operators or owned and maintained in common by the
residents/owners of the individual lots, the standards shall be as
follows:
(a) Right-of-way. There shall be an equivalent right-of-way, as
defined herein, reserved along those streets which are
designed to function as feeder or collector roads and which
connect major exterior roadways, form major loops, traverse
the park or provide major or important access to adjacent
parcels. No equivalent right-of-way is required on other roads.
On those roads where an equivalent right-of-way is required,
parallel parking may be permitted, but perpendicular or angle
parking is discouraged.
(b) Pavement. The pavement width of all residential streets
serving as access to mobile home lots shall be not less than 26
feet, except that this may be reduced to not less than 20 feet on
a street serving as access to no more than 20 mobile home lots
where parking is prohibited along the road and off-street
visitor parking is provided in common areas within 300 feet of
all dwelling units at a rate of 0.3 space per mobile home.
(c) Grades. Gradients on all residential streets shall not exceed
10%.
§ 205-67 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-67
1:426
(d) Culs-de-sac. A paved turnaround area with a minimum radius
of 50 feet shall be provided at the closed end of any cul-de-sac
road serving as the sole access of four or more mobile home
lots. No permanently closed cul-de-sac street shall exceed 500
feet in length or serve as the sole access to more than 20
mobile home lots.
(e) Other requirements. All other applicable requirements of this
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance relating to
grades, vertical curves, horizontal curves, tangents between
curves, sight distance, construction specifications, intersection
alignment, intersection radius, interconnection of adjacent
parcels and similar regulations shall be adhered to in all mobile
home park developments.
(2) Access limitations. Mobile home lots may have direct access only
onto minor internal streets. Direct access from a mobile home lot
shall not be permitted onto the street(s) from which the mobile
home development gains primary access.
(3) Access streets. Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to
minimize congestion and hazards at the entrances or exits and
allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance
roads connecting the park streets with a public street or road shall
have a minimum road pavement width of 34 feet for a distance of at
least 100 feet from the public street.
(4) Conversions. Any road built as a private road and later proposed for
conversion to a public road shall be brought up to the applicable
standards for public roads prior to being ordained as a public way,
unless this requirement is waived by the governing body
subsequent to determining that compliance with the requirement
would have a negative effect on the mobile home park.
G. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home parks shall provide safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width for
intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between
individual mobile homes, mobile home park streets, all community
facilities provided for the residents and off-site pedestrian traffic
generators, such as schools, bus stops, commercial centers, etc.
These pedestrian walkways may parallel vehicular roadways,
where they shall only be required on one side, or they may form a
separate but coordinated system away from streets. Walkways
must be provided wherever pedestrian traffic is concentrated and
where school children congregate but may be waived elsewhere if
the applicant successfully demonstrates a lack of need.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations, such common walks shall have
a minimum width of four feet. Where these walks parallel
§ 205-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-67
1:427
roadways, they shall be separated from the road pavement by a
distance of at least four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All dwellings shall be connected to common walks
to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved
street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two
feet.
H. Parking.
(1) Spaces required. Two all-weather off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling either on the same lot therewith or in
common parking facilities, provided that parking areas contained
therein are within 150 feet of the mobile home lots for which they
are intended.
(a) Aisle width. Where common parking facilities are to be used,
no parking aisle will be less than 22 feet in width.
(b) Required green areas. Ten percent of all common parking
areas on each lot shall be devoted to green areas consisting
mostly of natural vegetation which must be interspersed within
the paved parking area to channel traffic or divide parking
areas. The green areas required by this section shall not
constitute a portion of any green area on common open spaces
otherwise required by this chapter or any other ordinance or
regulation of the Township. The exact design and location of
the green areas required by this section shall be indicated on a
development or subdivision or other similar plan and be
permanently maintained as such.
I. Common open space. In addition to the requirements of § 230-61 of the
Township Zoning Ordinance, the following regulations shall also apply:
(1) Common open space and buffer areas design. Common open space,
buffer areas and the circulation system should be designed as an
integrated open space system, utilizing techniques that will
produce maximum open space benefit to the resident consistent
with the unit density and density concentration on the park site.
(2) Standards for location and management. Common open space
areas shall be located and designed as areas easily accessible to
residents and preserving natural features. Common open space
areas should include both active recreation areas for all age groups
and, particularly where the site includes a watercourse or hilly or
wooded areas, land which is left in its natural state. At least 25% of
the open space areas shall be located in an area not subject to
flooding and have reasonable topography and slope to be used for
active recreational activities. No such active recreational open
space areas shall be less than 1/4 acre in size.
J. Buffers.
§ 205-67 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-67
1:428
(1) General requirement. Along all exterior property boundary lines,
except those which abut another mobile home park, there shall be a
permanent buffer at least 15 feet in depth, unless this is waived
pursuant to Subsection J(4) or (5) below. A screen buffer, as defined
herein, shall be provided wherever the mobile home park abuts
existing residential uses, with the exception of mid-rise or high-rise
structures, and where abutting other types of uses when deemed
necessary by the Township governing body to provide sufficient
buffering and transition. A softening buffer, as defined herein, shall
be provided wherever the mobile home park abuts existing mid-rise
or high-rise residential uses; existing commercial, office, industrial,
and institutional uses; any existing street [as modified by
Subsection J(3) below], drive or parking area; or open (not wooded)
undeveloped land. An open buffer shall be provided wherever the
mobile home park abuts wooded undeveloped land or where more
extensive buffers are deemed unnecessary by the governing body.
(2) Components. The minimum components of each type of buffer shall
be as follows:
(a) Screen buffer. The primary component of a screen buffer shall
be a row of evergreen trees at a height of not less than six feet
when planted, spaced not more than 10 feet apart on center,
and these trees shall be of such species to attain a height of not
less than 20 feet at maturity. Also required as a secondary
component of the buffer is one of the following: mounding (the
use which is encouraged), provided that the slopes shall be a
maximum of 3:1; visually opaque fencing not greater than six
feet in height; and coniferous shrubbery. Any combination of
evergreen trees, coniferous shrubs, mounding, fencing or
other natural vegetation or man-made material is allowed,
provided that an effective visual screen at least 15 feet in
height above the adjacent ground elevation in the mobile home
park is achieved within a reasonable time. But whenever only
vegetation is used there shall be at least a double row of
evergreen trees, with the trees in one row offset five feet from
the trees in the other row and the rows at least five feet apart.
(b) Softening buffer. The primary component of a softening buffer
shall be a row of trees, spaced not more than 25 feet apart on
center, at least 25% of which shall be evergreen. The
evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height when planted
and shall attain at least 20 feet in height at maturity. Any
deciduous trees shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper,
measured one foot above ground level, and eight feet in height
when planted and shall attain a height of not less than 20 feet
in maturity. These trees shall be interspersed with other
allowable components, including any other type of trees,
shrubs, mounding, fencing and/or similar natural or man-made
§ 205-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-67
1:429
elements having a visible vertical dimension, or any
combination thereof.
(c) Open buffer. The open buffer shall, as a minimum, consist of
grass, ground cover and/or similar vegetative material and
may include trees, shrubs or other natural or man-made
landscaping materials, but it shall be mostly vegetative rather
than paved.
(3) Street boundaries. Rather than the extensive buffers described in
Subsection J(2) above, the use of a single row of deciduous trees at
least eight feet in height when planted and at least 20 feet in height
at maturity, with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on center, may
be provided along all property boundaries which abut a street
wherever necessary for adequate sight distance or where the
governing body determines this to be a sufficient buffer to protect
the welfare and safety of the community.
(4) Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a mobile home park
occurs along natural features which function as buffers, including
but not limited to mature vegetation, significant grade changes or
stream valleys, which are likely to be permanently preserved,
buffering may be waived along that edge(s) upon approval of the
governing body.
(5) Buffer alternative. Buffers may also be waived by the governing
body where the mobile home park abuts a single-family residential
use, if only detached modular homes or conventionally-built singlefamily
detached dwellings, but no mobile home, are constructed
within 200 feet of that property boundary.
(6) Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained permanently and,
in the event of death or other destruction, shall be replaced within
one year by the persons responsible for maintenance when death or
destruction occurred.
(7) Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with
the final plans, showing all pertinent information, including the
location, size and specie of all individual trees and shrubs to be
preserved or planted, or, alternately, the general characteristics of
existing vegetation masses which are to be preserved.
K. Drainage considerations. The following site drainage requirements
shall apply to all mobile home parks.
(1) Surface water. The ground surface in all parts of park shall be
graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient
manner. The velocity of runoff during and after development shall
not exceed 1.5 feet per second as required by Chapter 102, Section
102.22(c) of the Erosion Control Rules and Regulations, published
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, July
1, 1973, and as subsequently amended.
§ 205-67 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-67
1:430
§ 205-68. Common elements.
(2) Ponds and retention structures. Surface water collectors and other
bodies of standing water capable of breeding mosquitoes and other
insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
(3) Wastewater. Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary
sewer line shall not be deposited upon the ground surface in any
part of a mobile home park or the surrounding properties.
(4) Erosion and sediment control. All applicable regulations and permit
requirements to prevent accelerated soil erosion and resulting
sedimentation as stipulated in the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Manual, July 1, 1973, and as subsequently amended, shall be
followed by all parties engaged in establishment of a mobile home
park. (The manual is available at the office of the Montgomery
County Soil and Water Conservation District, Court House,
Norristown, Pennsylvania.)
L. Ground cover requirement. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of
every mobile home park shall be paved or covered with stone
screenings or other solid material or protected with a vegetative
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation of
dust during dry weather. Impervious pavement shall be kept to a
minimum. All ground surfaces shall be appropriately maintained.
M. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as needed and
arranged in a manner which will protect the mobile home park
residents, neighboring properties and adjacent highways from direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be
required where deemed necessary by the governing body for the safety
and convenience of the mobile home park residents and shall be
installed by the developer.
N. Required illumination of park circulation systems. All parks shall be
furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaires
placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average
maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians
and vehicles at night:
(1) All parts of the park circulation system: an average of 0.6
footcandle with a minimum of 0.1 footcandle.
(2) Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections,
parking areas and steps or step ramps: individually illuminated
with a minimum of 0.3 footcandle.
A. Ownership. Common open space and roadways shall be offered for
dedication to the Township or public use assured through easements or
other appropriate means in any mobile home park where all lots will be
§ 205-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-68
1:431
§ 205-69. Utilities.
sold or where the Township governing body determines those facilities
to be key elements in the open space and/or circulation systems of the
Township, in accordance with the Township Comprehensive Plan. In
all other cases, these and other common elements may be retained in
private ownership or may be owned jointly by the residents of the park.
B. Maintenance. Prior to development plan approval, provision acceptable
to the Township governing body and Township Solicitor for the
maintenance of all common elements which will not be owned and
maintained by a governmental agency shall be established.
C. Service building. The structure or structures containing the
management office and other common facilities shall be conveniently
located for the use intended. Consolidation of laundry, recreation,
management and other common facilities in a single building and
location is encouraged, if the single location will adequately serve all
mobile home lots.
D. Locator system. All mobile home units, structures and facilities
contained in the park shall have an address for purposes of establishing
residency and location of units for mail and parcel delivery and
emergency services. The address shall be part of a logical locator
system for unit orientation by street or area names and numbers. The
locator system shall be approved by the Township.
A. Water supply.
(1) General requirements. An adequate supply for domestic, auxiliary
and fire-fighting uses shall be provided for all uses included in the
mobile home park, including service buildings and accessory
facilities, in accordance with § 230-57I of the Township Zoning
Ordinance.137
(2) Water distribution system. All water piping, fixtures and other
equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
state and local regulations as well as those of the servicing utility.
(3) Individual water-riser pipes and connections for mobile homes.
(a) Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the
confined area of the mobile home stand at a point where the
water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby
ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(b) The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter
consistent with the standards of the servicing public utility or,
in lack thereof, of the Township Engineer and shall terminate
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-68 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-69
1:432
at least four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet
shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from
heaving and thawing actions of the ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location
of the riser pipe.
(4) Fire protection. All mobile home parks shall be provided with fire
hydrants to meet the specifications of the Middlestates Department
Association of Fire Underwriters. In addition, those hydrants shall
be in sufficient numbers to be within 600 feet of all existing and
proposed mobile homes and other dwellings and structures,
measured by way of accessible streets or common areas.
B. Sewage disposal.
(1) General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system
shall be provided in all mobile home parks for conveying and
disposing of sewage from dwellings, service buildings and
accessory facilities in accordance with § 230-57I of the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Sewer system. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of
sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other
movements and shall be separated from the water supply system.
The system shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
all state and Township regulations, as well as those of the servicing
utility.
(3) Individual sewer connections for mobile homes.
(a) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a sewer-riser
pipe consistent with the standards of the servicing utility or, in
lack thereof, of the Township Engineer. The sewer-riser pipe
shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to
the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical
position.
(b) The sewer connection shall have an inside diameter and slope
as required by the servicing utility or, in lack thereof, by the
Township Engineer. All joints shall be watertight.
(c) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner
surface shall be smooth.
(d) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer-riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall
§ 205-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-69
1:433
be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
C. Utility systems, electricity and communications. Each mobile home unit
shall be provided electric and telephone connections, serviced by public
utility companies and installed in accordance with the utility's
specifications regulating such systems. Communication systems not
provided for by publicly regulated companies, television cables and
antennas included, shall be approved by the Township Engineer. All
utility distribution lines within the mobile home park shall be
underground installations.
D. Fuel supply and storage. Each mobile home unit shall be supplied with
and serviced by a fuel storage and delivery system.
(1) Natural gas system.
(a) Natural gas piping systems, when installed in mobile home
parks, shall be maintained in conformity with accepted
engineering practices and the regulations of the utility
company.
(b) Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an
approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet.
The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
(a) The design, installation and construction of containers and
pertinent equipment for the storage and handling of liquefied
petroleum gases shall conform to the Act of Pennsylvania
Legislation 1951, December 27, P.L. 1793, as it may be
amended; and to the regulations therefor promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or its
successor.138
(b) Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes,
service buildings or other structures, when installed, shall be
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and shall
include the following:
[1] Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at a safe location.
[2] Systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off gas. Such means shall be located outside the
138. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1321 et seq. This Act was repealed in part by the Underground
Storage Act of 1978. See 58 P.S. § 451 et seq.
§ 205-69 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-69
1:434
§ 205-70. Fire protection.
Portable hand-operated fire extinguishers of a type suitable for use on oil
fires and approved by the local fire prevention authority shall be kept in
each service building under park control and shall be required by the mobile
home operator to be placed in each mobile home in the park, located inside
the mobile home in a fixed location, preferably near a door but not in close
proximity to cooking facilities.
§ 205-71. Landscaping.
mobile home and shall be maintained in effective
operating condition.
[3] All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile
home shall be well supported and protected against
mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in
liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping
equipment or systems in mobile homes.
[4] Vessels of at least 12 United States gallons and less than
600 United States gallons gross capacity shall be
maintained in a vertical position and shall be securely but
not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning. No vessel shall be placed any closer than five
feet to a mobile home exit and no closer to any window
than three feet.
[5] No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or
located inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport,
mobile home or any other structure.
[6] All pipe connections shall be a flare type.
(3) Fuel oil supply systems.
(a) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
authority having jurisdiction when provided.
(b) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to
mobile homes shall be securely but not permanently fastened
in place.
(c) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall have shutoff valves located
within five inches of storage tanks.
(d) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and
shall not be less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
§ 205-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-71
1:435
§ 205-72. Foundation.
§ 205-73. Permits; fees; inspections.
A. No portions of tree masses or trees with a caliper of four inches or
greater shall be cleared unless clearly necessary for effectuation of the
proposed mobile home park development.
B. Applicants shall make all reasonable efforts to harmonize their plans
with the preservation of existing trees. In addition to plantings for
buffered setbacks, a mobile home park shall be provided with the
following landscaping requirements:
(1) Disturbed topsoil shall be stockpiled and replaced after
construction.
(2) Deciduous trees of varying species shall be planted within the
mobile home park at the ratio of two per mobile home. In the event
that a substantial portion of the tract is wooded and a substantial
number of trees remain after development, the governing body may
modify this requirement.
(3) Deciduous and/or evergreen shrubs of varying species shall also be
planted within the mobile home park at a ratio of at least four per
mobile home.
(4) Planting of landscaping material shall be in accordance with a plan
prepared by a registered landscape architect, and failure to carry
out the landscaping plan within such time shall warrant denial of
the park's annual license under § 205-73A(2)(b) hereof.
A. Each mobile home unit shall be placed upon an adequate foundation
system, as approved by the Township Engineer, that will secure the unit
from uplift, sliding, rotation or settling by reason of drainage, frost,
wind, vibration or other forces acting upon the structure. The
foundation system shall also provide for control of rodents and pests,
accumulation of refuse, unsafe storage of materials, moisture and
drainage control, air circulation, entrapment of explosive gases and
retardation of fire movement.
B. Skirting, if part of the foundation system, shall be complimentary to the
unit exterior surfaces and be reasonably resistant to infestation,
corrosion and marking from impact. Adequate provision shall be made
to ground all exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of the mobile
home unit.
C. The hitch or tow bar attached to the mobile home for transport
purposes shall be removed and remain removed from the mobile home
when it is placed on its mobile home stand.
A. Permits required.
§ 205-71 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-73
1:436
(1) Lots for sale. In those mobile home parks wherein some or all of the
mobile home lots will be sold individually (whether totally fee
simple, fee simple with a homeowners' association, condominium
or cooperative), no lot to be conveyed shall be developed or a
mobile home or other structure placed or constructed thereon until
the subdivision and/or land development plan has been properly
approved and the proper building and construction permits have
been issued for that lot in accordance with the standard procedures
for any building activity in Montgomery Township. No mobile home
or other structure shall be occupied until a valid occupancy permit
has been issued by the Township.
(2) Lots for lease. In those mobile home parks wherein some or all of
the mobile home lots will be leased, the following regulations shall
apply to the entire development exclusive of the lots being sold
individually:
(a) Initial permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or group to
construct, alter, extend or operate a mobile home park unless
or until that person or group obtains:
[1] A valid permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources in the name of the operator for a
specified construction, alteration or extension proposed;
and
[2] Valid permit(s) authorizing construction and initial
occupancy issued by the Montgomery Township Zoning
Officer in the name of the operator, which shall not be
issued until a copy of the Department of Environmental
Resources permit has been furnished, all permits for water
supply and sewage systems shall have been obtained and
all other requirements contained herein have been
complied with and final approval of the application has
been granted by the governing body.
(b) Annual licenses. In addition to the initial permits, the operator
of a mobile home park with lots for lease shall apply to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and to
the Montgomery Township Zoning Officer on or before the 15th
day of each year for an annual license to continue operation of
the mobile home park. The Zoning Officer shall issue the
annual license upon satisfactory proof that the park continues
to meet the standards prescribed by state agencies having
jurisdiction and the standards of this article and other
applicable Township ordinances. The license so issued shall be
valid for one year from the date of issuance.
B. Fees.
§ 205-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-73
1:437
§ 205-74. Maintenance and operation.
(1) Fees for the initial application and preliminary and final approvals
of any mobile home park shall be prescribed by resolution of the
governing body of Montgomery Township.
(2) The fee for the annual license required for mobile home parks
having lots for lease shall be prescribed by resolution of the
governing body and shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer with
the application for the annual license.
C. Inspection. Upon notification to the licensee, manager or person in
charge of a mobile home park with lots for lease, the Building Inspector
or Zoning Officer or other designated representative of Montgomery
Township shall make an inspection of the mobile home park to
determine compliance with this article and other applicable Township
ordinances. The Zoning Officer or other representative shall thereafter
notify the licensee of any instances of noncompliance and shall not
issue the annual license until the licensee has corrected all such
violations.
A. Maintenance of facilities. The operator and owner shall be responsible
for maintaining all common facilities, including but not limited to roads,
parking areas, sidewalks or pathways, common open space, water
supply and sewage disposal systems and service buildings, in a
condition of proper repair and maintenance. If, upon inspection by the
Zoning Officer or other representative, it is determined that the mobile
home park is not in compliance with this standard of maintenance, the
licensee shall be considered to be in violation of this chapter, and the
Zoning Officer shall notify the operator or licensee of the particulars of
any such violation.
B. Failure to maintain. The operator and licensee shall thereafter have 30
days in which to correct any such violations, except that if the violation
is determined by the Zoning Officer or other representative to
constitute a hazard to the health or safety of the residents of the mobile
home park, he shall order that the violation be corrected forthwith.
C. Maintenance bond.
(1) The licensee of a mobile home park shall, prior to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy pursuant to final approval of an
application, post with the Township of Montgomery a maintenance
bond in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor in an amount
sufficient to cover for a period of two years the cost of maintenance
of all common facilities as defined in Subsection A above as
determined by the Township Zoning Officer or other
representative. The bond shall remain in effect for the duration of
the operation of the mobile home park.
§ 205-73 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-74
1:438
(2) In the event of noncompliance with an order pursuant to
Subsection B above, whether a thirty-day order or an order to
correct violations forthwith, the Township may forfeit the
maintenance bond and use the proceeds thereof to effect
correction of the violations.
D. Fire protection.
(1) In addition to the requirements of § 205-70 of this article, the
owner and operator of the park shall prepare, publish and
distribute to the park occupants and to the Township at the time of
licensing application a fire emergency response system approved
by the Township Fire Marshal. The system shall include:
(a) An identification of areas and conditions within the park which,
under reasonable and prudent consideration, represent
unusual susceptibility for fire threat.
(b) An identification and location of all on-site fire combative
equipment.
(c) An emergency notification system to notify park residents that
a fire on the site is in existence, an indication of the threat
involved and a positive method for unit and/or park evacuation
should conditions warrant the action.
(d) An emergency notification system for direct contact between
the unit resident and the fire-fighting company.
(2) No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may endanger
life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
§ 205-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-74
1:439

ARTICLE VIII
Required Subdivision Plans
§ 205-75. Preliminary plan.
A preliminary plan is required for all subdivision proposed within the
Township. A plan showing all the information required for a final plan may
be submitted as a preliminary plan and, in the case where no changes to the
plan are required by the Township Supervisors, may be approved as a final
plan.
§ 205-76. Final plan.
A final plan is required for all subdivisions proposed within the Township.
A plan showing all the information required for a final plan which has
been submitted as a preliminary plan and for which no changes have been
required by the Township Supervisors may be approved as a final plan. A
final plan shall consist of two parts:
§ 205-77. Sketch plan. [Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 18N]
Sketch plans are not required but may be submitted for informal discussion
between a developer and the Township Planning Commission. Sketch plans
are intended to raise and resolve issues before time and expense have been
incurred in developing preliminary plans.
A. Improvement construction plan.
B. Record plan.
§ 205-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-77
1:441

ARTICLE IX
Contents of Subdivision Plans
§ 205-78. Preliminary plan.
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The scale shall be 100 feet to the inch and shall be accurate to
within one part in 300.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals, and bearings shall be in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered to show its relation to the total
number of sheets in the plan, as "Sheet No. 1 of 5 sheets."
(4) Where there are two or more sheets, a key map at a scale sufficient
to show their relationship shall be furnished.
(5) This plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer
who shall certify that all data concerning existing land, buildings,
streets and other locations are correct and that to the best of his
knowledge the plan complies with all ordinances and regulations of
the Township of Montgomery.
B. Existing features of the land. The plan shall set forth:
(1) The location, names and widths of streets and alleys, including
existing streets; the location and names of railroads; the location of
property lines and names of owners; and the location of
watercourses, sanitary sewers, storm drains and similar features
within 400 feet of any part of the land to be subdivided. Within 400
feet of any part of the land being subdivided or developed, a plan
shall show the location and size of all watercourses and the
boundaries of floodplain areas (not limited to the established flood
level and regulatory flood elevation, where applicable) utilizing
base flood elevation data available from federal, state and other
sources. [Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
(2) The names, locations, widths and other dimensions, including
center-line courses, distances, and curve data, paving widths and
curblines, right-of-way and curbline radii at intersections and
street location tie-ins by courses and distances to the nearest
intersection of existing and planned streets and alleys, and the
location and size of existing sanitary sewers and storm drains,
watercourses and drainage flows and recreational areas within the
land to be subdivided. Within the land to be subdivided or
developed, the plan shall show the location and size of all
watercourses and boundaries of floodplain areas (not limited to the
established flood level and regulatory flood elevation, where
applicable). Supporting hydrologic and hydraulic data will be
required to substantiate the one-hundred-year floodplain location
§ 205-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-78
1:443
utilizing base flood elevation data from federal, state and other
sources. [Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
(3) The contour lines at intervals not to exceed two feet wherever lots
abut streets proposed to be laid out through unimproved land.
Where the street grade approaches the minimum allowed (see
Article III, Design Standards), lesser intervals will be required.
(4) The location and character of existing buildings; the locations,
species and size of trees standing alone 10 inches or more in
caliper measured one foot above the ground; and the location of
quarries, marshlands, tree masses, areas subject to inundation and
other topographical features which may affect the location of
proposed streets and buildings.
(5) Measured distances from the center line of streets to buildings,
large trees standing alone or other control points and the location
of all monuments with reference to them.
C. Proposed street and lot layout.
(1) The plan shall also contain the following information:
(a) A title consisting of the name and address of the subdivider,
developer or builder and the registered engineer or surveyor
or qualified site planner; the location and area of the
subdivision; the date, sale and North point; and the elevation
based on Township level data.
(b) The courses and distances of the boundary line survey of the
land to be subdivided. The survey shall not have an error of
closure greater than one part in 2,500.
(c) The layout of streets, including names and widths of streets,
the ultimate right-of-way widths and widths of alleys and
crosswalks.
(d) The layout and approximate dimensions of lots.
(e) A reference to any land to be dedicated for public use.
(f) Tentative grades to an existing street or to a point 400 feet
beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.
(g) Location and size of sanitary sewers and storm drains.
(h) Building setback lines, with distances from the ultimate rightof-
way line.
(i) Indication of any lots in which a use other than residential is
intended.
(2) Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or
completely in a floodplain or where the subdivision or land
§ 205-78 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-78
1:444
development borders on a floodplain, all subdivision and land use
plans shall include detailed information identifying the following:
[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
(a) Location and elevation of existing and proposed streets, water
supply and sanitary facilities and any other permitted
improvements, soil types and proposed floodproofing
measures.
(b) Boundaries of the floodplain and the base flood elevation as
defined in Article IV, FP Floodplain Conservation District, of
the Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance.139
D. Proposed improvements.
(1) The plan shall show the following:
(a) Tentative cross sections and center-line profiles for each
proposed street shown on the preliminary plan, including a
profile of proposed sanitary sewers and storm drains, showing
the location of manholes and inlets.
(b) Preliminary design of any bridges, culverts or other structures
and appurtenances which may be required.
(2) All plans shall be drawn to assure that: [Added 4-23-1984 by Ord.
No. 18F]
(a) Proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(b) Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate damage thereto by flooding; and
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(3) The developer shall provide written proof that adequate
precautions against flood damage have been taken with respect to
the design of any buildings or structures located in an area where
surface water could come in contact with the building or structure.
[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
(4) Building or filling in a floodplain area is prohibited, except as
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance of Montgomery Township.140
E. Certificates. When approved, the plan must show:
(1) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder certifying his
adoption of the plan and the date signed.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-78
1:445
§ 205-79. Final plan.
(2) The signature of the Township Engineer certifying that the plan
conforms to these regulations and the date signed.
(3) The signature of the Township Secretary certifying that the Board
of Supervisors approved the plan on the date shown.
A. Improvement construction plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for an
improvement construction plan as for a preliminary plan, except
that the horizontal scale of the plan and profile shall be 40 feet to
the inch and the vertical scale of the profile shall be four feet to the
inch.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan shall contain sufficient
information to provide working plans for the construction of the
proposed streets or any portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, sewers and utilities, shown on the approved
preliminary plan, from one existing or approved street to another
or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, to its dead end, and shall include:
(a) Horizontal plan. The horizontal plan shall show details of the
horizontal layout as follows:
[1] Information shown on the preliminary plan pertaining to
the street to be constructed.
[2] The beginning and end of the proposed immediate
construction.
[3] Stations corresponding to those shown on the profile.
[4] The elevation of the curb at tangent points of horizontal
curves at street or alley intersections and at the projected
intersections of curblines.
[5] The location and size of sanitary sewers and lateral
connections with distances between manholes of water,
gas, electric and other utility pipes or conduits and of
storm drains, inlets and manholes.
[6] The location, type and size of curbs and widths of paving.
[7] The location and species of street shade trees and the
location and type of fire hydrants and streetlights.
[8] The direction of flow of surface drainage on the finished
grades of all lots within the subdivision.
(b) Profile. The profile shall be a vertical section of the street with
details of vertical alignment as follows:
§ 205-78 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-79
1:446
[1] Profiles and elevations along the present ground surface
over the center line and profiles of ultimate right-of-way
lines or building setback lines.
[2] Profile of the grade along the top of the curbs showing the
percentage of grade on tangents and details of vertical
curves indicated at intervals of 50 feet on straight grades,
intervals of 25 feet on vertical curves and points of grade
intersections, as well as elevations of the curb, at tangent
points of horizontal curves.
[3] Profile of sanitary sewer with a profile over the sewer of
the present and finished ground surface showing manhole
locations with stations beginning at the lowest manhole.
[4] Profile of the storm drain showing manhole locations.
(c) Cross section. The cross section shall comply with Township
standards and specifications as minimum requirements. It
shall show a typical cross section across the street or alley with
details of grading and construction as follows:
[1] The ultimate right-of-way width and the location of and
width of paving within the ultimate right-of-way.
[2] The type, thickness and crown of paving.
[3] The type and size of curb.
[4] When sidewalks are required, grading of sidewalk area
should be carried to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway
and slopes of cut or fill extended beyond the ultimate
right-of-way.
[5] The location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks, when
required.
[6] The typical location, size and depths of sewers and
utilities.
(3) Certificates, in the same form as required on the preliminary plan,
shall be shown on the final plan.
B. Record plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for a
record plan as for a preliminary plan and in addition, for recording
purposes, the plans shall be placed on sheet sizes of 24 inches by
36 inches or 18 inches by 30 inches. All lettering and lines should
be so drawn as to be legible if the plan should be reduced to halfsize.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan, which may constitute a portion
only of an approved preliminary plan, shall show:
§ 205-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-79
1:447
(a) A title, as required for a preliminary plan.
(b) Courses and distances sufficient for the legal description of all
the lines shown on the plan. The error of closure shall not be
greater than one part in 2,500.
(c) The names of abutting owners; names, locations, widths and
other dimensions of streets, including center-line courses,
distances and curve data, descriptive data of ultimate right-ofway
lines not parallel with or concentric with a center line, and
location tie-ins by courses and distances to the nearest
intersections of all existing, planned and approved streets,
alleys and easements; and recreational areas and other public
improvements within the land to be subdivided.
(d) All lots are to be deeded to the side of public rights-of-way so
that a single deed may be drawn to the Township for the
dedication of streets by the subdivider, developer or builder;
except that all lots along state or county roads shall show
ownership within rights-of-way with the additional widening
strip, if any, designated as "reserved for future dedication."
(e) Evidence that the plans are in conformity with the Zoning,
Building and Sanitation Ordinances141 and other applicable
Township ordinances and regulations. In any instance where
such plans do not conform, evidence shall be presented that an
exception or variance has been officially granted by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment of Montgomery Township.
(f) The location, material and size of monuments, with reference
to them.
(g) Building setback lines with distances from the ultimate rightof-
way lines.
(h) Restrictions in the deed affecting the subdivision of the
property.
(i) The location of all floodplains and steep slopes as defined in the
Zoning Ordinance 142 and herein. [Added 4-23-1984 by Ord.
No. 18F]
(j) For purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance
risk premium rates for structures to be located in flood-prone
areas: [Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
[1] The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor, including basements, of all new or substantially
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning; Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention; Ch.
183, Sewage Disposal Systems; and Ch. 187, Sewers, respectively.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-79 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-79
1:448
§ 205-80. Fees and costs.
The subdivider shall be required to deposit cash with the Township in the
amount approved by the Supervisors to guarantee payment of the following
fees and costs:
improved structures and whether or not such structures
contain a basement;
[2] If the nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, the
elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the
structure will be floodproofed; and
[3] If the residential structure will be elevated at or above
base flood elevation, and indicating the actual lowest floor
elevation, in relation to mean sea level.
(k) The present Montgomery County tax parcel and block and unit
number for the subject property. [Added 4-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-9S]
(3) Certificates. When approved, the record plan must show:
(a) The signature of the registered engineer or surveyor, certifying
that the plan represents a survey made by him, that the
monuments shown thereon exist as located and that all
dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
(b) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder, certifying
his adoption of the plan.
(c) The signature of the Township Secretary, certifying that the
Board of Supervisors approved the plan on the date shown.
A. Filing fees. The Township Secretary shall collect a subdivision and land
development filing fee, which shall be comprised of an administrative
filing fee (which is nonrefundable) and an escrow deposit (which is
refundable to the extent not used for processing a subdivision). Said
fees and escrow deposit shall be determined and set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors, which shall, from time to time by resolution,
review and set the fees to be charged and determine the amount of
escrow deposits. [Amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 18E]
B. Other costs shall include:
(1) Engineering services: the services of the Township Engineer, as
provided in these rules and regulations; in addition, all costs for
other engineering and professional certification deemed necessary.
(2) Legal fees and other costs incident to the preparation and approval
of all agreements, bonds and other required legal papers.
§ 205-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-80
1:449
(3) Materials and facilities tests: the actual costs of all drainage, water
and/or material tests.
(4) Inspection: the costs of Township inspection, determined and set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, which shall, from time to
time by resolution, review and set the fees to be charged for
inspections imposed by the Land Development and Subdivision
Ordinance. [Amended 12-5-1983 by Ord. No. 18E]
(5) Dedication: legal fees, advertising and other costs involved in the
dedication of streets and public improvements to the Township.
§ 205-80 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-80
1:450
ARTICLE X
Processing of Subdivision Plans
§ 205-81. Preliminary plan.
§ 205-82. Final plan.
A. This shall be submitted in eight copies to the Township Secretary,
accompanied by an application for approval. The plan will be reviewed
by the Planning Commission in accordance with the Second Class
Township Code.143 The plan will also be reviewed by the Township
Engineer and Township or State Health Officer, the County Planning
Commission and other appropriate officials. The plan shall then be
reviewed by the Supervisors, taking into consideration the
recommendations of the other reviewing agencies or persons. If the
Supervisors approve the plan, the Township Secretary will so certify
thereon, and one copy will be given to the subdivider, developer or
builder. If the Board disapproves, the reasons therefor will be given to
the subdivider, developer or builder, who may appeal therefrom as
provided by law.
B. Approval of the plan by the Board will be tentative only and shall confer
no vested rights on the parties in interest, and changes or modifications
therein may subsequently be required if the Board determines the same
to be necessary. Any subdivision for which the record plan is not
approved within two years must be submitted as an entirely new
subdivision.
A. Improvement construction plan. This shall be submitted in triplicate
(two paper prints and one cloth print) to the Township Secretary for
approval by the Supervisors. Before approval, the plan will be reviewed
by the Township Engineer and the Planning Commission. Whenever the
drainage area involved contains more than 1/2 of one square mile, a
permit must be obtained from the Water and Power Resources Board of
the Commonwealth. The plan will then be reviewed by the Supervisors,
taking into consideration the requirements and recommendations of the
other reviewing agencies or persons. Upon approval of the plan, the
Township Secretary will so certify thereon, one copy will be given to the
subdivider, developer or builder, who will also receive from the
Township Secretary an improvement construction permit authorizing
him to proceed with the construction of the improvements. An
improvement construction permit does not constitute approval of the
work to be performed thereunder. Such permit will become void if work
is not commenced within six months, provided that an extension of six
months may be granted by the Township Secretary upon written
request therefor. After completion of the work, a completion certificate
will be issued by the Township Secretary, and the Township Engineer
will endorse the plan accordingly.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 205-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-82
1:451
§ 205-83. Amended preliminary or final plan.
B. Record plan. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
(1) This shall be submitted in quintuplicate (either two Mylar sepias or
two linen cloth prints and three paper prints) to the Supervisors for
approval. The plan shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, the
Montgomery Township Planning Commission and other
appropriate officials. The plan will not be approved by the Board of
Supervisors unless all fees required herein have been paid or
provided for and the required improvements have been installed in
strict accordance with Township standards and specifications or
the Township is assured, by means of a proper completion
guaranty, in the form of a bond with surety, approved by the
Supervisors, or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow
sufficient to cover 110% of the cost of the improvements, as
estimated by the Township Engineer, that the improvements will
subsequently be installed and maintained by the developer or
builder for a period of one year after recording of the deed of
dedication of said improvements. In addition, a statement shall be
included on the record plan that the approved improvement
construction plan, a copy of which may be inspected at the office of
the Township Secretary, has been made a part of the approved final
plan. [Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-95S]
(2) Upon approval of the record plan, the Township Engineer shall sign
it and certify that it conforms with the improvement construction
plan and that the improvements have been installed or guaranteed;
the Township Secretary shall sign it and certify that it was
approved by the Board of Supervisors on the date shown; one copy
shall be given to the subdivider, developer or builder; and within 90
days after, one copy shall be recorded by the subdivider, developer
or builder in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery
County. The developer or builder shall immediately notify the
Township Secretary of the book and page wherein said plan is
recorded and shall supply a copy of the record plan. If such
information is not received within 100 days of the approval of the
plan by the Township, the plan shall not be considered an approved
plan for the purpose of this article.
A. In the event that a preliminary or final subdivision or land development
plan is amended, changed, revised or altered in any respect after the
original submission date, before the amended, changed, revised or
altered plan is accepted by the Township Secretary, the subdivider or
developer shall execute a statement indicating that the original plan is
amended, revised, changed or altered and that in consideration of the
accepting of the revised, changed, amended or altered plan, the
developer or subdivider extends the time for consideration of the plan
for 90 days from the date of the filing of the changed, amended, revised
or altered plan.
§ 205-82 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-83
1:452
B. In the event that the developer or subdivider refuses to extend the time
for plan approval for 90 days from the date of the filing of the amended,
revised, changed or altered plan, then the Supervisors shall, at their
next public meeting, deny the original application.
C. A revised, changed, altered or amended plan shall not be accepted by
the Township until a ninety-day extension agreement has been executed
by the developer or subdivider.
§ 205-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-83
1:453

ARTICLE XI
Processing of Minor Subdivisions
§ 205-84. Purpose.
In the case of minor subdivisions, it is the purpose of this article to provide
a simplified procedure by which minor subdivisions may be submitted and
approved.
§ 205-85. Criteria for minor subdivisions.
§ 205-86. Submission procedure.
A. A tract of land that is not part of a previous subdivision, under this
section or otherwise, may be divided into two lots or parcels without the
necessity of full compliance with the preliminary and final plan
requirements of this chapter, except that in the event that the proposed
subdivision shall require improvements of streets, sanitary sewers,
drainage facilities, culverts or other municipal improvements, then, in
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, the provisions of this article
on minor subdivisions shall not be applicable, and the applicant shall be
required to comply with the requirements for major subdivisions.
B. The provisions of this article on minor subdivisions shall be applicable,
provided that the Township Board of Supervisors shall determine that
all of the following conditions have been met:
(1) Both of the proposed lots shall have adequate frontage on or
adequate access to an existing public road, and no new public road
will be required.
(2) The owner shall agree, in writing, to construct any drainage facility,
sewer facility or other improvement or provide such access and
street openings as the Township Engineer recommends and the
Supervisors require to be necessary in order to carry out the
purposes of this chapter and these regulations.
(3) Both proposed lots shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance in all
respects.144
A. The applicant shall submit 10 copies of a final plan, copies of other
required materials and an application to the Township Secretary,
accompanied by fees required by the Township.
B. The Township shall distribute copies of the proposed minor subdivision
plans to the Montgomery County Planning Commission for review upon
payment of fees (due to Montgomery County Planning Commission) by
the applicant as required by Montgomery County.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-87
1:455
§ 205-87. Contents of plan.
The final plan shall meet the following standards and shall contain the
following information:
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40, 50 or 100
feet.
(2) Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal points thereof, and
bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered to show its relation to the total
number of sheets.
(4) The plan shall contain adequate legend to indicate clearly which
features are existing and which are proposed.
(5) The original of the plan submitted for final approval and
subsequent recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink upon
tracing cloth on sheets either 18 inches by 22 inches or 36 inches
by 44 inches in size. If the plan is drawn in two or more sections, it
shall be accompanied by a key map showing the location of the
several sections.
B. Information to be shown. The following shall be shown:
(1) The proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying
title.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the tract or of his authorized
agent, if any.
(3) The name and address of the registered engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan. If an architect or landscape architect
collaborated in the preparation of the plan, his name and address
shall also appear.
(4) Zoning requirements, including applicable district lot size and yard
requirements, and proof of any variances or special exceptions
which may have been granted.
(5) A key map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided or
developed at a scale of not less than 800 feet to the inch, showing
the relation of the tract to adjoining property and to all streets,
roads and municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any
part of the property proposed to be subdivided or developed.
(6) Tract boundaries, showing all courses and distances with tie-ins to
all adjacent street intersections.
(7) The total acreage of both tracts.
§ 205-87 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-87
1:456
(8) The original date, revised dates, North point and graphic scale.
(9) All significant topographical and physical features, including
contours obtained from United States Geodetic Service maps.
(10) The names of all owners of all immediately adjacent lands; the
name of all proposed existing subdivisions immediately adjacent,
and the locations and dimensions of any streets and/or rights-ofway
easements shown thereon; the locations and dimensions of all
existing streets, roads, railroads, sewers or sewerage systems,
aqueducts, water mains and feeder lines, fire hydrants, gas,
electric and oil transmission lines, watercourses, buildings, sources
of water supply and other significant features, within the property
or within 400 feet of any part of the property proposed to be
subdivided; and the location of all tree masses within the property.
(11) The direction and distance of the nearest sewage treatment plant
and information as to its future accessibility in terms of time,
finances and load capacity.
(12) Any existing public lands; all open spaces for which offers of
dedication are included; and all those other areas to which title is
reserved by the owner.
(13) Sufficient data acceptable to the Township Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of every boundary line,
street line and lot line to enable the engineer to reproduce such
lines upon the ground. All dimensions shall be shown in feet or
hundredths of a foot.
(14) Permanent reference monuments.
(15) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgments of deeds and signed by the owner or owners
of the property to the effect that the subdivision or land
development shown on the final plan is made with his or their free
consent and in accordance with his or their desires.
(16) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency.
(17) A copy of such private deed restrictions, including building setback
lines, as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of sale,
together with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed
which may affect the title to the land being subdivided. Such
restrictions shall be satisfactory to the Supervisors.
(18) Such certificates of approval or of conceptual approval by proper
authorities of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as required.
§ 205-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-87
1:457
(19) For roads under the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Montgomery County and Montgomery Township, a
letter shall be obtained from PennDOT, the Montgomery County
Bridge and Highway Department or the Montgomery Township
Engineer, as appropriate, indicating that the plan has been
reviewed and approved in concept and that traffic considerations,
driveways and the discharge of water onto or into the road right-ofway
has been reviewed. Highway occupancy and/or encroachment
permits issued by the aforementioned governmental agencies shall
be required as a condition prior to recording the plan.
(20) The location and size of all watercourses and boundaries of floodprone
areas (not limited to the established flood level and
regulatory flood elevation, where applicable) utilizing any base
flood elevation data from federal, state and other sources. [Added
4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
C. The plan shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer and the Township
Planning Commission, and they shall submit a report and
recommendations to the Township Board of Supervisors.
D. The Township Planning Commission shall schedule an informal
conference to be held with the applicant within 30 days of the receipt of
the plan, the application, other required materials and the payment of
the required fees or upon receipt of the Montgomery County Planning
Commission report, whichever is sooner.
E. The applicant shall have no right to a formal hearing on any minor
subdivision plan. If the applicant shall desire a formal hearing, then the
subdivision shall not be considered a minor subdivision and the
applicant shall be required to meet all the requirements for major
subdivisions.
F. The Township Planning Commission shall not be required to render a
decision on the plan at the conference. After the conference, the
Planning Commission shall review all evidence and submit a report on
the conference and its recommendations concerning the minor
subdivision plan to the Township Board of Supervisors.
G. The report and recommendations of the Township Planning Commission
shall be filed with the Township and shall be heard at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board of Supervisors or at a special meeting
called for that purpose.
H. The Board of Supervisors shall render a final decision on the approval
or disapproval of the minor subdivision plan based on the report and the
recommendations of the Township Engineer and the Township Planning
Commission and such other evidence as the Board of Supervisors may,
in its discretion, consider. As promptly as possible, but within the
ninety-day maximum review period, the Board of Supervisors or its
§ 205-87 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-87
1:458
agent shall advise the applicant of the results of its review and decision
and, if the proposed subdivision is disapproved, the reasons therefor.
I. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
J. If the Board of Supervisors approves the final plan, a record plan shall
be submitted in quintuplicate (two cloth and three paper prints) to the
Supervisors for approval. Information required by Article IX,
§ 205-79B(2), shall appear in addition to the information required by
Subsection B of this section.
K. The following certifications shall appear on the record plan:
(1) The signature of the registered engineer or surveyor, certifying
that the plan represents a survey made by him, that the monuments
shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and
geodetic details are correct.
(2) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder, certifying his
adoption of the plan.
(3) The signature of the Township Secretary, certifying that the Board
of Supervisors approved the plan on the date shown.
L. The record plan shall not be approved by the Board of Supervisors
unless all fees required herein have been paid.
M. All plans shall be drawn to assure that: [Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No.
18F]
(1) Proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) Utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
N. The developer shall provide written proof that adequate precautions
against flood damage have been taken with respect to the design of any
buildings or structures located in an area where surface water could
come in contact with the building or structure. [Added 4-23-1984 by
Ord. No. 18F]
O. Building or filling in a floodplain area is prohibited, except as permitted
by the Zoning Ordinance of Montgomery Township.145 [Added
4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 18F]
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 205-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-87
1:459
P. The depth of the water table shall be noted on the plan or in a separate
report, along with the location of test borings. For on-site sewage
disposal systems, the plan shall show the location of percolation and
deep holes tests, as well as the date(s) and results of the test. If
available, the applicant shall attach Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources subdivision modules or the actual results of
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. [Added 4-23-1984 by
Ord. No. 18F]
§ 205-87 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-87
1:460
ARTICLE XII
Sketch Plans
[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 18N]
§ 205-88. Applicability.
The standards, requirements and procedures contained in this article shall
supplement the existing submission and processing procedures of all
applications for subdivision and/or land developments in the Township.
§ 205-89. Intent.
It is the intent in permitting sketch plans to avoid unnecessary delays and
expense to both the Township and the applicant. Issues raised at the sketch
plan stage can be resolved before time and expense have been incurred in
developing preliminary plans. Preliminary plans submitted without sketch
plan approval may raise significant issues that can be resolved only by
redesign.
§ 205-90. Tentative sketch plan submissions.
A. All applicants for subdivision or land development may submit a sketch
plan to the Township Planning Commission. Applicants with proposals
to subdivide a parcel of land into three or more lots or to develop a
parcel of land containing one or more acres are strongly encouraged to
submit sketch plans because their proposals are more likely than
smaller proposals to need redesigning.
B. Tentative sketch plans shall be considered as submitted for informal
discussion between the developer and the Planning Commission and, at
its option, the Board of Supervisors. Submission of a sketch plan does
not constitute a formal submission of an application for approval of a
subdivision or land development plan.
C. For informal purposes, seven copies of the tentative sketch plan shall be
submitted to the Township Manager for distribution to the Township
Engineer, the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors and the
Montgomery County Planning Commission. Each such reviewing
agency shall have comments on the sketch plan within 45 days. This
forty-five-day review period shall not restrict the applicant from
submitting a preliminary plan. The applicant may submit a preliminary
plan at any time.
D. Contents of tentative sketch plans. Tentative sketch plans shall be
drawn to scale showing precise dimensions and shall show the
following information:
(1) The name of the subdivision or land development and the name of
municipality.
§ 205-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-90
1:461
§ 205-91. Review procedures.
(2) A location plan showing the subject tract and the surrounding road
network, including all adjoining curb cuts and traffic lights;
including a key map.
(3) The name and address of the owner, agent, engineer, surveyor and
architect, as applicable.
(4) The tract boundary and location by deed plotting.
(5) A North point and scale.
(6) The existing and proposed road and lot or structure layout and
building envelopes.
(7) Significant topographical and physical features, such as soils,
floodplains, slopes at two-foot grade changes, woodlands and
existing structures.
(8) Proposals for control of drainage runoff.
(9) Proposals for community facilities.
(10) Road widths and dimensions.
E. The tentative sketch plan shall be accompanied by at least two recent
photographs of all existing structures on the tract.
F. Formal review. Formal submission of an application for subdivision or
land development begins with preliminary plan submission, at which
time:
(1) The appropriate fee to the Township and Montgomery County
Planning Commission must be submitted; and
(2) The requirements for formal review and approval begin as per
Article V of Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.146
A. The tentative sketch plans shall be presented to the Township Planning
Commission for informal discussion at a regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting, following an application made to the Township
Zoning Officer or Manager and a request to be placed on the agenda.
B. The Township Planning Commission may make nonbinding suggestions
and recommendations to the applicant during the meeting at which the
plan is discussed. These need not be presented in writing to the
applicant.
C. If a proposal is large or complex, the Township Planning Commission
may defer completing its comments and recommendations until it has
146. Editor's Note: For the Municipalities Planning Code, see 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 205-90 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-91
1:462
§ 205-92. Effect of review.
consulted its technical advisors. However, the Planning Commission
will try to expedite this informal review process.
A. Approval of a tentative sketch plan shall not be considered as approval
of a preliminary plan nor in any way bind the applicant or the Township.
B. The Planning Commission may grant sketch plan approval unless the
proposal is for cluster development for which conditional approval is
required by the Board of Supervisors.
C. The purpose of allowing a tentative sketch plan submittal is to provide a
vehicle for discussing and clarifying ideas and concepts to be used and
refined in further sketches or in preliminary plans. Therefore,
preliminary plans shall incorporate rudiments of sketch plans approved
by the Township, including the information listed in § 205-90D above.
§ 205-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-92
1:463

ARTICLE XIII
Improvement Construction Requirements
§ 205-93. Required improvements.
The subdivider, developer or builder shall construct streets and other
improvements from the lot or lots to be sold or built upon to any existing
improved streets, subject to the provisions of § 205-3B of this Land
Subdivision Ordinance. The work shall be performed in strict accordance
with approved plans and Township standards and specifications or the
applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways
Specifications, 408, latest edition, or any subsequent number or section
thereof. All work shall be completed within two years of the approval of the
Supervisors of the record plan. No builder's permit shall be issued for any
dwelling or building nor shall there be any occupancy of any dwelling or
building until all required improvements are completed and accepted by the
Township.
§ 205-94. Public utilities and laterals.
All water, gas, electric and other pipes and conduits and all service
connections or laterals shall be laid to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway,
where the need therefor can be reasonably anticipated, before streets
are paved. The arrangements for said service connections or laterals shall
be the responsibility of the subdivider, developer or builder.
§ 205-95. Inspection of work and materials.
The Township Engineer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of the
commencement of any construction operation, in order that provisions may
be made for inspection by the Township.
§ 205-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-95
1:465

ARTICLE XIV
Conditions of Acceptance
§ 205-96. Streets and other improvements.
A. Conditions. The Township may take over and make public any street or
other improvement if:
(1) The required improvements, utility mains and laterals and
monuments shown on an approval plan or plans have been
constructed to all requirements and approved by the Township
Engineer.
B. Time of acceptance. Street or other improvements will be accepted
annually by the Supervisors upon compliance with the foregoing
regulations and presentation of a deed of dedication at the regular
monthly meetings of the Supervisors in the months of August and
September.
C. Duty of Township Engineer. Annually at the October meeting of the
Supervisors, the Township Engineer shall present to the Board of
Supervisors a map of the Township showing the name, location and
length of all streets accepted by the Township during the then current
year.
D. Responsibility. The Township shall have no responsibility with respect
to any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the
same by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted
by ordinance or resolution of the Supervisors.
§ 205-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-96
1:467

ARTICLE XV
Enforcement
[Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 18O]
§ 205-97. Preventive remedies.
§ 205-98. Jurisdiction.
District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought under
§ 205-99.
§ 205-99. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of any subdivision or land development ordinance shall, upon
A. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer of other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of any ordinance. Such denial of a permit or
approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval of any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 205-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-99
1:469
being found liable therefor in a civil proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
unless the District Justice, determining that there has been a violation,
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.147,148
147. Editor's Note: Original Art. IX, Amendments, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1.
148. Editor's Note: The following informational forms, which followed this chapter, are on file
in the office of the Township Secretary: Steps for Final Acceptance of Section or Entire
Subdivision Per Act 247 of 1968; Installment Payments for Improvements from Escrow
Funds; and Key to Disposition.
§ 205-99 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-99
1:470
ARTICLE XVI
Traffic Management Study
[Added 8-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-23]
§ 205-100. Purpose.
A traffic management study shall be required for all major subdivisions,
land developments and rezoning requests as described in § 205-102. This
study and report will enable Montgomery Township to assess the effect
of a proposed subdivision, land development or rezoning request on the
transportation system in Montgomery Township. The purpose of the study is
to ensure that proposed developments or zoning changes do not adversely
affect the transportation network, to identify any traffic problems
associated with site access and to determine traffic problems on Township,
county or state roads in the study area of the proposed project. The study
also will assist in the protection of air quality, the conservation of energy
and the safety of the motoring public. The study shall also present specific
determination of necessary traffic control signing (i.e., stop signs, speed
limit signing, warning signs, no parking signing, etc.), conforming to
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, Title 75, and applicable Township
requirements.
§ 205-101. Conduct of traffic management study.
The traffic management study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study
experience. The requirements, procedures and standards for the traffic
management study are set forth in § 205-104.
§ 205-102. Applicability.
A. A traffic management study shall be submitted for all residential
subdivisions or land developments of 20 or more lots or dwelling units;
all commercial, office, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential
uses requiring subdivision or land development approval; all rezoning
requests; and, with respect to residential subdivisions or land
developments of fewer than 20 dwelling units, the Board of
Supervisors, at its discretion where it determines that there is a need
for a traffic management study because of the location of the proposed
site, may require a traffic management study and report; provided,
however, that the Supervisors notify the applicant of this requirement
within 30 days of the original filing of the application.
B. The Board of Supervisors may waive in whole or in part the
requirement for a traffic management study at its discretion in
accordance with the provisions of § 205-107 below.
§ 205-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-103
1:471
§ 205-103. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEVEL OF SERVICE — This elevation is defined in the 1985 Highway
Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, as amended, as operational
conditions within a traffic stream (or at an intersection approach). "Level of
service" also generally describes these conditions in terms of such factors
as speed, travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort
and convenience and safety. Six "levels of service" are defined for each type
of traffic facility, ranging from A to F. Level of Service A indicates free flow;
Level of Service B indicates stable flow; Level of Service C indicates stable
but inhibited flow; Level of Service D indicates high-density, restricted
stable flow; Level of Service E indicates operation at or near capacity; and
Level of Service F is indicative of flow breakdown.
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection where traffic generated by the
proposal will have a significant effect on the operation of traffic through
the intersection. Where doubt exists, the qualified traffic engineer and/
or planner shall seek guidance from the Montgomery Township Board of
Supervisors and/or the Township Traffic Engineer prior to the submission of
the study.
QUEUE ANALYSIS — This procedure includes the average queue and
maximum queue of vehicles which will be observed in each traffic stream
and intersection approach, measured in both feet and vehicles. Various
statistical and/or computer models may be applied.
STUDY AREA — This area will extend along all Township, county and state
roads serving the development and will extend to all major intersections
in the Township that may be affected. Where doubt exists, the qualified
traffic engineer and/or transportation planner will seek guidance from the
Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors or its designee prior to the
submission of the study.
TRIP GENERATION — The total count of trips to and from a study site
per unit of land use (i.e., acres, dwelling unit, etc.) as established by
the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip
Generation Report. For land uses not listed in this report or if information
is determined through a small sample size, the qualified traffic engineer
and/or transportation planner shall seek guidance from the Montgomery
Township Board of Supervisors or its designee prior to the submission of the
study.
VOLUME/CAPACITY ANALYSIS — This procedure compares the volume of a
traffic facility to its capacity. The procedure described in the 1985 Highway
Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board Special Report 209, as
amended, shall be followed.
WARRANTS FOR TRAFFIC SIGNAL INSTALLATION — A series of warrants
which detail the minimum traffic volume, pedestrian volume or other
criteria necessary for the installation of a traffic signal. These criteria are
§ 205-103 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-103
1:472
contained in the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways, United States Department of
Transportation, FHWA.
§ 205-104. General requirements and standards for traffic
management study.
A traffic management study shall follow the outline in Subsection A and
include information as contained in Subsection B.
A. Traffic management study outline.
(1) Introduction.
(a) Site and study area boundaries.
(b) Existing and proposed site uses.
(c) Existing and proposed nearby development.
(d) Existing and proposed roadways and intersections.
(2) Analysis of existing conditions.
(a) Daily (weekday and Saturday) peak hour traffic volumes.
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points.
(c) Levels of service at critical points.
(3) Analysis of future conditions without proposed development.
(a) Daily (weekday and Saturday) peak hour traffic volumes.
(b) Volume/capacity analyses at critical points.
(c) Levels of service at critical points.
(4) Trip generation.
(5) Trip distribution.
(6) Traffic assignment.
(7) Analysis of future conditions with the proposed development.
(a) Daily (weekday and Saturday) peak hour traffic volumes.
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points.
(c) Levels of service at critical points.
(8) Recommended improvements.
(a) Proposed recommended improvements.
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points.
§ 205-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-104
1:473
(c) Levels of service at critical points.
(9) Conclusions.
B. Traffic management report guidelines. The report made after the study
shall be in the following format and contain the following information
unless any part of the following requirements are specifically waived by
the Board of Supervisors.
(1) Introduction. The objective of this section is to clearly identify the
site and use and transportation setting for the site and its
surrounding area.
(a) Site and study area boundaries. A brief description of the size,
location, general terrain features, proposed land uses,
construction staging and completion date of the proposed land
development shall be provided. If the development is
residential, types of dwelling units and number of bedrooms
shall be included. Also, the description shall include probable
socioeconomic characteristics of site users with respect to
transportation needs of the site (i.e., number of senior
citizens).
(b) Existing and proposed site uses. The existing and proposed
uses of the site shall be identified in terms of type and zoning
classification category.
(c) Existing and proposed nearby uses. A complete description of
the existing land uses in the vicinity of the site as well as their
current zoning, proposed uses for adjacent land and other
major existing and proposed land development shall be
provided.
(d) Existing and proposed roadways and intersections. The
description shall contain full documentation of the proposed
internal and existing external transportation system. This
description shall include proposed internal vehicular bicycle
and pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and egress
locations, all internal roadways (widths and rights-of-way),
parking conditions, traffic channelization and any traffic
signals or other intersection control devices at all intersections
within the site. Also, locations for all signing (i.e., speed limits,
etc.) shall be shown and verified. The report shall describe the
entire external roadway system within the study area. Major
intersections in the study area shall be identified and
illustrated. All existing and proposed public transportation
services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall
also be documented. All future highway improvements within
Montgomery Township and the study area, including proposed
construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted.
Improvements cited within the most recent Montgomery
Township Comprehensive Plan shall be referenced.
§ 205-104 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-104
1:474
Improvements from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation's twelve-year Highway and Bridge Program,
within Montgomery Township and the study area, shall also be
noted. Any proposed or in-place roadway improvements due to
proposed surrounding developments shall be noted.
(2) Analysis of existing conditions. This section shall describe the
results of the volume/capacity analysis to be completed for the
roadways and intersections in the study area under existing
conditions as well as any data collection efforts that are required.
(a) Daily and peak hour volumes. Schematic diagrams shall be
presented depicting existing traffic volumes for average daily
traffic (ADT), the weekday peak highway traffic hour(s) and
peak development-generated hour(s) and the Saturday peak
traffic hour. All documentation must be contained in the report.
Turning movement and mainline volumes shall be presented
for all peak hour conditions (weekday a.m. peak, weekday p.m.
peak, weekday site-generated and Saturday peak) while only
mainline volumes are required for ADT's. Source and method
of computation must be included.
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. A volume/capacity
analysis based upon existing volumes shall be performed
during the weekday and Saturday peak traffic hour(s) and the
peak development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and
major intersections in the study area.
(c) Levels of service at critical points. Based on the results
obtained in the previous section, levels of service are to be
computed and presented in schematic form. Included in this
section shall also be a description of typical operating
conditions at each level of service.
(3) Analysis of future conditions without the proposed development.
This section shall describe the anticipated traffic volumes in the
future and the ability of the roadway network to accommodate this
traffic without the proposed development. The future year(s) for
which projections are made shall be the development completion
year unless required otherwise by the Montgomery Township
Board of Supervisors. Factors included within this section include,
but are not limited to, background traffic growth expansion and
traffic generated by other proposed developments as well as
associated improvements.
(a) Daily and peak hour traffic volumes. This section shall clearly
indicate the method and assumptions used to forecast future
volumes in order that Township personnel can duplicate these
calculations. The schematic diagrams depicting future volumes
shall be similar for those described previously in Subsection
B(2)(a) in terms of location and times (daily and peak hours).
§ 205-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-104
1:475
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. The ability of the
roadway system to accommodate future traffic (without the
proposed development) is to be described in this section. If
roadway improvements or modifications are committed for
implementation, the volume/capacity analysis should be
presented for these conditions. Periods of analysis shall be
presented for these conditions. Periods of analysis shall be the
same as those previously performed in Subsection B(2)(b).
(c) Levels of service at critical points. Based on the results
obtained in the previous section, levels of service are to be
determined and presented as in Subsection B(2)(c).
(4) Trip generation. The estimation of vehicular trips to result from the
proposal shall be completed for average weekday, average
Saturday, peak traffic hours during the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak
traffic hours, the weekday peak development-generated hour and
the Saturday peak traffic hour. These development-generated
traffic volumes shall be provided for the inbound and outbound
traffic movements as estimated, and the reference source(s) and
methodology followed shall be documented. Any characteristics of
the site which may cause particular trip generation problems shall
be noted.
(5) Trip distribution. The direction of approach for site-generated
traffic will be presented in this section for the appropriate time
periods. As with all technical analysis steps, the basic method and
assumptions used in this work must be clearly stated in order that
Township officials may replicate these results.
(6) Traffic assignment. This section describes the utilization of study
area roadways by site-generated traffic. The proposed traffic
volumes shall be combined with anticipated traffic volumes as
calculated under Subsection B(3) to describe mainline and turning
movement volumes for future conditions with the site developed as
proposed. Traffic volumes shall be assigned to individual access
points. If school crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes shall
be assigned to each crossing.
(7) Analysis of future conditions with the proposed development. This
section describes the adequacy of the roadway system to
accommodate future traffic with development of the site.
(a) Daily and peak hour traffic volumes. Mainline and turning
movement volumes shall be presented, in schematic form, for
the highway network in the study area as well as driveways
and internal circulation roadways for the appropriate time
periods (identified previously).
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Similar to
Subsections B(2)(b) and B(3)(b), a volume/capacity analysis
§ 205-104 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-104
1:476
§ 205-105. Time of submission.
shall be performed for the appropriate peak hours for future
conditions with the site developed as proposed.
(c) Levels of service at critical points. Based upon the results
obtained in the previous section, levels of service are to be
determined and presented as in Subsections B(2)(c) and
B(3)(c).
(8) Recommended improvements. A description of proposed
improvements to remedy deficiencies shall be included in this
section. Improvements shall be identified which would replace
capacity and/or return predevelopment levels of service conditions.
Alternative improvement schemes shall be presented for
postdevelopment traffic volumes to operate at a minimum Level of
Service D or in no circumstances at a level of service worse than
predevelopment levels. These recommendations shall separately
identify committed projects of governmental agencies which were
described and independently identified in Subsection B(1) and
reflected in the analysis contained in Subsections B(2) and B(3).
(a) Proposed recommended improvements. This section should
describe the location, nature and extent of proposed
improvements to assure sufficient capacity. The listing of
recommended improvements shall include, but not be limited
to, the following elements: internal circulation design, speed
limit, stop and no parking sign locations, site access location
and design, external roadway and intersection design and
improvements and traffic signal installation and operation,
including phasing and timing. All physical roadway
improvements shall be shown in sketches. This listing shall
also include, for each improvement, preliminary cost
estimates, funding source, timing and likelihood of the
improvement implementation and the party responsible for the
improvement.
(b) Volume/capacity analysis at critical points. Another iteration of
the volume/capacity analysis shall be presented and described
which demonstrates the anticipated results of making
recommended improvements.
(c) Levels of service at critical points. Based on the results
obtained in the previous section, levels of service for the study
area with improvements shall be presented.
(d) Conclusion. The last section of the study shall be a clear,
concise description of the study findings. It is anticipated that
this concluding section should serve as an executive summary.
§ 205-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-105
1:477
§ 205-106. Implementation.
§ 205-107. Waivers.
A. The traffic management study shall be submitted to the Township
Secretary with the preliminary plan application or the petition for
rezoning, as the case may be. An application for preliminary plan
approval shall be deemed incomplete and unacceptable for filing if the
traffic study is not included in the submission, and the time period for
approval of such plans pursuant to Section 508 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Code, 53 P.S. § 10508, shall not commence until the
study is received by the Township Secretary. A petition for rezoning will
not be accepted or scheduled for hearing until the traffic management
study is received.
B. The preliminary plan and accompanying improvement construction
plans shall not be submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation until the plans and the traffic management study have
been reviewed by the Montgomery Township Planning Commission, the
Montgomery Township Engineer and the Montgomery Township Traffic
Engineer and approved by the Montgomery Township Board of
Supervisors. The submittal to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation shall be accompanied by the comments of Montgomery
Township.
A. The Montgomery Township Planning Commission, the Township
Engineer, the Township Traffic Engineer and Board of Supervisors shall
review the traffic management study to analyze its adequacy in solving
any traffic problems that may occur due to the land development,
subdivision or request for rezoning.
B. The Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors may decide, after
receiving the reports and recommendations of the Planning
Commission, Township Engineer and Township Traffic Engineer, that
certain improvements are necessary and may make these additional
improvements to be completed by and at the cost of the developer as
conditions to the subdivision, land development or request for rezoning
approval.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township may waive or
modify, in whole or in part, the requirement for a traffic management
study or any of the requirements and standards set forth in § 205-104 if
literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such waiver
or modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and interest of this article is observed.
B. In considering any waiver or modification, the Board of Supervisors
may consider, in its discretion, but is not limited to considering, such
factors as the location of the subject property, its proximity to
intersections and major roadways, the size and density of the proposed
§ 205-105 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-107
1:478
subdivision or land development, the number and location of proposed
accesses to the subject property and the nature of the use proposed.
§ 205-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-107
1:479

ARTICLE XVII
Development Disclosure
[Added 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 94-34]
§ 205-108. Applicability.
The requirements of this article shall apply to all developers, owners and/
or owner's agents (hereinafter referred to as the "seller") who are selling a
vacant subdivided residential lot or a newly constructed home (hereinafter
referred to as "new residential property") to a member of the general public.
§ 205-109. Intent.
These requirements are intended to ensure that home buyers are informed
about limitations, easements and restrictions on their property, the general
nature of the subdivision and/or land development in which the property is
located and potential development on abutting properties.
§ 205-110. Disclosure requirements.
A. Before signing a sales agreement for any newly constructed residential
or subdivided residential property or lot for residential building, buyers
shall sign a disclosure statement that verifies that the seller has
provided, shown and explained all of the information that is required by
this article.
B. The seller of any newly constructed residential real property or of a
subdivided lot for residential building shall prominently display the
approved subdivision and/or land development plans in the office or
other place where property sales are transacted, so that they are plainly
visible to all potential buyers of the newly constructed residential
property or lot. The approved subdivision and/or land development plan
shall include the record plan and all other accompanying plans
approved with the record plan.
C. The information listed below shall be clearly shown or noted on the
approved plans or summarized in text narrative, and a copy of the plans
and text narrative shall be given to the potential home buyer. The
approved plans and text narrative shall show and describe the
following:
(1) Common areas, such as park lands, streets and open space which
are part of the subdivision or adjacent to the lot building sold.
(2) All lot lines within the development.
(3) All uses permitted within the development by Chapter 230, Zoning,
including accessory uses, and all limitations, easements and deed
restrictions and other restrictions which affect the development of
the lots and use thereof.
§ 205-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-110
1:481
§ 205-111. Residential disclosure statement.
All purchasers of newly constructed residences shall complete the following
statement, which shall be presented to the Code Enforcement Officer,
before the Code Enforcement Officer issues an occupancy permit for the
newly constructed dwelling, or if the sale is of an unimproved lot, to the
Code Enforcement Officer before a building permit is issued.
(4) Membership in a homeowner's association, if required. A copy of
the homeowner's association or condominium agreement shall be
provided at that time.
(5) All dimensional requirements for the primary uses on each lot, such
as setback requirements, building coverage, impervious coverage
and height limits.
(6) All dimensional requirements for the accessory uses permitted on
each lot, such as size, setback requirements and height.
(7) The location of all easements through the development, describing
the terms of the easements and showing which lots are affected by
these easements.
(8) The location of all areas within the development and on each lot
which are classified as wetlands, under the currently used
definition, and a reference to Township Code requirements which
govern wetlands.
(9) The location within the development and on each lot of floodplain
area, as defined by Chapter 230, Zoning, and a reference to
Township Code requirements which govern floodplains.
(10) The location of stormwater drainage facilities, the paths of
stormwater runoff and a reference to Township Code requirements
which govern stormwater facilities.
(11) Any constraints which would affect emergency vehicles'
accessibility to the development.
(12) The zoning of land which abuts the development, and a description
of permitted uses and dimensional requirements for each zoning
district.
(13) The proposed land use of the development and abutting properties
as shown in Montgomery Township's most recent Comprehensive
Plan.
(14) Proposed new road rights-of-way shown in the Official Map of
Montgomery Township, if any exists.
§ 205-110 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-111
1:482
Please initial next to each of the following to verify that information
about each was presented and explained with regard to your property:
____ (1) Common areas, such as park lands, streets and open
space.
____ (2) All lot lines within the development.
____ (3) All uses permitted within the development by
Montgomery Township's Zoning Ordinance, including
accessory uses, and all deed restrictions which affect
development of the lots.
____ (4) Membership in a homeowner's association, if required.
A copy of the homeowner's association or condominium
agreement shall be provided.
____ (5) All dimensional requirements for the primary uses on
each lot, such as setback requirements, building
coverage, impervious coverage and height limits.
____ (6) All dimensional requirements for the accessory uses
permitted on each lot, such as size, setback
requirements and height.
____ (7) The location of all easements through the development,
describing the terms of the easements and showing
which lots are affected by these easements.
____ (8) The location of all areas within the development and on
each lot which are classified as wetlands, under the
currently used definition, and a reference to Township
Code requirements which govern wetlands.
____ (9) The location within the development and on each lot of
floodplain area, as defined by the Township's Zoning
Ordinance, and a reference to Township Code
requirements which govern floodplains.
____ (10) The location of stormwater drainage facilities, and the
paths of stormwater runoff and a reference to Township
Code requirements which govern stormwater facilities.
____ (11) Any constraints which would affect emergency vehicles'
accessibility to the development.
____ (12) The zoning of land which abuts the development, and a
description of permitted uses and dimensional
requirements for each zoning district.
____ (13) The proposed land use of the development and abutting
properties as shown in Montgomery Township's most
recent Comprehensive Plan.
____ (14) Proposed new road rights-of-way shown in the Official
Map of Montgomery Township, if any exists.
§ 205-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-111
1:483
I/we, the undersigned, acknowledge that I/we have received a copy of the
subdivision and/or land development plan and related text narrative of my/
our property from the seller and understand and agree to the constraints
imposed therein with regard to my/our property. I/we also understand that
signing this disclosure statement does not release me/us from meeting
requirements of any of the Codes of the Township of Montgomery.
_________________________ _________________________
Purchaser Owner/Authorized Agent
__________________________________
Purchaser
________________________ _________________________
Date Date
§ 205-112. Individual plan of lot to be presented.
The developers of a subdivision wherein the developer is building and
selling newly constructed residences shall present to a prospective
purchaser before the agreement of sale for such property is signed an
individual plan of the lot involved, showing the street upon which the
building will front and the building envelope with rear, front and side yards
shown.
§ 205-111 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-112
1:484
ARTICLE XVIII
Dedication of Land Suitable for Park and Recreational Use or
Payment of Fees in Lieu Thereof
[Added 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 01-155S]
§ 205-113. Dedication of land.
The applicant shall dedicate land suitable for park or recreational use
to the Township, unless one of the alternatives set forth in § 205-116 is
agreed to by the Township and the applicant. The land shall be dedicated
to the Township as a condition of final plan approval, and no lots shall be
sold or built upon until and unless the actual transfer of title has been
completed or guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Board. The requirements
of this chapter shall be in addition to any other Township requirements for
dedication of open space.
§ 205-114. Amount and location of the land to be dedicated.
The amount and location of land to be dedication to the Township shall be
10% of the total lot area of a proposed subdivision or land development.
A. The land dedicated to the Township for park and recreation purposes
need not be a part of the land development or subdivision. It may be
located on a separate parcel of land, provided that, in the sole
discretion of the Board of Supervisors, it is convenient to the future
inhabitants of the subdivision or land development. In addition, the
applicant, with the approval of the Township, may dedicate land or
construct park and recreation facilities at Township facilities, a public
school situated within the Township, or the facilities of another
developer to satisfy the requirements of this section.
B. No more than 25% of the minimum land area required for park and
recreation land may consist of floodplain areas, wetlands or areas with
slopes in excess of 8%. Floodplains, wetlands and steep slopes may not
be used for active recreation.
C. The minimum land area required for park and recreation shall not
include land designed for retention/detention basins in connection with
required stormwater management nor contain fuel, power or other
transmission lines, whether underground or overhead.
D. The land to be dedicated must be suitable for active or passive
recreation by reason of its size, shape, location and topography and
shall be provided with safe and direct access, either by adjoining public
road frontage or public easements, which shall be no less than 25 feet
in width.
E. Areas shall comprise a single parcel of land except where the Board
shall determine that two or more parcels would be in the public
interest.
§ 205-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-114
1:485
§ 205-115. Acceptance of dedication.
When land is dedicated, acceptance by the Township shall be by means
of a signed resolution to which a property description of the dedicated
recreational area shall be attached. All changes and agreements shall
eventually be listed directly on the signed drawing linens of the final plans.
A fee simple warranty deed conveying the property shall be delivered to
the Township with title free and clear of all liens and encumbrances except
for public utility easements. In no event shall the Township be required to
accept dedication of park and recreational areas.
§ 205-116. Alternatives to dedication of land. [Amended 5-27-2003
by Ord. No. 03-169ZS]
§ 205-117. Use of land and fees.
Any land dedicated to the Township shall be used only for the purpose of
providing park and recreational facilities. The types of recreational facilities
shall be designed and constructed as provided in the Township Park and
Recreation Plan and be deemed to include but not be limited to:
F. The area dedicated may not be used in calculating density.
A. Fee in lieu of dedication.
(1) The Board of Supervisors and the applicant may agree to the
payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of land.
(2) Where the Board and the applicant agree that a fee is to be
contributed in lieu of the dedication of land, the amount shall be
$2,000 per dwelling unit and $0.50 a square foot for nonresidential
development or use up to 10,000 square feet and $0.25 a square
foot over 10,000 square feet.
(3) Any fee in lieu of dedication which is collected by the Township
shall be used only for the purpose of providing park and
recreational facilities within the Township.
(4) A fee authorized under this subsection shall, upon its receipt by the
Township, be deposited in an interest-bearing account, designated
as the Township Park and Recreation Fund. Interest earned on such
accounts shall become funds of that account. Funds from such
accounts shall be expended only on the design, construction or
acquisition of specific recreation facilities approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
(5) Upon request of any person who paid fees under this subsection,
the Township shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated
thereon from the date of payment, if the Township has failed to
utilize the fee paid for recreation purposes within three years from
the date such fee was paid unless return of the fee has been waived
by agreement between the applicant and the Township.
§ 205-114 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-117
1:486
§ 205-118. Combination of land and facilities and fee.
§ 205-119. Park and Recreation Plan.
The Board of Supervisors shall adopt a formal Park and Recreation Plan for
Montgomery Township by resolution. Future park and recreational facilities
proposed within the Township shall be in accordance with principles and
standards contained in the plan. The plan may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Playground equipment and surfaces.
B. Playfields (baseball fields, football fields, soccer fields or the like,
designed for active recreation).
C. Tennis courts.
D. Tot lots (small playgrounds especially designed for young children).
E. Basketball courts.
F. Paddle tennis courts.
G. Jogging paths with exercise stations.
H. Bicycle and walking trails.
I. Parking lot facilities.
J. Utility services (electric, water fountains and toilet facilities).
K. Landscaping, earth shaping and plant materials.
L. Picnic facilities and benches.
M. Swimming pools.
N. Lighting facilities related to park and recreation facilities.
A. Where the applicant and the Township agree, the applicant may utilize
any combination of the aforementioned techniques to satisfy the
applicant's park and recreation obligation.
B. Credit for the cost of construction of any park and recreation facility
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township Engineer as
determined by prevailing costs for labor, structures and materials
associated with the facility.
C. All construction by applicant must comply with all ordinances and
Township requirements.
§ 205-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-119
1:487
Chapter 206
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 183. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
§ 205-119 MONTGOMERY CODE § 205-119
1:488
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 206-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Montgomery
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 206-2. Statement of findings.
The Board of Supervisors finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development and redevelopment throughout a watershed
increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and
manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood
reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Township and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
G. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-2
1:489
§ 206-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the Township by maintaining the natural hydrologic regime
and by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in
§ 206-2, through provisions designed to:
water quality, groundwater recharge, stream baseflow, and aquatic
ecosystems.
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Minimize increases in stormwater volume and control peak flows.
C. Minimize impervious surfaces.
D. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
F. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
G. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to
otherwise protect water resources.
H. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
I. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and stream beds.
J. Provide standards to meet National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements.
K. Address certain requirements of the Municipal Separate Stormwater
Sewer System (MS4) NPDES Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
L. Provide for proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are
implemented in the Township.
M. Implement the requirements of the Neshaminy Creek Watershed Act
167 Stormwater Management Plan (includes Little Neshaminy Creek
Watershed).
N. Implement the requirements of the Wissahickon Creek Watershed Act
167 Plan.
§ 206-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-4
1:490
§ 206-4. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff, surface, and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of:
§ 206-5. Applicability/regulated activities.
§ 206-6. Exemptions.
A. Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.149
B. Second Class Township Code (Act 69 of 1933, P.L. 103; 53 P.S. § 65101,
as amended).
A. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. Regulated activities include, but are not limited to:
(1) Land development;
(2) Subdivisions;
(3) Prohibited or polluted discharges;
(4) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime;
(5) Construction or reconstruction of, or addition of new impervious or
semipervious surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.),
except for reconstruction of roads where there is no increase in
impervious surface;
(6) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
(7) Redevelopment;
(8) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel;
(9) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) or appurtenances thereto;
(10) Earth disturbance activities of equal to or greater than 1,000
square feet;
(11) Any of the above regulated activities which were approved more
than five years prior to the effective date of this chapter and
resubmitted for municipal approval.
A. Table 206-6.1 summarizes the exemptions from certain requirements in
this chapter. "Proposed impervious surface" in Table 206-6.1 includes
new, additional, or replacement impervious surface/cover. "Repaving"
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 206-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-6
1:491
existing surfaces without reconstruction (see § 206-10) does not
constitute replacement.
Table 206-6.1: Exemption Thresholds
Ordinance
Article or
Section
Type of
Project
Less than 5,000 square feet Disturbed
Area and Proposed Impervious Surface
Equal to or
greater than
5,000 square
feet Disturbed
Area
0 to 1,000
square feet
More than
1,000 to
Less than
5,000 square
feet
Equal to or
Greater than
5,000 square
feet
Article IV
SWM site plan
requirements
All
development
Exempt Not exempt
(except
residential
activity)
Not exempt Not exempt
Appendix F
Nonengineered
small project
site plan
Only
residential
development
applicable
Exempt Not exempt Not applicable Not applicable
§ 206-14
Volume
control
requirements
All
development
Not
applicable
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 206-15 Peak
rate control
requirements
All
development
Exempt Exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 206-16
Nonstructural
project design
requirements
All
development
Exempt Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 206-17
Stream bank
erosion
requirements
All
development
Exempt Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 206-13
Erosion and
sediment
pollution
control
requirements
See Table 206-6.2
Article V
Inspections
All
development
Exempt Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 206-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-6
1:492
Table 206-6.1: Exemption Thresholds
Ordinance
Article or
Section
Type of
Project
Less than 5,000 square feet Disturbed
Area and Proposed Impervious Surface
Equal to or
greater than
5,000 square
feet Disturbed
Area
0 to 1,000
square feet
More than
1,000 to
Less than
5,000 square
feet
Equal to or
Greater than
5,000 square
feet
Article VII
Maintenance
responsibilities
All
development
Exempt Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Table 206-6.2: Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Exemption Thresholds
Disturbed
Area
Written E&S
Plan
E&S Plan
Review for
Adequacy by
MCCD
E&S Plan
Review for
Adequacy by
the
Township
NPDES
Permit
Written
PCSM Plan
Required
0 to 1,000
square feet
Not required
unless in HQ or
EV watershed,
or is a condition
of other state
permit
Exempt Exempt Exempt Exempt
1,000 to 5,000
square feet
Required by the
Township
Exempt Not exempt Exempt Per Table
206-6.1
5,000 square
feet to less than
1 acre
Required by the
Township
Required by
Township
Not exempt Exempt Per Table
206-6.1
1 acre or
greater
Required by
MCCD
Required by
MCCD
Not exempt Not exempt Per Table
206-6.1
B. Agricultural activity is exempt from the peak rate control requirements
and SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided
the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa.
Code 102.
C. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the peak
rate control requirements and SWM site plan preparation requirements
of this chapter provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102.
§ 206-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-6
1:493
D. Any aspect of BMP maintenance to an existing SWM system made in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Township is
exempt.
E. The use of land for gardening and/or landscaping for home
consumption is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
F. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 206-11D through L.
G. Infiltration exemptions.
(1) Depth to limiting zone: A minimum of two feet of soil suitable for
infiltration must exist between the invert of the infiltration BMP
and the top of the nearest limiting zone. Otherwise, the volume
control requirement shall not be applied to the development site,
and the entire volume must be treated.
H. Hotspots.
(1) Stormwater hotspots: Appendix D contains a list of types of
hotspots that may be recognized by the Township.150 If a site is a
potential hotspot, it has important implications for how stormwater
is managed. First and foremost, untreated stormwater runoff from
hotspots concentrated into a collection system shall not be
recharged into groundwater where it may contaminate water
supplies. Therefore, the volume control requirement shall not be
applied to development sites that lie within a hotspot (the entire
volume must still be treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater
treatment shall be applied at hotspot sites to prevent pollutant
washoff after construction. The Environmental Protection Agency's
(EPA) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
stormwater program requires some industrial sites to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
(2) Rate of infiltration: When infiltration is not feasible due to poor
infiltration rates or hotspot, the water quality volume must be
treated by an approved SMP.
I. Additional exemption criteria.
(1) Exemption responsibilities: An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect public health, safety, and property.
(2) Drainage problems: Where drainage problems are documented or
known to exist downstream of or is expected from the proposed
activity, the Township may deny exemptions.
(3) Exemptions are limited to specific portions of this chapter.
150. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-6
1:494
§ 206-7. Compatibility with other ordinance or legal requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
§ 206-8. Change of appendixes.
The appendixes listed below are incorporated herein by reference, as
amended:151
(1) Appendix A - Stormwater Management Design Criteria.
(2) Appendix B - Low Impact Development Practices.
(3) Appendix C - Disconnected Impervious Area.
(4) Appendix D - Hot Spots.
(5) Appendix E - West Nile Virus Guidance.
(6) Appendix F - Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan.
(7) Appendix G - Nonstructural Project Design Checklist.
(4) HQ and EV streams: The Township may deny exemptions in high
quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters and source water
protection areas (SWPA).
(5) For a development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining compliance with these exemption
criteria. The starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent
tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective impervious area
computations are cumulatively considered shall be the date of the
municipal adoption of the original Montgomery Township
Stormwater Management Plan Ordinance [May 12, 2014].
(a) For example: If a property owner in Montgomery Township
proposes a three-hundred-square-foot shed after adoption of
the municipal stormwater management ordinance, that
property owner would be exempt from site plan and peak rate
control requirements. If, at a later date, the property owner
proposes to construct a garage and driveway adding an
additional 1,300 square feet of impervious surface, the
applicant would be required to submit a SWM site plan or
small project SWM site plan (or if applicable a fee-in-lieu of
alternative for small projects) in accordance with Article IV
demonstrating the stormwater control requirements for the
total impervious surface of 1,600 square feet.
J. The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Township believes may pose
a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
151. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 206-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-8
1:495
(8) Appendix H - Riparian Buffer Trail Guidelines.
(9) Appendix I - References.
§ 206-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-8
1:496
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 206-9. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 206-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or
less impervious as the result of changing the land cover including the water,
vegetation and bare soil.
ANNUAL EXCEEDANCE PROBABILITY — See "return period."
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage
in any regulated activity defined in § 206-5.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 206-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:497
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the
contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the
actual locations of the building components and changes to the original
contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are turned over
to the qualified professional at the completion of the project.
AVERAGE RECURRENCE INTERVAL — See "return period."
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank, or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a
stream (see "top-of-bank").
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
watercourses, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes that convey
continuously or periodically flowing water.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montgomery County Conservation
District (MCCD).
CULVERT — A structure, with its appurtenant works, which carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
CURVE NUMBER — Value used in the Soil Cover Complex Method. It is
a measure of the percentage of precipitation which is expected to run off
§ 206-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-10
1:498
from the watershed and is a function of the soil, vegetative cover, and tillage
method.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill or structure for
highway, railroad or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP).
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania-registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect or registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop stormwater management
plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. See "return period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon
after a rainfall event and become dry until the next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development or who seeks to undertake any
regulated earth disturbance activity.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved
real estate, whether public or private, including but not limited to land
development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other
structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration
such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or
storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in
this chapter, "development" encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity set forth in § 206-5 is planned, conducted or maintained.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not
confined to a single point location or channel, including sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or
other point of interest (verb);
A.
§ 206-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:499
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage
or conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area,
which allows for infiltration, filtration, and increased time of concentration
as specified in Appendix C, Disconnected Impervious Area.152
DISTURBED AREAS — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff that includes channels, swales,
pipes, conduits, culverts, and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township after the SWM site
plan has been approved.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
that disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands or
diminishes the course, current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway
or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A site-specific plan
identifying BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. For
agricultural plowing or tilling activities, the erosion and sediment control
plan is that portion of a conservation plan identifying BMPs to minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second. See also "peak
discharge."
B.
152. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-10
1:500
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration.
EXISTING RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the groundwater.
EXISTING RESOURCES AND SITE ANALYSIS MAP — A base map which
identifies fundamental environmental site information including floodplains,
wetlands, topography, vegetative site features, natural areas, prime
agricultural land and areas supportive of endangered species.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of the
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or as delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary Map as being a special flood hazard area. That area defined in
the Township Zoning Ordinance153 as the Floodplain Conservation District;
the floodplain definition contained therein is made part of this chapter by
reference.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where
no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundredyear
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary,
that the floodway extends 50 feet from the top-of-bank on each side of the
stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forestland. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE —
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 206-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:501
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells
and springs, and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used
to model the Neshaminy Creek watershed during the Act 167 Plan
development and was the basis for the standards and criteria of this
chapter.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds
levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOT SPOT — An area where land use or activity generates highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater. Typical pollutant loadings in stormwater may
be found in Chapter 8, Section 6, of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP) No. 363-0300-002 (2006). More information concerning
hot spots may be found in § 206-6.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and groundwater
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service,
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any materials that do not permit the natural
absorption and permeation by soils of rain or other surface water, to include
but not be limited to all concrete, asphalt, and similar paving products,
earthen materials (brick, stone), chemical treatment of soils or artificial
ground covers as may be used in the construction of roads, walks,
driveways, parking areas, patios and recreation facilities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, pavement roofs, or driveway areas. Any surface areas designed
to be gravel or crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of excavation.
B.
§ 206-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-10
1:502
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Development that occurs on smaller parcels
that remain undeveloped but are within or very close proximity to urban
or densely developed areas. Infill development usually relies on existing
infrastructure and does not require an extension of water, sewer or other
public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INITIAL ABSTRACTION (IA) — The value used to calculate the volume or
peak rate of runoff in the soil cover complex method. It represents the
depth of rain retained on vegetation plus the depth of rain stored on the soil
surface plus the depth of rain infiltrated prior to the start of runoff.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying a stratum that includes one of the following:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.154
C.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 206-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:503
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES — Practices that will
minimize proposed conditions runoff rates and volumes, which will
minimize needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance used as a reach in the applicable watershed hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MCCD — The Montgomery County Conservation District.
MUNICIPALITY — Montgomery Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NESHAMINY CREEK WATERSHED ACT 167 STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan for managing those land use
activities that will influence stormwater runoff quality and quantity and
that would impact the Neshaminy Creek watershed adopted by Bucks and
Montgomery Counties as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167).
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,155
which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with sufficient fine soil to fill the
voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
155. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 206-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-10
1:504
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service).
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point
where the Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of Township adoption of
this chapter.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based hydrologic
model developed at the Pennsylvania State University.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream which contains water at all times except
during extreme drought.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that allows the infiltration of water into
the ground.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The planning commission of Montgomery
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POST CONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning and
all proposed improvements in the approved land development plan are
completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — See "existing condition."
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before
they enter the system, but not necessarily designed to meet the volume
requirements of § 206-14. For example, any inlets draining to an infiltrating
system should be sumped and trapped to prevent the system from becoming
clogged with excess sediment.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the Township are planned, conducted or maintained.
§ 206-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:505
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by the chapter.
RATIONAL METHOD — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the engineer to the client. The
engineer reviews the contractor's as-built drawings against his/her own
records for completeness, then either turns these over to the client or
transfers the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the
client's permanent records. Record drawings are not the same as record
plans submitted for recording with the County in accordance with the PA
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247).
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to
be redevelopment. Utility trenches in streets are not considered
redevelopment unless more than 50% of the street width including
shoulders is removed and repaved.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or
the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for
infiltration purposes, and do not have an outlet. The retention basin must
infiltrate stored water in four days or less.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
§ 206-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-10
1:506
RETURN PERIOD (or AVERAGE RECURRENCE INTERVAL) — The average
interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given or greater
magnitude can be expected to recur. The reciprocal of the return period is
the annual exceedance probability of the storm event, that is, the probabilty
that the storm event is equaled or exceeded in any one-year period. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to
recur on the average of once every 25 years, or conversely would have a 1/
25 or four-percent chance of occurrence or exceedance in any given year.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation, as well as any other flow
contributions, that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.156
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by water, air or gravity
as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water, air or gravity. Once
this matter is deposited (or remains suspended), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the underground water. More information on seepage
pits may be found in the PA BMP Manual, December 2006, Chapter 6,
Section 4.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, Township streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN).
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 206-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:507
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated in Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, as exceptional value (EV) or high quality (HQ)
waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event"
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES —
Abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan or plans for
managing those land use activities that will influence stormwater runoff
quality and quantity and that would impact the watershed adopted
Montgomery County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167).
STORMWATER SWM SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant or
his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the
particular site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — A flow of water in a natural channel or bed, as a brook, rivulet,
or a small river.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream,
essential to maintaining water quality. (See "buffer.")
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
§ 206-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-10
1:508
STREAMBANK EROSION — The widening, deepening, or headward cutting
of channels and waterways, caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development, provided
the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or
any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. Refer to "land development."
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM SITE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system to be used for a given development site, the contents of which are
established in § 206-22.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel crosssection
at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
TOWNSHIP — Montgomery Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for
Montgomery Township.
VEGETATED SWALE — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface
water.
VERNAL POOL — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring, but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
§ 206-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:509
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WISSAHICKON CREEK ACT 167 PLAN — The watershed plan for managing
those land use activities that will influence stormwater runoff quality and
quantity and that would impact the Wissahickon Creek watershed adopted
by Philadelphia and Montgomery Counties as required by the Act of October
4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).
§ 206-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-10
1:510
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 206-11. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in Township that do not fall
under the exemption criteria shown in § 206-6 shall submit a
stormwater management (SWM) site plan consistent with the
watershed SWM plan to the Township for review. The SWM criteria of
this chapter shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages. Preparation and implementation
of an approved SWM site plan is required. No regulated activities shall
commence until the Township issues written approval of a SWM site
plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the Township, in accordance with Article
IV, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
C. The Township may, after consultation with the Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP), approve measures for meeting the
state water quality requirements other than those in this chapter,
provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not
conflict with, state law including but not limited to the Clean Streams
Law.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
(E&S) control best management practices (BMPs) shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth
disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various
BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual, No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000),
as amended and updated.
E. For all regulated activities, implementation of the volume controls in
§ 206-14 is required.
F. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 206-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-11
1:511
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) from the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Create, maintain, repair or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces (i.e., disconnected impervious
areas, DIAs) by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever
possible. See Appendix C for detail on DIAs.157
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices (e.g., protecting existing trees,
reducing area of impervious surface, cluster development, and
protecting open space) described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) no. 363-0300-002 (2006). See
Appendix B for a summary description.158
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize the use of natural on-site infiltration features
while still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
J. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize the risk of adverse effects.
K. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not
more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
L. The design storms to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge
are listed in Table A-1 (Appendix A).159
M. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
157. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
158. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
159. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-11
1:512
§ 206-12. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 206-13. Erosion and sediment pollution control.
§ 206-14. Volume control.
Volume controls will mitigate increased runoff impacts, protect stream
channel morphology, maintain groundwater recharge, and contribute to
water quality improvements. Stormwater runoff volume control methods
are based on the net change in runoff volume for the two-year storm event.
Volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in
Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated
activities equal to or less than one acre, this chapter establishes no
preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select
either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations of the procedures associated with each methodology, and other
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.160
N. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (PA BMP Manual).
A. Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102 of the Pa. Code and any other
applicable state, county and Township codes. PADEP requires an
engineered post-construction SWM plan with projects proposing earth
disturbance greater than one acre.
B. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the Township.
C. Approval of earth disturbance activities is required by the Township per
Table 206-6.2.
D. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed.
They shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire drainage area contributory to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
160. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 206-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-14
1:513
factors. All regulated activities greater than one acre must use the Design
Storm Method.
A. Design-Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) (any regulated
activity): This method requires detailed modeling based on site
conditions. For modeling assumptions refer to § 206-19A.
(1) Post-development total runoff should not be increased from predevelopment
total runoff for all storms equal to or less than the
two-year twenty-four-hour duration precipitation.
(2) The following applies in order to estimate the increased volume of
runoff for the two-year twenty-four-hour duration precipitation
event:
To calculate the runoff volume (cubic feet) for existing site
conditions (pre-development) and for the proposed developed site
conditions (post-development), it is recommended to use the soil
cover complex method as shown on the following page. Table
A-3 in Appendix A is available to guide a qualified professional
and/or an applicant to calculate the stormwater runoff volume.
The calculated volume shall be either reused, evapotranspired, or
infiltrated through structural or nonstructural means.
Soil Cover Complex Method:
Step 1: Runoff (in) = Q = (P - 0.2S)2/(P + 0.8S)
Where
P = 2-year Rainfall (in)
S = the potential maximum retention (including initial
abstraction, Ia)
S = (1,000/CN) - 10
Step 2: Runoff Volume (Cubic Feet) = Q x Area x 1/12
Where
Q = Runoff (in)
Area = SWM Area (square feet)
B. Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) (regulated activities less
than or equal to one acre):
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture the runoff volume from at least
the first two inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
Volume (cubic feet) = (2" runoff/12 inches)* impervious surface
(square feet)
(2) At least the first inch of runoff volume from the new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it
§ 206-14 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-14
1:514
shall not be released into the surface waters of the commonwealth.
The calculated volume shall be either reused, evapotranspired or
infiltrated through structural or nonstructural means.
Volume (cubic feet) = (1" runoff/12 inches)* impervious surface
(square feet)
(3) Infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate the first
half inch of the permanently removed runoff.
(4) No more than one inch of runoff volume from impervious surfaces
shall be released from the site. The release time must be over 24
hours to 72 hours.
C. Stormwater control measures: The applicant must demonstrate how the
required volume is controlled through stormwater best management
practices (BMPs) which shall provide the means necessary to capture,
reuse, evaporate, transpire or infiltrate the total runoff volume.
(1) If natural resources exist on the site and a SWM site plan
submission is required for the regulated activity, the applicant shall
determine and display the total acreage of protected area where no
disturbance is proposed on the plan. The acreage of the protected
area should be subtracted from the total site area and not included
in the stormwater management site area acreage used in
determining the volume controls.
Stormwater Management Site Area =
{Total Site Area (for both pre and post development
conditions) - Protected Area}
Natural resource areas should be calculated based upon the
Township's own natural resource protection ordinance. If no
ordinance exists, see Table A-2 in Appendix A161 for guidance
to assess the total protected area. For additional reference, see
Chapter 5, Section 5.4.1, of the PA BMP manual.
(2) Calculate the volume controls provided through nonstructural
BMPs. Table A-5 in Appendix A162 is recommended as guidance.
(3) Volume controls provided through nonstructural BMPs should be
subtracted from the required volume to determine the necessary
structural BMPs.
Required
Volume
Control (ft3)
—
Nonstructural
Volume Control
(ft3)
=
Structural
Volume
Requirement (ft3)
161. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
162. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-14
1:515
(4) Calculate the volume controls provided through structural BMPs.
Table A-6 in Appendix A163 is recommended as guidance. See PA
BMP Manual, Chapter 6, for description of the BMPs.
(5) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas
shall be selected based on the suitability of soils and site conditions
(see Table A-6 in Appendix A164 for a list of infiltration BMPs).
Infiltration BMPs shall be constructed on soils that have the
following characteristics:
(a) A minimum soil depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the
infiltration BMPs and the top of bedrock or seasonally high
water table.
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and dewater completely as determined by
field tests. A minimum of 0.2 inches/hour should be utilized and
for acceptable rates a safety factor of 50% should be applied
for design purposes (e.g., for soil which measured 0.4 inches
per hour, the BMP design should use 0.2 inches per hour to
insure safe infiltration rates after construction).
(c) All open-air infiltration facilities shall be designed to
completely infiltrate runoff volume within three days (72
hours) from the start of the design storm.
(d) All subsurface and contained facilities such as capture-andreuse
systems must have storage available equivalent to the
water volume control amount within three days (72 hours)
from the end of the design storm.
(e) Pretreatment (See Appendix D165) shall be provided prior to
infiltration.
(6) Soils. A soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. All regulated
activities are required to perform a detailed soils evaluation by a
qualified design professional which, at minimum, addresses soil
permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(a) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the site to determine general areas of
suitability for infiltration practices. In areas where
development on fill material is under consideration, conduct
geotechnical investigations of subgrade stability; infiltration
may not be ruled out without conducting these tests.
163. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
164. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
165. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-14 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-14
1:516
§ 206-15. Stormwater peak rate control and management districts.
(b) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Percolation tests are not recommended for
design purposes.
(c) Design the infiltration structure based on field determined
capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration surface and
based on the safety factor of 50%.
(d) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed, it must be
demonstrated to the Township that the soils are conducive to
infiltrate on the lots identified.
(e) An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins
where the possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A
detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the
Township.
A. District boundaries. For the purposes of this chapter, the Township is
divided in stormwater management districts as listed in Table 206-15.1.
The boundaries of the stormwater management districts are shown on
official maps attached to and made part of this chapter, which shall be
designated Stormwater Management District Map. The exact location
of the stormwater management district boundaries as they apply to a
given development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries
using the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate data
required) provided as part of the SWM site plan.
B. General. Proposed conditions rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing
conditions for the design storms specified on the Stormwater
Management District Watershed Map and in this section of this chapter.
C. Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the watershed for
the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year design
storms are shown in Table 206-15.1. Development sites located in each
of the management districts must control proposed development
conditions runoff rates to existing conditions runoff rates for the design
storms in accordance with Table 206-15.1 on the following page.
Table 206-15.1: Peak Rate Runoff Control Standards by
Stormwater Management Districts
District
Design Storm
Postdevelopment
(Proposed Conditions)
Design Storm
Predevelopment
(Existing Conditions)
Neshaminy A 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
§ 206-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-15
1:517
Table 206-15.1: Peak Rate Runoff Control Standards by
Stormwater Management Districts
District
Design Storm
Postdevelopment
(Proposed Conditions)
Design Storm
Predevelopment
(Existing Conditions)
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
Neshaminy B 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 50-year
Neshaminy C 2-year 2-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
Wissahickon 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 2-year[JPD1]
25-year 25-year
50-year 10-year[JPD2]
100-year 100-year
NOTE:
The Neshaminy Creek Watershed includes the Little Neshaminy Creek.
D. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the
management district criteria for the district in which the discharge is
located.
E. Off-site areas. When calculating the allowable peak runoff rates,
developers do not have to account for runoff draining into the subject
development site from an off-site area. On-site drainage facilities shall
§ 206-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-15
1:518
§ 206-16. Nonstructural project design to minimize stormwater
impacts.
§ 206-17. Stream bank erosion requirements (channel protection).
be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development
site.
F. Site areas. The stormwater management site area is the only area
subject to the management district criteria. Nonimpacted areas or
nonregulated activities bypassing the stormwater management
facilities would not be subject to the management district criteria.
G. Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites, one
of the following minimum design parameters shall be accomplished,
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions as
determined by the Township:
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by Table 206-15.1 and
§ 206-20; or
(2) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface.
A. The design of all regulated activities should include the following to
minimize stormwater impacts:
(1) The applicant should find practicable alternatives to the surface
discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces, and
the degradation of waters of the commonwealth and must maintain
as much as possible the natural hydrologic regime of the site.
(2) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of
implementation after taking into consideration existing technology
and logistics in light of overall project purposes and other
municipal requirements.
(3) See Appendix G for a Nonstructural Project Design Checklist.166
A. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a riparian buffer extending a minimum of 10 feet
to either side of the top-of-bank of the channel. The buffer area shall be
established and maintained in an undisturbed state. This buffer area
may be maintained as a meadow with minimal mowing of the grassed
area, or as a forested buffer, being planted with appropriate native
vegetation (refer to Appendix B of the BMP Manual for plant lists167). If
an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant, easement,
166. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
167. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-17
1:519
§ 206-18. (Reserved)
§ 206-19. Calculation methodology.
etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this chapter, the existing buffer
shall be maintained. This does not include lakes or wetlands.
B. Applicants shall adhere to the following stream bank erosion/channel
protection requirements:
(1) In addition to the control of water quality volume (in order to
minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream stream
bank erosion), the primary requirement is to design a BMP to
detain the proposed conditions two-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event to the existing conditions one-year flow using the SCS Type II
distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as adding
a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure or a sand filter)
so that the proposed conditions one-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility from a
point when the maximum volume of water from the one-year,
twenty-four-hour storm event is captured (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can
begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water volume
control orifice is at the invert of the facility).
(2) The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter, where possible, and a trash rack shall be
installed to prevent clogging. On sites with small drainage areas
contributing to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume
to allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice,
the calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. Orifice
sizes less than three inches can be utilized, provided that the
design will prevent clogging of the intake. It is recommended that
the design, to accommodate maintenance, include a replaceables
and/or porous media filter cartridge.
A. The following criteria shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used to determine the existing conditions runoff volume and
flow rate shall be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition." A site is classified as wooded if a continuous canopy
of trees exists over 1/4 acre.
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site, including agriculture,
bare earth, and fallow ground, shall be considered as "meadow
in good condition," unless the natural ground cover generates
a lower curve number (CN) or Rational "c" value (i.e., woods)
as listed in Tables A-4 or A-7 in Appendix A.168
§ 206-17 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-19
1:520
(2) For development and redevelopment sites, the ground cover used
to determine the existing conditions runoff volume and flow rate for
the developed portion of the site shall be based upon actual land
cover conditions. If the developed site contains impervious
surfaces, 20% of the impervious surface area shall be considered
meadow in the model for existing conditions.
B. Stormwater runoff peak discharges from all development sites with a
drainage area equal to or greater than two acres shall be calculated
using a generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the
NRCS Soil Cover Complex Method. Table 206-19.1 summarizes
acceptable computation methods. The method selected by the design
professional shall be based on the individual limitations and suitability
of each method for a particular site. The Township may allow the use of
the Rational Method (Q = CIA) to estimate peak discharges from
drainage areas that contain less than two acres.
Q = Peak flow rate, cubic feet per second (CFS)
C = Runoff coefficient, dependent on land use/cover
I = Design rainfall intensity, inches per hour
A = Drainage area, acres
C. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to Table A-1 in Appendix A.169 If
a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is
used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall
shall be 24 hours.
Table 206-19.1: Acceptable Computation Methodologies For
Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in
TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
168. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
169. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-19
1:521
Table 206-19.1: Acceptable Computation Methodologies For
Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary;
simpler than TR-20 or HEC-1
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on the
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 2 acres, or
as approved by the Township
and/or Township Engineer.
Not acceptable when a full
hydrograph is required
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the Township and/or
Township Engineer
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow
and return periods from Table A-1 in Appendix A.170 Times-ofconcentration
for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the soil cover complex method shall be based on Table A-4
in Appendix A.171
F. Runoff coefficients (C) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be consistent with Table A-7 in Appendix
A.172
G. Runoff from proposed sites graded to the subsoil will not have the same
runoff conditions as the site under existing conditions because of soil
compaction, even after top-soiling or seeding. The proposed condition
"CN" or "C" shall increase by 5% to better reflect proposed soil
conditions.
H. The Manning equation is preferred for one-dimensional, gradually
varied, open channel flow. In other cases, appropriate, applicable
methods should be applied; however, early coordination with the
Township is necessary.
170. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
171. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
172. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-19 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-19
1:522
§ 206-20. Other requirements.
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using the
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method of the
Township.
J. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-
Indication Method. For drainage areas greater than two acres in size,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph. The Township may approve the
use of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique
that shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume
from a method that produces a full hydrograph.
A. Hot spots.
(1) The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hot spot land use
areas. Examples of hot spots are listed in Appendix D.173
(2) Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In
no case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement. Guidance regarding acceptable methods of
pretreatment is located in Appendix D.174
B. West Nile guidance requirements. All wet basin designs shall
incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance
found in Appendix E.175
173. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
174. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
175. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-20
1:523

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 206-21. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any
building or occupancy permit, the commencement of any earth disturbance,
or activity may not proceed until the property owner or applicant or his/her
agent has received written approval of a SWM site plan from the Township
and an approval of an adequate erosion and sediment (E&S) control plan
review from the Township or County Conservation District.
§ 206-22. SWM site plan requirements.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project,
including calculations, maps, and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to
the associated computations and E&S control plan by title and date. The
cover sheet of the computations and E&S control plan shall refer to the
associated maps by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be
included in the SWM site plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of the project including plan contents
described in § 206-22B.
(2) General description of proposed SWM techniques to be used for
SWM facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic and hydraulic computations for all SWM
facilities.
(4) All reviews and letters of adequacy from the Conservation District
for the erosion and sedimentation plan as required by Township,
county or state regulations.
(5) A general description of proposed nonpoint source pollution
controls.
(6) The SWM site plan application and completed fee schedule form
and associated fee for all regulated activities not already paying
pay fees by under the SALDO regulations.176
(7) The SWM site plan checklist.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 206-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-22
1:525
(8) Appropriate sections from the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,177 and other applicable local ordinances,
shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plan.
B. Plans: SWM site plan shall provide the following information;
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of natural site conditions and stormwater
management needs. This shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Site features:
[1] The location of the project relative to highways, Township
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
[2] The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines on site and to within 50 feet of
property lines.
[3] Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
[4] The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to
the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
[5] Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including
drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales. At
a minimum this should include pre- and post-drainage area
maps, an overall post construction stormwater
management plan, stormwater details sheets, and
landscape plans (if proposing bioretention facilities, lowimpact
development, bioretention, or vegetative basins).
[6] The locations and minimum setback distances of existing
and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply
wells.
[7] The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
[8] The location of proposed septic tank infiltration areas and
wells in cases where groundwater recharge measures
such as seepage pits, beds or trenches are proposed.
(b) Natural site conditions:
[1] Existing Resource and Site Analysis Map:
[a] An Existing Resource and Site Analysis Map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas including,
but not limited to;
[i] Steep slopes;
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 206-22 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-22
1:526
[ii] Ponds;
[iii] Lakes;
[iv] Streams;
[v] Wetlands;
[vi] Hydric soils;
[vii] Hydrologic soil groups A and B;
[viii] Vernal pools;
[ix] Stream buffers;
[x] Open channels;
[xi] Existing recharge areas; and
[xii] Floodplains.
[b] The area of each of these sensitive areas shall be
calculated and should be consistent with the runoff
volume calculation § 206-14C(1).
[2] A detailed site evaluation for projects proposed in areas of
frequent flooding, karst topography, and other
environmentally sensitive areas, such as brownfields and
source water protection areas.
[3] Existing and proposed contour lines (two feet).
[4] The total extent of the drainage area upstream from the
site and all down gradient receiving channels, swales and
waters to which stormwater runoff or drainage will be
discharged.
(c) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to
demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 206-11.
(d) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(3) The format of the plan shall include the following;
(a) The expected project time schedule.
§ 206-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-22
1:527
§ 206-23. Plan submission.
The Township requires submission of a complete SWM site plan, as
specified in this chapter.
(b) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
(c) The date of submission.
(d) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(e) A North arrow.
(f) An access easement around all stormwater management
facilities is required that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way. The size of the easement shall be
commensurate with the maintenance and access requirements
determined in the design of the BMP.
(g) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(h) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities. All facilities
shall meet the performance standards and design criteria
specified in this chapter.
(i) The following signature block for the design engineer: "I,
(design engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of Montgomery Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance or plan."
(j) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan must be approved by
the Township and that a revised E&S Plan must be submitted
to the Conservation District.
(4) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that is proposed.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(6) The SWM site plan shall include an operations and maintenance
(O&M) plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater
management facilities, as well as schedules and costs for O&M
activities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and
responsibilities for O&M.
§ 206-22 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-23
1:528
§ 206-24. Small project stormwater management site plan.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan:
(1) NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction
Activities.
(2) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. The SWM site plan shall be submitted to the following agencies. Refer
to the Township application for the number of copies.
(1) The Township accompanied by the requisite Township review fee.
(2) The County Conservation District.
(3) The Township Engineer (where applicable).
C. When the SWM site plan is associated with a subdivision and/or land
development, the submission requirements of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance shall be followed.178
D. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
E. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Township,
MCCD or PADEP.
A. Residential projects proposing less than or equal to 5,000 square feet of
impervious surface and less than one acre of earth disturbance qualify
as a small project. The requirements of a small project stormwater
management plan are presented in Appendix F.179
B. Fee-in-lieu of alternative for small projects:
(1) In order to address flooding and erosion problems found in the
Township, applicants proposing a small project, as defined in this
chapter, Stormwater Management Ordinance, may pay a fee in lieu
of stormwater conveyance/detention/storage facilities as an
alternative to the construction of stormwater conveyance/
detention/storage facilities, with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors. When fees are offered by an applicant, the Township
may, but shall not be required to, accept the fees, provided that the
proposed stormwater solution meets the requirements in this
chapter.
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
179. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 206-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-24
1:529
(2) These fees shall be used to construct or make improvements to
stormwater facilities that are either Township-owned or have a
perpetual easement or deed restriction that would ensure access,
and that are located in the Township within the same watershed as
the project paying the fee. Additionally, such fees may be used for
the acquisition of land and rights-of-way, engineering, legal and
planning costs and all other costs, including debt service, related to
the construction or improvement of necessary stormwater control
facilities.
(a) Applicability.
[1] In order to ensure that water quality protection and
stormwater management is provided during and after the
construction of the proposed activity, the FILO alternative
shall be available where the following conditions apply:
[a] The proposed activity is located in a residential zoning
district.
[b] The project site is located in a watershed for which an
Act 167 stormwater management plan has been
prepared by the county and approved by PADEP.
[2] In addition to the criteria in Subsection B(1)(a)[1][a], the
project site must meet at least one of the following two
criteria:
[a] The project site is located in a subdivision that is
served by storm sewers discharging to a stormwater
basin or other stormwater management facility which
infiltrates, evaporates or detains stormwater for a
period of time prior to discharge; or
[b] The following conditions exist on the site, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer:
[i] The surface conditions on the site will encourage
overland sheet flow of stormwater, as opposed to
concentrated flow; and
[ii] The project site is located at a sufficient distance
from the receiving stream such that runoff from
the project will be filtered by vegetation and given
opportunity to infiltrate as it flows across the land
to the stream.
(b) Fees:
[1] Applicants shall pay the following fees-in-lieu of
stormwater facilities:
§ 206-24 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-24
1:530
§ 206-25. Stormwater management site plan review.
[a] Fees in lieu of stormwater detention/storage facilities
on a single-family dwelling lot shall be based on the
cubic feet of required storage capacity generated by
the entire area of the proposed impervious surface,
when that area is greater than 1,000 square feet and
less than 5,000 square feet, in accordance with this
chapter. Such fee shall be established and updated
periodically by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
and shall be based on an average cost of providing
stormwater control facilities per square foot of
proposed impervious surface.
[b] Fees collected by the Township shall be deposited in
an interest-bearing account in a bank authorized to
receive deposits of Township funds. Interest earned by
the account shall be credited to that account and shall
be used for the same purposes as money deposited in
the account.
[c] Fee-in-lieu payments shall be collected when the land
development agreement is finalized or, if no land
development agreement is required, before final
permits are issued.
(c) Fee-in-lieu credit:
[1] Each square foot of proposed impervious surface
compensated by a fee-in-lieu payment shall be credited as
the actual construction of this stormwater storage when
sites are proposed for development in the future.
A. The stormwater management (SWM) site plan shall be reviewed by a
qualified professional on behalf of the Township for consistency with
the provisions of this chapter. After review, the qualified professional
shall provide a written recommendation for the Township to approve or
disapprove the SWM site plan. If it is recommended to disapprove the
SWM site plan, the qualified professional shall state the reasons for the
disapproval in writing. The qualified professional also may recommend
approval of the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing. The SWM site plan
review and recommendations shall be completed within the time
allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code for reviewing subdivision
plans.
B. The Township will notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
period is 90 days. If a longer notification period is provided by other
statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the
§ 206-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-25
1:531
§ 206-26. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this chapter.
§ 206-27. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township's concerns, to the Township in accordance with
this chapter. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 206-28. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The Township's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The Township may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Township signs
the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is not
completed according to § 206-29 within the term of validity, the Township
may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all
permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the Township
shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 206-27.
Township. If the Township disapproves the SWM site plan, the Township
shall cite the reasons for disapproval in writing.
§ 206-25 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-28
1:532
ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 206-29. Inspections.
A. The Township shall inspect all phases of the installation of the best
management practices (BMPs) and/or stormwater management (SWM)
facilities as deemed appropriate by the Township.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township determines that the BMPs
and/or stormwater management facilities are not being installed in
accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the Township shall
revoke any existing permits or other approvals and issue a cease and
desist order until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved,
as specified in this chapter and until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities
may be conducted by the Township to confirm compliance with the
approved SWM site plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
D. The applicant and/or developer shall be responsible for providing asbuilt
plans of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan.
The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies, which were
reviewed and received approval by the Township, shall be submitted to
the Township.
E. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all SWM BMPs have
been constructed according to the approved plans and specifications. If
any qualified professionals contributed to the construction plans, they
must sign and seal the completion certificate.
F. Final plans based upon the record drawings must be submitted to the
Township for the project to be eligible for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 206-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-29
1:533

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 206-30. Stormwater management site plan review and inspection
fee.
Fees shall be established by the Township to cover plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the Township. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant at the time of SWM site plan submission. A review and
inspection fee schedule shall be established by Township resolution. The
Township shall periodically update the review and inspection fee schedule
to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.
§ 206-31. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter (unless otherwise waived by the
Township) shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Township administrative costs.
B. Township legal costs.
C. Township engineering costs.
D. The review of the stormwater (SWM) site plan by the Township.
E. The review of as-built drawings.
F. The site inspections.
G. The inspection of SWM facilities and drainage improvements during
construction.
H. The final inspection at the completion of the construction of the SWM
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site plan.
I. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 206-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-31
1:535

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 206-32. Performance guarantee.
§ 206-33. Operations and maintenance of stormwater facilities and
BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the Township for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management (SWM) facilities as:
(1) Required by the approved SWM site plan equal to or greater than
the full construction cost of the required controls; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.180
B. For other regulated activities, the Township shall require a financial
guarantee from the applicant.
A. Recording of documents.
(1) The owner of any land upon which stormwater facilities and BMPs
will be placed, constructed, or implemented, as described in the
stormwater facility and BMP operations and maintenance (O&M)
plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County, within 90 days of
approval of the stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan by the
Township:
(a) The O&M plan, or a summary thereof;
(b) O&M agreements under § 206-35; and
(c) Easements under § 206-36.
(2) The developer or builder shall immediately notify the Township
Secretary of the book and page wherein said documents are
recorded and shall supply a copy of the recorded documents. If
such information is not received within 100 days of the approval of
the stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan by the Township, the
stormwater facilities and BMP O&M plan shall not be considered
an approved plan for the purpose of this article.
B. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply
with this section.
C. The following items shall be included in the stormwater facility and
BMP O&M plan:
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 206-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-33
1:537
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of
Montgomery County, and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inchby-
thirty-six-inch sheets. The contents of the map(s) shall include,
but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of stormwater
facilities and BMPs.
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, Township
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks.
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate.
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area.
(e) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved.
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines on site and within 50 feet of property
lines of the project site.
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added.
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(i) A twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
facilities and BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(2) A description of how each stormwater facility and BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity and contact information
associated with the person(s) responsible for O&M.
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
(4) A statement, signed by the facility owner, acknowledging that the
stormwater facilities and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the Township.
D. The stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing O&M of all stormwater
facilities and BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
§ 206-33 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-33
1:538
§ 206-34. Township review of stormwater facilities and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 206-35. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater facilities and BMPs.
are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater facilities and
BMPs may also be offered for dedication to and maintained by the
Township.
(2) If a plan includes O&M by single ownership, or if sewers and other
public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, the
O&M of stormwater facilities and BMPs shall be the responsibility
of the owner or private management entity.
E. The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
O&M responsibilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or
reject the O&M responsibility for any or all of the stormwater facilities
and BMPs.
F. Facilities, areas, or structures used as BMPs shall be enumerated as
permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions
or conservation easements that run with the land.
G. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
H. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this article and this chapter.
A. The Township shall review the stormwater facilities and BMP O&M plan
for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter, and
any permits issued by PADEP.
B. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing whether the
stormwater facility and BMP O&M plan is approved.
C. The Township shall require a record drawing of all stormwater facilities
and BMPs.
A. The owner shall sign an O&M agreement with the Township covering all
stormwater facilities and BMPs that are to be privately owned. The
O&M agreement shall be transferred with transfer of ownership. The
agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township.
B. Other items may be included in the O&M agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory O&M of all stormwater controls
and BMPs. The O&M agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township.
C. The owner is responsible for the O&M of the SWM BMPs. If the owner
fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the Township may perform the
§ 206-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-35
1:539
§ 206-36. Stormwater management easements.
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
A. The owner must obtain all necessary real estate rights to install,
operate, and maintain all stormwater facilities in the SWM site plan.
B. The owner must provide the Township easements, or other appropriate
real estate rights, to perform inspections and maintenance for the
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas.
§ 206-35 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-36
1:540
ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 206-37. Prohibited discharges.
§ 206-38. Roof drains.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any non-stormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the waters of the commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except (1) as provided in Subsection C below, and (2) discharges
allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources including water line flushing;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Air conditioning condensate;
(5) Springs;
(6) Water from crawl space pumps;
(7) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
(9) Lawn watering;
(10) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges [per Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) requirements];
(11) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(12)Water from individual residential car washing; and/or
(13) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the Township or PADEP
will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to sanitary sewers.
§ 206-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-38
1:541
§ 206-39. Alteration of stormwater management BMPs.
B. Roof drains and sump pumps may be connected to streets, storm
sewers or roadside ditches only when permitted by the Township.
C. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any stormwater
management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs), facilities,
areas, or structures unless it is part of an approved maintenance
program and written approval of the Township has been obtained.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater facility or BMP or within a drainage easement which
would limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater facility or BMP
without the written approval of the Township.
§ 206-38 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-39
1:542
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 206-40. Right-of-entry.
§ 206-41. Inspection.
Stormwater management (SWM) best management practices (BMPs)
should be inspected for proper operation by the landowner, or the owner's
designee (including the Township for dedicated and owned facilities),
according to the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 206-42. Enforcement.
All inspections regarding compliance with the Stormwater Management
(SWM) site plan and this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized Township
representatives may enter at reasonable times upon any property
within the Township to inspect the implementation, condition, or
operation and maintenance of the stormwater facilities or best
management practices (BMPs) in regard to any aspect governed by this
chapter.
B. Landowners with stormwater facilities and BMPs on their property
shall allow persons working on behalf of the Township ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance
with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater facility or BMP in the Township
such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of
the discharges from such stormwater facilities or BMP.
A. Annually for the first five years;
B. Once every three years thereafter;
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm; and/or
D. As specified in the operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement.
A. Public nuisance.
(1) The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a
public nuisance.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
B. Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Township may order
§ 206-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-42
1:543
§ 206-43. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater facilities and best management
practices (BMPs); and
(7) Operation and maintenance (O&M) of stormwater facilities and
BMPs.
C. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Township and the expense may be charged to the violator.
D. Failure to comply within the time specified may subject a violator to the
penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing any and
all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the Township may be suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by the
Township for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life, health, or
property of others.
B. Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false,
misleading, or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void
without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other
authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency, or
employee of the Township purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 206-42 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-43
1:544
§ 206-44. Violations and penalties.
§ 206-45. Appeals.
C. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the
stormwater facilities and BMPs or the elimination of the hazard or
nuisance; and
(2) The Township is satisfied that all applicable violations in this
chapter have been corrected.
D. Any permit or approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined of this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties that may range from liens against the property to fines for
each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and the applicable fines
are cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
under this chapter, may appeal to the appropriate judicial or
administrative body according to applicable Pennsylvania law.
§ 206-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-45
1:545
Chapter 209
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 43.
Temporary retail businesses — See Ch. 215.
Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 206-45 MONTGOMERY CODE § 206-45
1:546
ARTICLE I
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-22-2010 by Ord. No. 10-247181]
§ 209-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax."
§ 209-2. Authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,182
as amended.
§ 209-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 209-4. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — "Compensation" as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating to
personal income tax), not including, however, wages or compensation paid
to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses are
allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971." Any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
181. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Occupational Privilege Tax,
adopted 11-27-1973 by Ord. No. 45, as amended.
182. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-4
1:547
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity (except from corporations), determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Montgomery Township.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 209-5 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 209-5. Levy of tax.
The Montgomery Township hereby levies and imposes on every individual
engaging in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the
Montgomery Township a tax in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning
the first day of January 2011 and continuing on a calendar basis annually
thereafter, until modified or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax
may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated
by the Montgomery Township from time to time: emergency services, which
shall include emergency medical services, police services and/or fire
services; road construction and/or maintenance; reduction of property
taxes; or property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instrument of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
§ 209-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-5
1:548
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subch. F
(relating to homestead property exclusion). The political subdivision shall
use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency
services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature
heretofore levied by the political subdivision. The tax shall be no more than
$52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of
political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
§ 209-6. Exemption; refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this Subsection A(2), "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
§ 209-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-6
1:549
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
Subsection B that employers shall not be responsible for
investigating exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption
eligibility or exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. Montgomery Township, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the General Municipal
Law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Township of Montgomery or the Collector shall
determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt
persons.
§ 209-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-7
1:550
§ 209-7. Duty of employers to collect.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
§ 209-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-7
1:551
§ 209-8. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 209-9. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
Collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 31, respectively.
§ 209-10. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who has earned income or realizes net profit,
as those terms are defined herein, within the political subdivision shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the tax due to the Collector on
or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 209-11. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent
employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more
than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim
to collect the local services tax shall be in the following order:
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection
B of § 209-6 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
A. First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
§ 209-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-11
1:552
§ 209-12. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 209-13. Administration of tax.
B. Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works
if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
C. Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. In case of
dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year
declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima
facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County after exhausting
any administrative remedies, as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
§ 209-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-13
1:553
§ 209-14. Suits for collection.
§ 209-15. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 209-15.1. Interpretation.
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 209-13 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-15.1
1:554
ARTICLE II
Mercantile License Tax
[Adopted 12-12-1978 by Ord. No. 66]
§ 209-16. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mercantile License Tax
Ordinance."
§ 209-17. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this article unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS or GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — In general,
the "gross receipts" or "gross volume of business" upon which the
tax is imposed is the value of all cash, credits or property received
by a person which is attributable to the carrying on of business in
the Township, undiminished by any costs of doing business, including
both services, labor and materials entered into or becoming component
parts of the services performed within the Township. A receipt
generally will be considered attributable to the Township if any part
of the transaction or service giving rise to the receipt takes place
within the Township or is directed in any part from an office or place
of business within the Township.[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
66C]
LICENSE YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31,
inclusive.[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation (except such as are wholly exempt from
taxation under the Act of the General Assembly No. 511, approved
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257).183
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in
or a vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale
dealer or vendor or a wholesale and retail dealer or vendor as
hereinafter defined.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Township of Montgomery.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The person duly appointed by the Township
Manager of the Township of Montgomery to administer this article
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.[Amended
4-16-1979 by Ord. No. 66A; 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31,
inclusive.[Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
183. Editor's Note: The Local Tax Enabling Act. See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 209-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-17
1:555
§ 209-18. License. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business
that is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar
days.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Montgomery.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER or WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
VENDOR — Any person who sells to dealers in or vendors of goods,
wares and merchandise and to other persons.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who
sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and
merchandise.[Amended 4-16-1979 by Ord. No. 66A]
B. The terms "person," "retail dealer," "wholesale dealer" and "wholesale
and retail dealer," hereinbefore defined in this article, shall not include
nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the government of the
United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any person
vending or disposing of articles of his own manufacture for shipment or
delivery from the place of the manufacture thereof or any farmer
vending or disposing of his own product or any other transaction
exempted by law.
A. For each license year, every person desiring to engage in the business
of wholesale or retail or wholesale and retail vendor or dealer in goods,
wares and merchandise and any person conducting a restaurant or
other place where food, drink or refreshments are sold in the Township
shall, on or before the 15th day of March or prior to commencing
business in any such license year, apply for and procure a mercantile
license for his place of business or, if more than one, for each of his
places of business in the Township from the Tax Administrator, who
shall issue the same upon payment of a fee for a license for the place of
business or, if more than one, for each of the places of business in the
Township for such license year. Each application for a license shall be
signed by the applicant, if a natural person, and, in the case of an
association or partnership, by a partner thereof and, in the case of a
corporation, by an officer thereof. Such license shall not be assignable
and shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business at all times.
In the case of loss, defacement or destruction of any license, the person
to whom the license was issued shall apply to the Tax Administrator for
a new license, for which a fee shall be charged. The amount of such fee
shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time.
[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
B. Any person required to pay both a Business Privilege License Tax and a
Mercantile License Tax needs only one license for each place of
business.
§ 209-17 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-19
1:556
§ 209-19. Imposition of tax. [Amended 4-16-1979 by Ord. No. 66A;
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 66B; 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
A tax to provide revenue for general Township purposes is hereby levied,
assessed and imposed upon every person engaged in any of the following
occupations or businesses in the Township at the rate hereinafter set forth,
and such persons shall pay a mercantile license tax for the year beginning
January 1, 1979, and each year thereafter at such rate, subject to the
exceptions hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that in no event shall
the annual mercantile license tax herein imposed be less than $10 for each
of the places of business of every such person.
§ 209-20. Exemptions, deductions and exclusions. [Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of every
kind, at the rate of 1/5 (0.2) of a mill on each dollar of the gross volume
of business transacted by him during the license year.
B. Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of every
kind and all persons engaged in conducting restaurants or other places
where food, drink or refreshments are sold, at the rate of 1 1/2 (1.50) of
a mill on each dollar of the gross volume of business transacted by him
during the license year.
C. Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise of every kind at the rate of 1/5 (0.2) mill on each dollar of
the gross volume of wholesale business transacted by him during
license year, and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise of every kind at the rate of one and 1 1/2 (1.50) mill on
each dollar of gross volume of retail business transacted by him during
the license year.
D. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the dollar volume of
annual business transacted by wholesale and retail dealers derived
from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken by any dealer as
a trade-in or as a part payment for other goods, wares and
merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the
trade-in allowance.
A. All persons required to pay a mercantile tax under the provisions of this
article shall be exempted from paying such tax upon the same subject
matter of taxation upon which such persons are required to pay a
business privilege tax under the Business Privilege Tax Ordinance.184
Any person required to pay both a business privilege tax and a
mercantile tax may file one joint return. In addition, any portion of a
taxpayer's gross receipts which is subject to a gross receipts tax under
any other Township ordinance may not be taxed under this article.
184. Editor's Note: See Article V of this chapter.
§ 209-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-20
1:557
B. Persons employed for a wage or salary, nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational
purposes, agencies of the government of the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County of Montgomery and the
North Penn School District and the business of any political subdivision
or any authority created or organized under and pursuant to any Act of
Assembly are exempt from the provisions of this article.
C. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross receipts from
utility service to any person or company whose rates of service are fixed
and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or on any
privilege or transaction involving the rendering of any such public
utility service.
D. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on goods and articles
manufactured in the Township or the by-products of manufacture or on
minerals, timber, natural resources and farm products produced in the
Township or on the preparation or processing thereof for use or market
or on any privilege, act or transaction related to the business of
manufacturing, the production, preparation or processing of minerals,
timber and natural resources or farm products by manufacturers, by
producers and by farmers with respect to the goods, articles and
products of their own manufacture, production or growth or on any
privilege, act or transaction relating to the business of processing byproducts
of manufacture or on the transportation, loading, unloading or
dumping or storage of such goods, articles, products or by-products.
E. Refunds, credits or allowances given by a person to a customer on
account of defects in services rendered or in goods, wares and
merchandise sold or returned may be deducted from the amount of the
gross receipts of the person.
F. Adjustments allowed to customers may be deducted from gross receipts
if they are deducted on the face of the invoice as a medium of adjusting
the price or fee for the service and if they are not reimbursed to the
person by his supplier or some other person.
G. Federal, state and local taxes are not included in gross receipts if they
are collected from the customer and are separately stated on the
evidence of charge or sale or the customer produces satisfactory proof
of payment of the federal, state or local taxes.
H. This article excludes from the definition of gross receipts the receipts
from services performed from a place of business regularly maintained
outside the Township by the taxpayer to a place of business regularly
maintained outside the Township by the customer, provided that such
performance is not made for the purpose of evading the tax. Services or
deliveries of services to a residence or place of business located outside
the Township do not qualify for this exclusion.
I. Where the gross receipts of the taxpayer cannot in their entirety be
subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of provisions of
§ 209-20 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-20
1:558
§ 209-21. Computation of tax. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
66C]
§ 209-22. Returns. [Amended 4-16-1979 by Ord. No. 66A;
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision of law, the Tax
Administrator shall establish rules and regulations and methods of
allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the gross receipts
which is properly attributable to doing business in the Township shall
be taxed by this article.
A. Estimated taxes.
(1) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced business at least a full year prior to the tax year
shall compute the gross volume of business upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during the 12 months
preceding the tax year.
(2) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced business less than one full year prior to the tax
year shall compute the gross volume of business by multiplying by
12 the monthly average of the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during the months while he was in business prior
to the tax year.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
commences business subsequent to January 1 of the tax year shall
compute the gross volume of business by multiplying the actual
gross volume of business transacted by him during the first month
of his engaging in business by the number of months remaining in
the tax year.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature, except for any person licensed to engage in a temporary
retail business under Ordinance No. 83, as amended,185 shall
compute the gross volume of business upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during the tax year.
B. Final taxes. On or before March 15 of the year following the end of the
tax year, every person subject to the tax hereby imposed shall make a
return to the Tax Administrator of the Township of the actual gross
receipts of the taxpayer during the period for which the taxpayer is
subject to the tax. Such final return shall state the amount of tax paid at
the time of filing the estimated return and the amount of tax due upon
the final computation.
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Temporary Retail Businesses.
§ 209-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-22
1:559
A. Every return as required by this article shall be made upon a form
furnished by the Tax Administrator. Every person making such return
shall certify the correctness thereof under the penalties of perjury.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall be required
to file two tax returns each year; an estimated return and a final return,
unless otherwise provided for in this article. Each time an estimated
return is required to be filed, the final return shall be filed the following
calendar year. If it is determined that the amount of tax paid in the
estimated return was greater than required by the final return, the
taxpayer shall be entitled to apply the overpayment to the estimated
return in the same calendar year in which the final return in question is
being filed. In the event that the tax was less than the amount finally
determined to be owed in the final return, the taxpayer shall be liable to
pay said tax upon the filing of the final return. In the event that the
amount paid at the time of the filing of the estimated return is less than
80% of the amount due in the final return, a penalty shall also be paid
by the taxpayer in the amount of 10% of the difference between the final
tax due and the estimated tax paid.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced business at least one full year prior to the beginning of the
tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of March following, file with
the Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name,
business and business address and such other information as may be
necessary to compute the actual gross receipts of such person during
the preceding year and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced business less than one full year prior to the beginning of
the tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of March following, file
with the Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name,
business and business address and such other information as may be
necessary to compute the actual gross receipts of such person during
the preceding year and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
E. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year shall,
within 60 days from the date of commencing such business, file with the
Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name, business
and business address and such other information as may be necessary
to compute the actual gross receipts of such person during the first
month of business and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
F. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who is engaged in a business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant
by its nature, except for any person licensed to engage in a temporary
retail business under Ordinance No. 83, as amended,186 shall, within
seven days from the date of completion of such business, file with the
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Temporary Retail Businesses.
§ 209-22 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-22
1:560
§ 209-23. Payment.
§ 209-24. Duties of the Tax Administrator. [Amended 12-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 66C]
Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name, business
and business address and such information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross receipts of such person during such period
and the amount of the tax due.
G. Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within seven
days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the
actual gross volume of business conducted and done by such person
during the tax year in which said person ceased doing business and pay
the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the
time of filing said return. If such tax has been previously paid based
upon estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a
refund, without interest, of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which
business was terminated.
H. Receipt. The Tax Administrator, upon request to him, will provide a
receipt of payment of the tax.
I. On or before March 15 of the year following the tax year, every person
subject to the tax hereby imposed shall make a final return as required
by § 209-21B.
A. At the time of filing the first return, the person making the same shall
pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due.
B. At the time of filing the final return, if the full amount of the tax due by
the taxpayer for the tax year has not been paid, the taxpayer shall pay
the remaining balance of the tax, which shall be the difference between
the amount of the tax paid at the time of making the estimated return
on the estimated computation and the amount of the tax finally shown
to be due. If the balance shall be a credit, the amount of the credit shall
be applied towards the current year's estimated tax. [Amended
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
A. The Tax Administrator is charged with the duties of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from
each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township, by resolution, may
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article
and charging the Tax Administrator with the responsibility for enforcing
the provisions of this article and any rules and/or regulations
promulgated pursuant hereto.
§ 209-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-24
1:561
§ 209-25. Recovery of taxes.
C. In the event that the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make
a return, then in such case the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed
deputies shall assess said person or persons on such an amount of
whole or gross volume of business as said Tax Administrator or his
deputies deem reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of such
assessment, the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall
give the parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade,
business, occupation or class and the amount of the mercantile tax
imposed or levied.
D. The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will
enable him to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Such accounts and records must disclose in
detail the gross receipts and other data pertaining to the taxpayer's
gross volume of business and must be sufficiently complete to enable
the Tax Administrator or his deputies to verify all transactions. The Tax
Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any person or persons subject to or
supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article in order to
verify the accuracy of the return made or, if no return was made,
ascertain the tax due.
E. The burden is hereby imposed upon any person, firm or corporation
claiming an exemption from the payment of the tax hereby imposed to
convince the Tax Administrator of his legal right to such exemption.
F. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Tax Administrator shall have
the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other cases.
G. Any information gained by the Tax Administrator or any other official
agent or member of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Montgomery as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential
except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
H. If the final return of the taxpayer shows an overpayment of the tax by
reason of the fact that the taxpayer did not continue to engage in
business throughout the year, the Tax Administrator shall refund to the
taxpayer the amount of such overpayment, without interest, which shall
be the difference between the amount of tax paid upon the filing of the
first return and the amount of the tax finally shown to be due.
A. All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Township Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now by law
recoverable.
B. The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power in the name of the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery
§ 209-24 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-25
1:562
§ 209-26. Interest and penalty. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
66C]
§ 209-27. Receipts to be paid to general fund.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the general fund of the Township
of Montgomery for the use and benefit of the Township of Montgomery.
§ 209-28. Limitations; saving clause. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 66C]
§ 209-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 66C]
Township to institute proceedings against any and all persons who
violate the provisions of this article. [Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
66C]
C. If and for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for
the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection, interest and penalties
herein imposed. [Added 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 66C]
A. The mercantile license tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due
and payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a
return as set forth above, and if the same is not filed and paid on said
date, 10% shall be added thereto, plus an additional 1% per month or
fractional part of a month until paid.
B. Shortages in the amount paid from the amount due are subject to the
same penalties and interest as set forth in Subsection A above. This also
includes shortages discovered after audit.
A. Nothing contained in this article, as amended, shall be construed to
empower the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township to levy and
collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or any business or any
portion of any business not within the taxing power of the Township
under the Constitution of the United States and the Laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article, as amended, shall be held by any court of
competent power or jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of
the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other
provision of the law, the decisions of the court shall not affect or impair
the right to impose the taxes or the validity of the taxes so imposed
upon other persons as herein provided.
A. Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of
§ 209-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-29
1:563
§ 209-30. Effect on other provisions.
It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that any ordinance now in effect
which imposes a special license fee or tax on specific types or kinds of
business not covered by the provisions of this article shall be and remain in
full force and effect.
the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $600
and costs of prosecution for each offense. Upon judgment by summary
conviction or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the defendant may be sentenced
and committed to the Township lockup for a period not exceeding five
days or to the county jail or workhouse for a period not exceeding 30
days. The fine imposed by this article shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
B. Each day on which such person violates this article may be considered
as a separate offense and punishable as hereinabove provided.
§ 209-29 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-30
1:564
ARTICLE III
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 93]
§ 209-31. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this article, except when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment, including
among others, but not limited to, theatrical or operatic performances,
concerts, vaudeville, circuses, carnivals and sideshows, all forms of
entertainment at any fairground or amusement park, athletic contests,
swimming pools, swim clubs, golf driving and miniature golf ranges,
golf clubs, country clubs, sports exhibitions, athletic or sports
participation, dancing and all other forms of diversion, sport, recreation
or pastime, shows, exhibitions, contests, displays and games and all
other methods of obtaining admission, participation or use charges,
donations, contributions or monetary charges of any character from
the general public or a limited or selected number thereof, directly
or indirectly, in return for other than tangible property.[Amended
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership or other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — A regular monetary charge of any character
whatever, including donations, contributions and dues, or membership
fees (periodical or otherwise), fixed and exacted or in any manner
received by producers, as herein defined, from the general public or
a limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, for the
privilege to attend or engage in any entertainment or amusement,
provided that when such entertainment or amusement is conducted at
any roof garden, nightclub, cabaret or other place where the charge
for admission is wholly or in part included in the price paid for
refreshment, service or merchandise, the amount paid for admission
to such amusement shall be deemed to be 50% of the amount paid
for refreshment, service and merchandise, excluding, however,
membership fees and dues in fraternal or beneficial lodges, fire
companies, veterans organizations, clubs duly incorporated as
nonprofit corporations and the YWCA and YMCA and any auxiliaries
supporting any of the above organizations.
PERSON — Every natural person, corpartnership, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing
a penalty, or both, the term "persons," as applied to copartnerships
or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within
the Township of Montgomery where the general public or a limited or
§ 209-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-31
1:565
§ 209-32. Permits.
selected number thereof may, upon payment of any established price,
attend or engage in any amusement, as herein defined.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an established price,
attend or engage in any amusement.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
producer to continue to conduct or thereafter to begin to conduct any
form of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of amusement
or any itinerant form of amusement within the Township of
Montgomery unless an amusement permit or permits shall have been
issued to him as hereinafter prescribed and the tax herein imposed paid
in accordance with the provisions herein made.
B. Application; fee; issuance. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1;
12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
(1) Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to
begin to conduct any amusement within the Township of
Montgomery shall file an application for a permanent, temporary or
itinerant amusement permit or permits, as the case may be, with
the Business Tax Administrator. Every application for such permit
or permits shall be made upon a form prescribed, prepared and
furnished by the Business Tax Administrator and shall set forth the
name under which the applicant conducts or intends to conduct an
amusement, whether the applicant conducts or intends to conduct
a permanent or temporary place or an itinerant form of
amusement; the location of the permanent or temporary place of
amusement; and such other information as the Business Tax
Administrator may require. If the applicant has or intends to have
more than one place of amusement within the Township of
Montgomery, the application shall state the location of each place
of amusement and, in the case of an itinerant form of amusement,
the date and length of time such amusement is to be conducted at
each place. In the case of an application for a permit for a
temporary place of amusement, the application shall state the
name and address of the owner, lessee or custodian of the premises
upon which such amusement is to be conducted. If the applicant is
an association or a corporation, the names and addresses of the
principal officers thereof and any other information prescribed by
the Business Tax Administrator for purpose of identification shall
be stated. The application shall be signed and verified by oath or
affirmation by the producer, if a natural person, and, in the case of
an association, by a member or partner thereof and, in the case of a
§ 209-31 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-32
1:566
corporation, by an executive officer thereof or some person
specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the application, to
which shall be attached the written evidence of his authority.
(2) At the time of making such application, the applicant shall pay to
the Business Tax Administrator a permit fee for each temporary
permit, which shall be good for one week, or a permit fee for an
annual permit, good for the then current calendar year. The amount
of such fees shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
from time to time. Itinerant producers of amusement shall be
eligible for temporary permits only.
(3) Upon approval of the application and the payment of any permit fee
or fees herein required, the Business Tax Administrator shall grant
and issue to each applicant an annual or temporary amusement
permit for each place of amusement within the Township of
Montgomery as set forth in his application. Amusement permits
shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the persons in
whose names issued and for the conduct of amusements at the
places designated therein and shall at all times be conspicuously
displayed at the places of amusement for which issued. All permits
for permanent places of amusement shall expire on the 31st day of
December next succeeding the date upon which they are issued,
unless sooner suspended, surrendered or revoked for cause by the
proper authorities of the Township of Montgomery. Permits for
temporary places of amusement or for forms of itinerant
amusement shall expire at the time specified therein. The producer
of an itinerant form of amusement shall notify the Business Tax
Administrator promptly of any change in the original contemplated
itinerary, either as to the date or time of the conduct of the
amusement at each place.
C. Renewal; duplicate permits. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1;
12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
(1) Permits issued for permanent places of amusement under the
provisions of this article may be renewed annually before the first
day of January upon application made to the Business Tax
Administrator and the payment of a renewal fee as set by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors from time to time.
(2) Whenever any permit issued under the provisions of this article is
defaced, destroyed or lost, the Business Tax Administrator may
issue a duplicate permit to the holder of the defaced, destroyed or
lost permit upon the payment of a fee as set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors from time to time.
D. The Business Tax Administrator may suspend or, after hearing, revoke
any amusement permit whenever he finds that the holder thereof has
failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. Upon
suspending or revoking any amusement permit, the Business Tax
§ 209-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-32
1:567
§ 209-33. Rate of tax; exemptions.
Administrator shall require the holder thereof to surrender immediately
all permits or duplicates thereof issued to him, and the holder shall
surrender promptly all such permits to the Business Tax Administrator
as required. Whenever the Business Tax Administrator suspends an
amusement permit, he shall notify the holder immediately and afford
him a hearing, if desired and if the hearing has not already been
afforded. After such hearing, the Business Tax Administrator shall
either rescind his order of suspension or, good cause appearing
therefor, shall continue the suspension or revoke the permit. Appeal
shall lie to the Township Supervisors after hearing before the Business
Tax Administrator, who may sustain the suspension or revocation or
may reinstate the permit. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
A. Golf courses.
(1) A tax is hereby imposed upon the admission fee or privilege to
enter any golf course in Montgomery Township at the rate of 10%
of the established price charged the general public or a limited or
selected group thereof by any producer for such privilege, which
shall be paid by the person acquiring such privilege, except,
however, that no tax shall apply to or be collected from or on the
admissions of children under the age of 12 years, which fee is
commonly known as the "greens fee"; provided, however, that the
tax base upon which the tax shall be levied shall be 40% of the
greens fee. The greens fee shall include all of the costs of admission
to the golf course.
(2) In the case of persons (except bona fide employees of a producer or
municipal or state officers on official business or totally blind
persons) admitted free or at reduced rates to any place of
amusement at a time when and under circumstances under which
an established price is charged to other persons, the tax imposed
by this article shall be computed on the established price charged
to such other persons of the same class for the same or similar
accommodations, to be paid by the person so admitted.
(3) For the purpose of determining the amusement tax to be imposed
under this article, any indoor golfing facility and any outdoor
golfing facility not played on grass and/or for which the fee charged
is not commonly known as a "greens fee," such as a miniature golf
course or driving range, shall not be considered to be a golf course
but shall be taxed under the rate of tax for other amusements as set
forth under § 209-33B of this article, and the tax upon said non-golfcourse
facilities shall be collected from or on the admissions of all
persons regardless of age. [Added 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
B. Other amusements.
§ 209-32 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-33
1:568
§ 209-34. Collection of tax.
(1) A tax is hereby imposed upon the admission fee or privilege to
attend or engage in any other amusement at the rate of 5% of the
established price charged the general public or a limited or
selected group thereof by any producer for such privilege, which
shall be paid by the person acquiring such privilege, except,
however, that no tax shall apply to or be collected from or on the
admissions of children under the age of 12 years. The exemption
under this article for children under the age of 12 years shall be
applicable only to admission fees charged for the privilege of
attending or entering into places of amusement or entertainment
and shall specifically not apply to coin- or token-operated
mechanical devices, all gross receipts from which shall be taxable
at the rate prescribed by ordinance. [Amended 12-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-6]
(2) In the case of persons (except bona fide employees of a producer or
municipal or state officers on official business or totally blind
persons) admitted free or at reduced rates to any place of
amusement at a time when and under circumstances under which
an established price is charged to other persons, the tax imposed
by this article shall be computed on the established price charged
to such other persons of the same class for the same or similar
accommodations, to be paid by the person so admitted.
(3) In the case of persons having seats in any place of amusement or a
lease for the use of such box or seat in such place of amusement,
the tax imposed by this article shall be computed on the established
price for which a similar box or seat is sold for each performance or
exhibition at which the box or seat is issued or reserved by or for
the lessee or holder, such tax to be paid by the lessee or holder.
(4) No tax shall be imposed or collected on admissions to amusements,
athletic contests or entertainments conducted, supervised or
controlled by the North Penn School District or by any religious,
philanthropic, civic or nonprofit organizations or any of their duly
authorized agencies, but permits therefor shall be obtained as
hereinbefore provided without charge.
A. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable
to the Township of Montgomery as agents thereof for the payment of
the same into the Township treasury through the Business Tax
Administrator as hereinafter provided in this article. [Amended
12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
B. Where producers are obtained for conducting temporary amusements
by persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the places
where the amusements are to be conducted or where the temporary
amusement is permitted by the owner, lessee or custodian of any place
to be conducted without the procurement of a permit or permits
§ 209-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-34
1:569
§ 209-35. Reports and payments.
§ 209-36. Recovery of taxes.
All such taxes shall be recoverable by the Township Solicitor as other debts
of like amounts are now collected.
required by this article, the tax imposed by this article shall be paid
by the owner, lessee or custodian of such place where such temporary
amusement is held or conducted unless paid by the producer
conducting the amusement.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable by the
producers to the Township of Montgomery, it shall be the duty of:
[Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
(1) Every producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting a place
of amusement on or after the 12th day of June 1953, to transmit to
the Business Tax Administrator on a form prescribed and prepared
by the Business Tax Administrator a report, under oath or
affirmation, of the amount of tax collected by him during the
preceding month.
(2) Every producer conducting a temporary place of amusement or
itinerant form of amusement to file a report with the Business Tax
Administrator promptly after each performance.
B. All reports required under this article shall show such information as
the Business Tax Administrator shall prescribe. [Amended
12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
C. Every producer, at the time of making every report required by this
article, shall compute and pay to the Township of Montgomery the taxes
collected by him and due to the Township of Montgomery during the
period for which the report is made. The amount of all taxes imposed
under the provisions of this article shall, in the case of places of
permanent amusement, be due and payable on the 10th day of the next
succeeding month, and in the case of temporary or itinerant forms of
amusement, it shall be due and payable on the day the report in such
cases is required to be made under this article, and all such taxes shall
bear interest at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a month
from the date they are due and payable until paid.
D. If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment
as herein required within 30 days of the due date, an additional 10% of
the amount of the tax shall be added by the Township of Montgomery
and collected, as well as any costs or legal fees incurred by the
Township in enforcing, prosecuting or collecting such payment.
§ 209-34 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-37
1:570
§ 209-37. Examination of records. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-6]
If the Business Tax Administrator is not satisfied with the report and
payment of tax made by any producer under the provisions of this article, he
is hereby authorized and empowered to make a determination of the tax due
by such producer, based upon the facts contained in the report or upon any
information within his possession or that shall come into his possession, and
for this purpose the Business Tax Administrator or any designated agent
or officer of the Township of Montgomery is authorized to examine the
books, papers, tickets, ticket stubs and records of any producer taxable
under this article to verify the accuracy of any report or payment made
under the provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by
this article have been paid. Application for and acceptance of any permit
shall constitute acceptance on the part of the producer of this right of
examination by the Township.
§ 209-38. Estimate in absence of report. [Amended 12-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-6]
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment
of tax required by this article or if, as a result of an investigation by the
Business Tax Administrator or any Township agent, a report is found to be
incorrect, the Business Tax Administrator shall estimate the tax due by such
producer and determine the amount due by him for taxes, penalties and
interest thereon, including all provisions under § 209-35 of this article.
§ 209-39. Taxes payable into treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Township of
Montgomery for the use and benefit of the Township of Montgomery.
§ 209-40. Adoption of rules. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-6]
The Business Tax Administrator is authorized and empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this article.
§ 209-41. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any person, copartnership, association or corporation who or which shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this
article or any regulation or requirement pursuant thereto and authorized
thereby shall, upon conviction before the District Justice, be subject to a fine
or penalty not to exceed $600 and costs for each such offense or, in default
of payment thereof, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
§ 209-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-41
1:571
both. Such fine or penalty imposed by this article shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 209-41 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-41
1:572
ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 103]
§ 209-42. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of
Montgomery Township."
§ 209-43. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within
Montgomery Township, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 209-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 209-49C of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 209-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-44
1:573
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both.
The term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the responsible
members or general partners thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this municipality,
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 209-44 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-44
1:574
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 209-45. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 209-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-45
1:575
§ 209-46. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds,
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, the amount of the tax and
the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article IV that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,187 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by the Township under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such one-half rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Township; provided, however, that the Township and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. Any realty transfer tax, or a portion thereof, imposed by Montgomery
Township which is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest
at a rate as prescribed for interest rate imposed upon delinquent
Commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9,
1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The
Fiscal Code." [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-212]
E. This provision is subject to and authorized by Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971, known as the "Realty Transfer Tax,"188 and other
provisions authorizing the Department of Revenue and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the
tax, interest and penalties. [Added 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-212]
187. Editor's Note: The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. §§ 6901 to 6909, was renumbered as 53
P.S. §§ 6924.101 to 6924.324 by P.L. 197, No. 32, §§ 2, 3.1 to 11, on 7-2-2008.
188. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 209-45 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-46
1:576
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 209-47. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by § 209-45 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at a Sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
§ 209-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-47
1:577
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all
of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries
are contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy
of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer either for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw
party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax
would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which
title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth
that the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the
benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
§ 209-47 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-47
1:578
§ 209-48. Documents to be fully taxable.
Except as otherwise provided in § 209-47 hereinabove, documents which
make, conform or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate
between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of
this article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 209-49. Acquired company.
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this article, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
§ 209-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-49
1:579
§ 209-50. Credits against tax.
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this article, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 209-49 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-51
1:580
§ 209-51. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 209-52. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or
other officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 209-53. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 209-54. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983,
P.L. 40, No. 21, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 209-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-54
1:581
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax
under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement
of value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this article
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 209-55. Civil penalties.
§ 209-56. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying or being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and to continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to
file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery
County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens
Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 209-57. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 209-58. Regulations.
The Tax Collector of the Township is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 209-54 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-58
1:582
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 209-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-58
1:583

ARTICLE V
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 109; amended in its entirety
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 109A]
§ 209-59. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Business Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 209-60. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on for gain or profit in the Township
of Montgomery, including but not limited to the sale of merchandise or
other tangible personalty or the performance of services and the rental of
personalty and/or realty; all trades, occupations and professions in which
there is offered any service or services to the general public or a limited
number thereof, including but not limited to those enterprises engaged
in by hotel operators, motel operators, apartment and rooming house
operators, parking lot and garage operators, warehouse operators, social
workers, consultants, teachers, nurses, health services, therapists,
physicians and surgeons, osteopaths, podiatrists, chiropractors,
veterinarians, optometrists, pharmacists, lawyers, dentists, engineers,
architects, chemists, certified public accountants, public accountants,
funeral directors, promoters, factors, commission merchants, agents,
brokers, manufacturers' representatives, advertising and public relations
agencies, real estate brokers, insurance brokers and agents, cable
television operators, vending machine operators, barbershop operators and
beauty shop operators, cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishment
operators, laundry operators, shoe repair operators, tailors, upholsterers,
electrical, plastering, bricklaying, carpentry, heat, ventilating, plumbing
and painting contractors engaged in the class of heavy building or other
construction of any kind or in the alteration, maintenance or repair thereof,
repairers of electrical, electronic and automotive machinery and equipment
or other machinery and equipment and other wares and merchandise,
renters or lessors of equipment, property or real estate and other
businesses, trades, occupations and professions in which there is offered
any service or services to the general public or a limited number
thereof.[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 109A]
CALENDAR YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
GROSS RECEIPTS or GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — In general, the
"gross receipts" or "gross volume of business" upon which the tax is
imposed is the value of all cash, credits or property received by a person
which is attributable to the carrying on of business in the Township,
undiminished by any costs of doing business, including both services, labor
and materials entered into or becoming component parts of the services
§ 209-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-60
1:585
performed within the Township. A receipt generally will be considered
attributable to the Township if any part of the transaction or service giving
rise to the receipt takes place within the Township or is directed in any
part from an office or place of business within the Township.[Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 109A]
LICENSE YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean the
partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The person duly appointed by the Township
Manager of the Township of Montgomery to administer this
article.[Amended 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 109A]
TAXPAYER — A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Montgomery.
§ 209-61. License; fee.
§ 209-62. Imposition of tax.
Every person engaged in a business, trade, occupation or profession in
the Township shall pay an annual business privilege tax for each calendar
A. For each license year, every person desiring to engage in business in
the Township shall, on or before the 15th day of March or prior to
commencing business in any such license year, apply for and procure a
business privilege license for his place of business or, if more than one,
for each of his places of business in the Township from the Tax
Administrator, who shall issue the same upon payment of a fee for a
license for his place of business or, if more than one, for each of his
places of business in the Township for such license year. Each
application for a license shall be signed by the applicant, if a natural
person, and in the case of an association or partnership, by a partner
thereof and, in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof. Such
license shall not be assignable and shall be conspicuously posted at the
place of business at all times. In the case of loss, defacement or
destruction of any license, the person to whom the license was issued
shall apply to the Tax Administrator for a new license for which a fee
shall be charged. The amount of such fees shall be set by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors from time to time. [Amended 6-22-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1]
B. Any person required to pay both a business privilege license tax and a
mercantile license tax needs only one license for each place of business.
§ 209-60 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-62
1:586
year at the rate of 1 1/2 (1.50) mills on each dollar of the gross volume of
business transacted by him during the license year; provided, however, that
in no event shall the annual business privilege tax herein imposed be less
than $10 for each of the places of business of every such person.
§ 209-63. Exceptions, deductions and exclusions.
A. All persons required to pay a business privilege tax under the
provisions of this article shall be exempted from paying such tax upon
the same subject matter of taxation upon which such persons are
required to pay a mercantile license tax under the Mercantile License
Tax Ordinance.189 Any person required to pay both a business privilege
tax and a mercantile tax may file one joint return. In addition, any
portion of a taxpayer's gross receipts which is subject to a gross
receipts tax under any other Township ordinance may not be taxed
under this article.
B. Persons employed for a wage or salary, nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational
purposes, agencies of the government of the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County of Montgomery and the
North Penn School District and the business of any political subdivision
or any authority created or organized under and pursuant to any act of
Assembly are exempt from the provisions of this article.
C. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross receipts from
utility service to any person or company whose rates of service are fixed
and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or on any
privilege or transaction involving the rendering of any such public
utility service.
D. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on goods and articles
manufactured in the Township or the by-products of manufacture or on
minerals, timber, natural resources and farm products produced in the
Township or on the preparation or processing thereof for use or market
or on any privilege, act or transaction related to the business of
manufacturing or the production, preparation or processing of
minerals, timber and natural resources or farm products by
manufacturers, by producers and by farmers with respect to the goods,
articles and products of their own manufacture, production or growth
or on any privilege, act or transaction relating to the business of
processing by-products of manufacture or on the transportation,
loading, unloading or dumping or storage of such goods, articles,
products or by-products.
E. Refunds, credits or allowances given by a person to a customer on
account of defects in services rendered or in goods, wares and
merchandise sold or returned may be deducted from the amount of the
gross receipts of the person.
189. Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 209-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-63
1:587
§ 209-64. Estimated taxes.
F. Adjustments allowed to customers may be deducted from gross receipts
if they are deducted on the face of the invoice as a medium of adjusting
the price or fee for the service and if they are not reimbursed to the
person by his supplier or some other person.
G. Federal, state and local taxes are not included in gross receipts if they
are collected from the customer and are separately stated on the
evidence of charge or sale or the customer produces satisfactory proof
of payment of the federal, state or local taxes.
H. This article excludes from the definition of gross receipts the receipts
from services performed from a place of business regularly maintained
outside the Township by the taxpayer to a place of business regularly
maintained outside the Township by the customer, provided that such
performance is not made for the purpose of evading the tax. Services or
deliveries of services to a residence or place of business located outside
the Township do not qualify for this exclusion.
I. Where the gross receipts of the taxpayer cannot in their entirety be
subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of provisions of
the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision of law, the Tax
Administrator shall establish rules and regulations and methods of
allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the gross receipts
which is properly attributable to doing business in the Township shall
be taxed by this article.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced business at least a full year prior to the tax year, shall
compute the gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount of
business transacted by him during the 12 months preceding the tax
year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced business less than one full year prior to the tax year,
shall compute the gross volume of business by multiplying by 12 the
monthly average of the actual gross amount of business transacted by
him during the months while he was in business prior to the tax year.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
commences business subsequent to such January 1 of the tax year, shall
compute the gross volume of business by multiplying the actual gross
volume of business transacted by him during the first month of his
engaging in business by the number of months remaining in the tax
year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
engages in business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature, except for any person licensed to engage in a temporary retail
§ 209-63 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-64
1:588
§ 209-65. Final taxes.
On or before March 15 of the year following the end of the tax year, every
person subject to the tax hereby imposed shall make a return to the Tax
Administrator of the Township of the actual gross receipts of the taxpayer
during the period for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax. Such final
return shall state the amount of tax paid at the time of filing the estimated
return and the amount of tax due upon the final computation.
§ 209-66. Returns.
business under Ordinance No. 83, as amended,190 shall compute the
gross volume of business upon the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during the tax year.
A. Every return as required by this article shall be made upon a form
furnished by the Tax Administrator. Every person making such return
shall certify the correctness thereof under the penalties of perjury.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall be required
to file two tax returns each year, an estimated return and a final return,
unless otherwise provided for in this article. Each time an estimated
return is required to be filed, the final return shall be filed the following
calendar year. If it is determined that the amount of tax paid in the
estimated return was greater than required by the final return, the
taxpayer shall be entitled to apply the overpayment to the estimated
return in the same calendar year in which the final return in question is
being filed. In the event that the estimated tax was less than the amount
finally determined to be owed in the final return, the taxpayer shall be
liable to pay said tax upon the filing of the final return. In the event that
the amount paid at the time of the filing of the estimated return is less
than 80% of the amount due in the final return, the penalty shall also be
paid by the taxpayer in the amount of 10% of the difference between the
final tax due and the estimated tax paid.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who has
commenced business at least one full year prior to the beginning of the
tax year, shall, on or before the 15th day of March following, file with
the Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name,
business and business address and such other information as may be
necessary to compute the actual gross receipts of such person during
the preceding year and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who has
commenced business less than one full year prior to the beginning of
the tax year, shall, on or before the 15th day of March following, file
with the Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name,
business and business address and such other information as may be
190. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Temporary Retail Businesses.
§ 209-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-66
1:589
§ 209-67. Payment of tax.
necessary to compute the actual gross receipts of such person during
the preceding year and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
E. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article, who has
commenced business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year, shall,
within 60 days from the date of commencing such business, file with the
Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name, business
and business address and such other information as may be necessary
to compute the actual gross receipts of such person during the first
month of business and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
F. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article,
who is engaged in a business which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant
by its nature, except for any person licensed to engage in a temporary
retail business under Ordinance No. 83, as amended,191 shall, within
seven days from the date of completion of such business, file with the
Tax Administrator a return setting forth such person's name, business
and business address and such other information as may be necessary
in arriving at the actual gross receipts of such person during such
period and the amount of the tax due.
G. Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within seven
days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the
actual gross volume of business conducted and done by such person
during the tax year in which said person ceased doing business and pay
the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the
time of filing said return. If such tax has been previously paid based
upon estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a
refund, without interest, of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which
business was terminated.
H. Receipt. The Tax Administrator, upon request to him, will provide a
receipt of payment of the tax.
I. On or before March 15 of the year following the tax year, every person
subject to the tax hereby imposed shall make a final return as required
by § 209-65 of this article.
A. At the time of filing the first return, the person making the same shall
pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due.
B. At the time of filing the final return, if the full amount of the tax due by
the taxpayer for the tax year has not been paid, the taxpayer shall pay
the remaining balance of the tax, which shall be the difference between
the amount of the tax paid at the time of making the estimated return
on the estimated computation and the amount of the tax finally shown
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Temporary Retail Businesses.
§ 209-66 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-67
1:590
§ 209-68. Duties of the Tax Administrator.
to be due. If the balance shall be a credit, the amount of the credit shall
be applied towards the current year's estimated tax.
A. The Tax Administrator is charged with the duties of collecting and
receiving the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from
each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township, by resolution, may
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article
and charging the Tax Administrator with the responsibility for enforcing
the provisions of the article and any rules and/or regulations
promulgated pursuant hereto.
C. In the event that the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make
a return, then in such case the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed
deputies shall assess said person or persons on such an amount of
whole or gross volume of business as said Tax Administrator or his
deputies deem reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of such
assessment, the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall
give the parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade,
business, occupation or class and the amount of the business privilege
tax imposed or levied.
D. The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will
enable him to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Such accounts and records must disclose in
detail the gross receipts and other data pertaining to the taxpayer's
gross volume of business and must be sufficiently complete to enable
the Tax Administrator or his deputies to verify all transactions. The Tax
Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any person or persons subject to or
supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article in order to
verify the accuracy of the return made or, if no return was made,
ascertain the tax due.
E. The burden is hereby imposed upon any person, firm or corporation
claiming an exemption from the payment of the tax hereby imposed to
convince the Tax Administrator of his legal right to such exemption.
F. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Tax Administrator shall have
the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other cases.
G. Any information gained by the Tax Administrator or any other official
agent or member of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Montgomery as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential
§ 209-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-68
1:591
§ 209-69. Recovery of taxes.
§ 209-70. Interest penalty.
§ 209-71. Receipts to be paid to general fund.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the general fund of the Township
of Montgomery for the use and benefit of the Township of Montgomery.
§ 209-72. Limitations; saving clause.
except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
H. If the final return of the taxpayer shows an overpayment of the tax by
reason of the fact that the taxpayer did not continue to engage in
business throughout the year, the Administrator shall refund to the
taxpayer the amount of such overpayment, without interest, which shall
be the difference between the amount of tax paid upon the filing of the
first return and the amount of the tax finally shown to be due.
A. All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Township Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now by law
recoverable.
B. The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power in the name of the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery
Township to institute proceedings against any and all persons who
violate the provisions of this article.
C. If and for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for
the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection, interest and penalties
herein imposed.
A. The business privilege tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due
and payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a
return as set forth above, and if the same is not filed and paid on said
date, 10% shall be added thereto, plus an additional 1% per month or
fractional part of a month until paid.
B. Shortages in the amount paid from the amount due are subject to the
same penalties and interest as set forth in Subsection A above. This also
includes shortages discovered after audit.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township to levy and collect the
taxes hereby imposed on any person or any business or any portion of
any business not within the taxing power of the Township under the
Constitution of the United States and the Laws and Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 209-68 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-72
1:592
§ 209-73. Violations and penalties.
§ 209-74. Effect on other provisions.
It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that any ordinance now in effect
which imposes a special license fee or tax on specific types or kinds of
business not covered by the provisions of this article, as amended, shall be
and remain in full force and effect.
B. If the tax or any portion thereof imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent power
or jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States
or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provision of the
law, the decisions of the court shall not affect or impair the right to
impose the taxes or the validity of the taxes so imposed upon other
persons as herein provided.
A. Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of
the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $600 and
costs of prosecution for each offense. Upon judgment by summary
conviction or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the defendant may be sentenced
and committed to the Township lockup for a period not exceeding five
days or to the county jail or workhouse for a period not exceeding 30
days. The fine imposed by this article shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
B. Each day on which such person violates this article may be considered
as a separate offense and punishable as hereinabove provided.
§ 209-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-74
1:593

ARTICLE VI
Tax Certifications
[Adopted 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 125]
§ 209-75. Appointment of administrator.
The Township of Montgomery hereby appoints the locally elected Tax
Collector as the municipal officer authorized to provide tax certifications
upon request by the public.
§ 209-76. Fee; intent.
A. Said Tax Collector is hereby authorized to assess, collect and retain, as
compensation for providing the additional service of providing tax
certifications, a fee of up to $25 per tax certification request.
B. It is the intent of this article that no more than a total assessment of $30
be assessed for a certification of taxes paid for the three years prior to a
real estate settlement, which is the standard nature of a tax
certification request. [Amended 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-303]
§ 209-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-76
1:595

ARTICLE VII
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 02-162]
§ 209-77. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit, or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by persons, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home, and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or property; not including, however, wages or
compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic payments
for sickness and disability other than regular wages received during a
period of sickness, disability or retirement, or payments arising under
Workmen's Compensation Acts, Occupational Disease Acts and similar
legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment,
compensation payments by any governmental agency, or payments to
reimburse expenses, or payments made by employers, or labor unions
for wage and salary supplemental programs, including, but not limited
to, programs covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death,
supplemental unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and
retirements.
§ 209-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-77
1:597
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity, employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by governing body to collect and administer the tax on
earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all
costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on
a cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in
such business, profession, or other activity, but without deduction of taxes
based on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association, or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 209-78. Imposition of tax.
A tax at the rate of 1% on each dollar is hereby imposed on all earned
income and net profits, as defined herein, earned by residents of the
Township and on all earned income and net profits earned by nonresidents
of the Township for work done or services performed or rendered in the
Township. This tax shall become effective January 1, 2003, and shall remain
in effect thereafter on a calendar-year basis without annual reenactment
unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
§ 209-79. Declaration and payment of tax.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of
each year, make and file with the Officer, on a form prescribed by
the Officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current
year and pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly installments the
tax due thereon as follows: the first installment on or before June
15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year, and
January 15 of the succeeding year.
§ 209-77 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-79
1:598
§ 209-80. Collection at source.
(2) On or before April 15 of the succeeding year, every taxpayer shall
make and file a return on a form prescribed by the Officer showing
the amount of net profits earned, the total amount of tax due and
the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final
return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the balance of the tax
due, or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment. An incomplete or improperly completed tax return
shall be considered as not having been filed. Each final return shall
be substantiated and supported by such United States Federal
Income Tax Return forms as required by the Officer, which shall at
least include a copy of the Federal W-2 form in the case of an
earned income taxable, and Schedule C of the Federal Return as to
a net profits taxable.
B. Earned income. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year, make and file with the Officer a final return showing
the amount of earned income received during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current
year, the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid
thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to
the provisions relating to the collection at source and the balance of tax
due. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. An incomplete or improperly completed tax
return shall be considered as not having been filed. Each final return
shall be submitted and supported by such United States Federal Income
Tax Return forms as required by the Officer, which shall include a copy
of the Federal W-2 form in the case of an earned income taxable, and
Schedule C of the Federal Return as to a net profit taxable.
C. Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation and
who received any earned income not subject to the provisions relating
to collection at source shall make and file with the Officer, on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer, a quarterly return on or before
April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of
the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth
the aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding by
him during the three-month periods ending March 31 of the current
year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year, and
December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject to the tax,
together with such other information as the Officer may require. Every
taxpayer making such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to
the Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Township who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
§ 209-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-80
1:599
commission, or other compensation, shall deduct at the time of payment
thereof the tax imposed by the Township on the earned income due
to his employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the
current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current
year, and January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay
to the Officer the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding
three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of
the current year, September 30 of the current year, and December
31 of the current year, respectively. Such returns, unless otherwise
agreed upon between the Officer and employer, shall show the name
and social security number of each such employee, the earned income
of such employee during such preceding three-month period, the tax
deducted therefrom, the political subdivision imposing the tax upon
such employee and the political subdivision in which the employee
resides, the total earned income of all such employees during such
preceding three-month period, and the total tax deducted therefrom
and paid with the return.
B. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority, may be required
by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return showing withholding statement for each employee
employed during all or part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address, and social security number,
the amount of earned income paid to the employee during said
period, the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions
imposing the tax upon such employee, and the amount of tax paid
to the Officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the
individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided, every employer who willfully or
negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this article
shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to
§ 209-80 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-80
1:600
§ 209-81. Powers and duties of Officer.
withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from
the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this article shall not relieve any employee from the payment
of the tax or from complying with the requirement of the article relating
to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax, and the date of such receipt.
B. Bond.
(1) Each Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Township. If the Board of Supervisors of
the Township shall by ordinance designate any bond previously
given by the Officer as adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to
satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
(2) Each such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more
corporate sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to
do business in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commission of this commonwealth.
(3) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided
in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all
duties required by him according to law, of all monies and all
balances thereof paid to, received, or held by him by virtue of this
office, and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in office
of all books, papers, documents or other official things held in right
of his office.
(4) Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the appointing
authority or authorities, and shall be for the use of the political
subdivision or political subdivisions appointing the Officer, and for
the use of such other person or persons for whom money shall
otherwise appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions
thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal on the bond.
C. The Officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the article
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period of
§ 209-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-81
1:601
§ 209-82. Suit for collection of tax.
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of the article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by the Board of Supervisors. A copy of such
rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
D. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers, and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer, or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be
an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any
declaration or return, or, if no declaration or return was filed, to
ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every
person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or
taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any
agent designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination and investigations, as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents, or by any other
official or agent of the taxing district as a result of any declarations,
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized
by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and
except in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise
provided by law.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Township for recovery of taxes
due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall begin
within three years after such tax is due, or within three years after the
declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for
the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following
cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
§ 209-81 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-82
1:602
§ 209-83. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 209-84. Violations and penalties.
in the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall begin within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the
Officer, or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This article shall not be construed to limit the Township from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by law.
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit
may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his employees, any person
who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent designated by him to
examine his books, records, and papers, and any person who knowingly
makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or attempts to do
anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net
profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax imposed by this article, shall, upon conviction
thereof before any Justice of the Peace, Alderman or Magistrate, or
court of competent jurisdiction in the county, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable by a like fine or imprisonment for each day of continued
violation.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Justice of the Peace, Alderman or Magistrate, or court of competent
§ 209-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-84
1:603
jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to
be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this article shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of the article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 209-84 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-84
1:604
ARTICLE VIII
Collection of Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 2-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-268]
§ 209-85. Authorization.
In addition to the authorization for the collection of taxes and institution
of tax sales authorized by the Real Estate Tax Sales Law ("RETSL"),192 the
Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau is appointed as alternative collector
and is authorized and directed to file liens for existing delinquent real estate
taxes with the Prothonotary of Montgomery County in accordance with the
provisions of the Act.193
§ 209-86. Interest.
In accordance with the Act and RETSL, interest shall be charged on taxes so
returned from and after, but not before, the first day of the month following
the return. Interest shall be charged at the rate of 9% per annum.
§ 209-87. Costs of collection.
Pursuant to Section 7106 of the Act, it is hereby established that the
reasonable charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection of any
delinquent account under the Act are hereby fixed at 5% of the total
amount of the delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties), and that
additional reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of any
delinquent taxes shall be fixed at 1% of the total amount of the delinquent
taxes (including interest and penalties), and that said charges for attorney's
fees and for all charges, expenses, and fees set forth herein, shall be paid to
Montgomery County through the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau in
lieu of payment of commission pursuant to Section 207 of RETSL.
§ 209-88. Additional action authorized.
The Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors are hereby authorized and
empowered to take such additional action as it may deem necessary or
appropriate to implement this article.
192. Editor’s Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.201 et seq.
193. Editor’s Note: The word "Act," as used herein, refers to the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act. See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 209-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-88
1:605

ARTICLE IX
Volunteer Service Earned Income Tax Credit and Real Property Tax
Credit
[Adopted 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-310]
§ 209-89. Scope; purpose.
§ 209-90. Qualifying volunteer.
§ 209-91. Volunteer service tax credits.
A. Scope. The scope of this article relates to Act 172 and its intended
incentives for municipal volunteers of fire companies and nonprofit
emergency medical services agencies.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to authorize the Township to
enact a tax credit against a qualifying volunteer's tax liability as a
financial incentive to (1) acknowledge the value and the absence of any
public cost for volunteer fire protection and nonprofit emergency
medical services provided by active volunteers; and (2) encourage
individuals to volunteer, or for former volunteers to consider rejoining
as active volunteers, in a volunteer fire company or nonprofit
emergency medical services agency.
A. Qualifying volunteer criteria. To be a qualifying volunteer under this
article, an individual must (1) be a Township resident; and (2) have
served as an active volunteer, in good standing for the entire eligibility
period, as so certified under this article, for a volunteer fire company
and/or a nonprofit emergency medical services agency.
B. Injured active volunteer. An active volunteer who was injured during a
response to an emergency call and can no longer serve as an active
volunteer because of the injury and who would otherwise be eligible for
tax credits under this article shall be eligible for such tax credits for the
succeeding five tax years.
C. Eligibility list. A notarized list of eligible qualifying volunteers shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors, no later than 45 days before tax
notices are to be distributed, by the Chiefs of each volunteer fire
company or volunteer nonprofit emergency medical service agency, as
applicable.
D. Criteria revision. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to revise
the criteria for a qualifying volunteer, in whole or in part, at its sole
discretion.
E. Eligibility period. The eligibility period for 2018 shall run from January
1, 2018, to December 31, 2018. The eligibility period for 2019 and each
subsequent year thereafter shall run from January 1 until November 15
of the year for which the tax credit will apply.
§ 209-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-91
1:607
§ 209-92. Certification of qualifying volunteers.
A. Earned income tax credit. Each qualifying volunteer, as defined and
certified in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall receive a
earned income tax credit of up to 100% of the earned income tax levied
by the Township per year. The credit shall be applied to that portion of
the earned income tax that is payable to the Township only and cannot
exceed the qualifying volunteer's liability to the Township for the
earned income tax due on wages/net profits earned in that tax year. By
annual resolution, the Board of Supervisors shall set and may adjust the
amount of the credit in its sole discretion.
B. Real property tax credit. Each qualifying volunteer, as defined and
certified in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall be
entitled to receive a real property tax credit in the amount of up to 20%
of the Township's real property tax levied on residential real property
owned and occupied by a qualifying volunteer in that tax year. If the tax
is paid in the penalty period, the tax credit shall only apply to the base
tax year liability. By annual resolution, the Board of Supervisors shall
set and may adjust the amount of the real property tax credit in its sole
discretion.
A. To receive a "qualifying volunteer exemption certificate" under this
article, an individual must (1) meet the qualifying volunteer criteria set
forth in § 209-90; and (2) by November 15 of each year in which an
individual has served as an active volunteer, sign and submit an
"application for qualifying volunteer exemption certificate" as a
qualifying volunteer in a volunteer fire company or volunteer nonprofit
emergency medical service agency as applicable.
B. Thereafter, the volunteer fire company or volunteer nonprofit
emergency medical service agencies' Chief, as applicable, shall review
all applications submitted, sign each application, and indicate on each
application whether he/she recommends the volunteer to be certified as
a qualifying volunteer.
C. By November 30 of the same year, the volunteer fire company or
volunteer nonprofit emergency medical service agencies' Chief, as
applicable, shall forward all applications received, with all supporting
documentation, to the Board of Supervisors.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall review the applications and supporting
documentation and shall, by Board motion, certify all qualifying
volunteers on or before December 31 of each year. Only those
volunteers so certified by the Board of Supervisors shall receive the
earned income tax credit and the real property tax credit, and these
credits may be utilized for any earned income taxes and/or real
property taxes paid or payable to the Township during or for the
previous calendar year only.
§ 209-91 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-92
1:608
§ 209-93. Tax credit claim process.
E. The Township shall keep an official tax credit register of all qualifying
volunteers who were issued qualifying volunteer exemption certificates.
The list of earned income tax credit recipients shall be sent to the
Earned Income Tax Officer and a list of any real property tax credit
recipients shall be sent to the Township Finance Director/Treasurer by
no later than December 31 of each year The Township Secretary shall
issue updates as needed of the official tax credit register to the
following:
(1) Board of Supervisors;
(2) Chief of the Volunteer Fire Company;
(3) Supervisor of the nonprofit emergency medical service agency; and
(4) Tax Officer of the Montgomery County Earned Income Tax
Collection District.
F. If the Board of Supervisors decides to deny a volunteer qualifying
volunteer certification, the volunteer shall be notified in writing of the
decision. The notice shall include the reason(s) for the denial as well as
the volunteer's right to appeal pursuant to Section § 209-95 of this
article.
A. Within 10 days of the Board of Supervisors' decision certifying
qualifying volunteers, the Township Secretary shall issue a qualifying
volunteer exemption certificate to each qualifying volunteer, in a form
acceptable to the Township Finance Director/Treasurer and the Tax
Officer appointed by the Montgomery County Tax Collection Committee
to collect the earned income tax.
B. Earned income tax credit claim. A qualifying volunteer seeking to claim
an applicable earned income tax credit shall submit the qualifying
volunteer exemption certificate with the qualifying volunteer's annual
tax return.
C. Real property tax credit claim. Real property tax credits shall be
administered as a tax refund by the Township's Finance Director/
Treasurer. A qualifying volunteer seeking to claim an applicable real
property tax credit shall file on or before January 31 of each year of
eligibly, the following documentation with the Township Finance
Director/Treasurer prior to the tax credit being administered:
(1) A true and correct receipt from the Township's tax collector of the
paid Township real property taxes for the tax year which the claim
is being filed;
(2) Qualifying volunteer exemption certificate;
(3) Photo identification; and
§ 209-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-93
1:609
§ 209-94. Rejection of tax credit claim.
§ 209-95. Appeal.
§ 209-96. False reporting penalty.
§ 209-97. Tax credit limitations.
(4) Documentation that the tax paid was for qualified real property, as
defined in this article.
A. The Tax Officer or the Township Finance Director/Treasurer may reject
an earned income tax or real property tax credit claim, respectively, if
(1) the qualifying volunteer is not on the official tax credit register
issued by the Township Secretary; or (2) does not timely provide the
required information as required under § 209-93B and C of this article,
respectively.
B. Tax credit claim rejection notices from the Tax Officer or the Township
Finance Director/Treasurer shall notify the qualifying volunteer in
writing of the associated claim rejection. The notice shall include the
reason(s) for the rejection as well as the volunteer's right to appeal
pursuant to § 209-95 of this article.
A. A volunteer may appeal from (1) a decision of the Board of Supervisors
denying a qualifying volunteer certification; or (2) a tax claim credit
rejection of the Tax Officer or Township Finance Director/Treasurer.
B. Appeals under this section shall be submitted as a written request for
binding arbitration to the Township Secretary within 10 days of the date
of the Board of Supervisors' denial decision or the rejection, whichever
is applicable. Appeals from tax credit claim rejections shall include
notice to the Tax Officer or the Township Finance Director/Treasurer,
whichever is applicable.
C. The binding arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the rules
of the American Arbitration Association, and any costs for the arbitrator
and the proceeding only shall be shared equally by the parties.
A. Any person who knowingly makes, or conspires to make, a false
application for certification as a qualifying volunteer commits a
misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
B. Any person who knowingly provides, or conspires to provide, a false
certification recommendation under this article commits a
misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
A. The tax credits established by this article may be used against the
qualifying volunteer's tax liability for the current taxable year and every
taxable year the individual is qualified as a qualifying volunteer.
§ 209-93 MONTGOMERY CODE § 209-97
1:610
B. The tax credits established by this article shall remain in effect until the
Township repeals this article.
§ 209-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-97
1:611
Chapter 215
TEMPORARY RETAIL BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 170.
Taxation — See Ch. 209.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 215-1. License required.
No person shall engage in any temporary retail business within the
Township of Montgomery without first having obtained a license as herein
provided or without first complying with all applicable Township regulations
established for a permanent retail business.
§ 215-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm, organization
or corporation. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION — Applies to any duly constituted religious
organization or any group affiliated with and forming an integral part of
said organization, no part of the net income of which inures to the direct
benefit of any individual, and which has received a declaration of current
tax-exempt status from the government of the United States.[Added
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
TEMPORARY RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the entering into, beginning
or carrying out of any business for the exhibition, sale or purchase of any
goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever by which a person hires, leases,
occupies or uses any room, vehicle, stand, apartment, store, shop, building,
portion of any building space or exterior retail sales or storage area or any
other structure for the exhibition, sale or purchase of such goods, wares or
merchandise within the Township for a period of 30 days or less.
§ 215-3. License application; transferability.
A. Every person desiring to engage in a temporary retail business in the
Township of Montgomery shall first make application to the Township
Zoning Officer at the Township Administration Building, Cowpath Road,
Montgomeryville, Pennsylvania, for a license. Said application shall be
upon a form provided by the Township and shall contain at least the
following information:
(1) The full name of the applicant and the local address, if any.
§ 209-97 MONTGOMERY CODE § 215-3
1:612
§ 215-4. Responsibilities of owners and landlords.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or landlord of the business
location being utilized for a temporary retail business use to inform the
applicant that prior to the commencement of the business a temporary
retail business license must be obtained from Montgomery Township.
§ 215-5. License fees. [Amended 8-22-1983 by Ord. No. 83A;
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
(2) The permanent address.
(3) The address at which the applicant will receive notices under this
chapter.
(4) The name of the employer or a statement that such applicant is selfemployed.
(5) The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise involved
or other purpose for the license.
(6) The location at which business is to be conducted.
(7) The name and address of the owner or landlord at the business
location.
(8) An affirmation that the owner or landlord of the site has given his
permission to conduct said business.
(9) The dates during which business is intended to be conducted.
B. No license under this chapter shall be transferable from one person to
another.
A. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the following fee is
paid to Montgomery Township for transmittal to the Township
Treasurer for the general use of the Township:
(1) For temporary retail business, a sum charged per license
application.
(2) Where itinerant (temporary) merchants form a part of a show
which is organized and booked by one or more promoters, the
promoter or promoters thereof shall be responsible for the
payment of a license fee covering all such itinerant merchants,
which shall consist of a sum per merchant for the specific show for
which booked and which shall run for a period not to exceed 30
days. A minimum fee in this case shall also be set.
B. All such fees shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from
time to time.
C. A temporary holiday season retail business license may be issued to all
merchants wishing to operate during the holiday season for a fee as set
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-5
1:613
§ 215-6. Expiration of license.
Any license issued for the purpose of engaging in a temporary retail
business shall be valid only for a single thirty-day period and is renewable
once only for another 30 days upon payment of the proper fees. After a
period of 30 days of inactivity on the part of the licensee, a new temporary
license may be reissued, which is again renewable only once. At such time
as what would otherwise be determined to be a temporary retail business,
as defined herein, continues for a period in excess of 30 calendar days or 60
days, in the case of an extension, said business shall no longer be deemed to
be a temporary retail business but shall become permanent and subject to
a mercantile license tax as set forth in Ordinance No. 66 and Ordinance No.
66A, as amended,194 and shall be required to obtain a use and occupancy
permit for its permanent location as required by the Montgomery Township
Zoning Ordinance.195
§ 215-7. Mercantile license tax.
Payment of the license fee under this chapter shall be in lieu of payment
of the mercantile license fee and tax as required under Ordinance No. 66
and 66A, as amended,196 and in lieu of the fee for a use and occupancy
permit as required under the Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance;197
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow a
temporary business to operate in violation of any existing public safety laws
or regulations nor any applicable zoning laws, and provided that the owner
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The holiday season will be
considered to be the time period of October 15 through the following
January 15. If requested, a merchant will be required to provide a copy
of the signed lease from the owner or landlord of the business location
being utilized to confirm the period of time the merchant has been
approved to operate as a seasonal business at that location. There will
be no refunds to merchants who, after issuance of this license, may
discontinue operations earlier than January 15. A merchant will not be
granted any extensions to this holiday season temporary retail business
license. A merchant must terminate retail business operations at the
time of the expiration of this license. Any merchant wishing to continue
in business beyond this holiday season shall be required to establish
the business as a permanent business. As a permanent business, it shall
be subject to all business taxes as required under Chapter 209 of the
Code and shall be required to obtain a use and occupancy permit for its
permanent location as required by the Montgomery Township Zoning
Ordinance, Chapter 230 of the Code. [Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No.
97-81]
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 209, Art. II, Mercantile License Tax.
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 209, Art. II, Mercantile License Tax.
197. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 215-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 215-7
1:614
of the building or structure in which the business is located must have a
valid use and occupancy permit for that building or structure.
§ 215-8. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
§ 215-9. Appeals.
In the event that the party to whom the suspension or revocation notice has
been given under § 215-8 finds that his request for reinstatement of license
is denied by the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township, an appeal
may be taken within 30 days of the denial of the reinstatement by the Board
of Supervisors of Montgomery Township to the Court of Common Pleas of
Montgomery County.
§ 215-10. Time for issuing or denying license.
Any application for a license made to the Township Zoning Officer shall be
granted or denied within 72 hours.
§ 215-11. Rules of conduct.
Any person to whom a license or permit has been issued hereunder shall
comply with the following rules of conduct:
A. Any license issued for the purpose of engaging in a temporary retail
business may be denied, suspended or revoked at any time upon proof
that:
(1) The application for the license contains false information.
(2) The licensee has failed to comply with any rules of conduct
prescribed in this chapter.
(3) The licensee has violated any section of the Montgomery Township
Zoning Ordinance.198
(4) Reasonable public safety standards as prescribed by the Zoning
Officer or Code Enforcement Officer have been violated.
B. Notice of suspension or revocation shall be given, in writing, by the
Zoning Officer, personally served or sent by registered mail to the
address designated for this purpose in the application for license. Any
person whose license has been revoked or suspended shall be entitled
to appear and be heard, with counsel if he so desires, before the Board
of Supervisors of Montgomery Township at a regular meeting pursuant
to a request for reinstatement of license.
A. The licensee shall have in his possession at all times the license issued
to him and shall exhibit it in a prominent place upon the premises.
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-11
1:615
§ 215-12. Exemptions from license.
§ 215-13. Exemptions from fee.
The following persons shall apply for a license for the purpose of engaging
in a temporary retail business in the Township but shall not be required to
pay a fee:
B. A licensee shall not engage in a temporary retail business involving a
product or service not set forth in the license application.
C. The licensee shall not permit any other person or individual to have
possession of the license card issued to him and shall immediately
report the loss of any license card to the Township.
D. The licensee shall not permit the license card to be altered or defaced.
E. No licensee shall represent that the license card issued to him is in any
way an endorsement by Montgomery Township of the licensee or the
goods or services which he sells, solicits or peddles.
A. The following persons shall be exempt from the obligation apply for and
receive a license as otherwise required by this chapter: a roadside
stand whereat farmers sell products grown on their own farms in
Montgomery Township or farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale
of their farm products and garden produce grown upon their own lands
in Montgomery Township.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent Montgomery Township or its agents or
authorized representatives from requesting any person exempt from
the provisions of this chapter to identify himself prior to engaging in
temporary retail business for that person's own safety and the general
safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
A. Any person engaged in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise
donated by the owners thereof where the proceeds are to be applied to
any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
B. Any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the military
service of the United States who procures from the Prothonotary of
Montgomery County a certificate that he is unable to earn a livelihood
by manual labor, and provided that he otherwise complies with the
requirements of the Act of April 8, 1867, P.L. 50, 60 P.S. § 61,199 as
amended.
C. Any person soliciting contributions on behalf of organizations or
nonprofit corporations, which have complied with the provisions of the
Solicitation of Charitable Funds Act, Act of August 9, 1963, P.L. 628, 10
P.S. § 16.1 et seq., as amended,200 governing solicitations for charitable,
benevolent, patriotic or other purposes, which persons are possessed of
199. Editor's Note: Former 60 P.S. § 61 was repealed 11-24-1992 by P.L. 717, No. 108.
§ 215-11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 215-13
1:616
§ 215-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, of not more than $600 and,
in default of payment of said fine, shall be imprisoned in the county prison
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 215-15. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow and permit retail
business to be operated in violation of the Montgomery Township Zoning
Ordinance201 and any other applicable local, state or federal laws.
Chapter 217
TENANT LISTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Real estate registry — See Ch. 178.
§ 217-1. Tenant lists required.
Each landlord, lessor and sublessor of property in the Township of
Montgomery, or the agent or manager of such landlord, lessor or sublessor,
shall file with the Township on or before January 15 of each year, on a form
prescribed and supplied by the Township, a list of all tenants, lessees and
sublessees of each of their units as of December 31 of the prior year.
a card or other written evidence of their appointment or authority
to solicit for said organization or corporation and upon proof of
compliance with the provisions of the aforesaid Act.
D. Any person soliciting contributions on behalf of a religious
organization. For the purposes of this chapter, a "religious
organization" shall be defined as any bona fide duly constituted
religious institution and such separate groups or corporations which
form an integral part of a religious institution, provided that such
religious institution, group or corporation is tax-exempt pursuant to the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, no part of its net income inures to the
direct benefit of any individual and its conduct is primarily supported by
government grants or contracts or funds solicited within its own
membership or congregation or fees charged for services rendered.
[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
200. Editor's Note: See now the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S.
§ 162.1 et seq.
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-2
1:617
§ 217-2. Filing of form.
The form listing tenants, lessees and sublessees shall be filed with the
Township.
§ 217-3. Notification of changes.
The list shall be supplemented within 15 days of the end of the month of the
arrival of tenants, lessees and sublessees not previously reported or of the
departure of tenants, lessees and sublessees not previously reported.
§ 217-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation or other form of business association
which shall violate any term or provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of up to $300 for failure to comply with this chapter. Each violation is
an additional offense subject to a separate fine.
Chapter 220
TOWING CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 37. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 222.
§ 220-1. Purpose.
Purpose. It is the purpose and objective of this chapter to protect the
general welfare and public interests of the community, safeguarding the
public against fraud, discrimination, deception and similar abuses and
eliminating the retarding of traffic, unnecessary street congestion,
unnecessary delays and traffic hazards, the towing and removal of
damaged, disabled, snowbound, abandoned vehicles or towing for other
lawful purposes, and to provide for the safe storage of such vehicles until
their disposition and to establish a towing contract and fee schedule.
§ 220-2. Authorization.
A. Towing contract. The Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors is
authorized to enter into agreements with persons and entities
(hereinafter individually called "contractor") engaged in the business of
removing vehicles of all types that are damaged, disabled, snowbound
or abandoned and providing a safe storage of such vehicles until their
disposition ("towing contract").
B. Towing fee schedule. The Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors
shall adopt a fee schedule for the removing of vehicles of all types that
are damaged, disabled, snowbound or abandoned and providing a safe
§ 217-2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 220-2
1:618
§ 220-3. Specifications for contractor vehicles and services.
storage of such vehicles until their disposition, by resolution ("towing
fee schedule"). The towing fee schedule shall be reviewed annually by
the Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors and may be changed
at its discretion.
A. The contractor shall provide properly licensed and operating
equipment capable of handling vehicles up to Class 8 (maximum 26,000
pounds).
B. The vehicle must be able to be moved by the contractor regardless of
the vehicle's condition.
C. The towing vehicles listed as being provided by the contractor shall
always be maintained in operating condition, or alternatively, a suitable
replacement shall be provided so that the contractor's services will be
available for the purpose and duration of the contract.
D. In addition to the removal of vehicles, the contractor shall clean up at
the scene of any traffic crash, removing broken glass, metal, and all
debris as required by the Montgomery Township police officer at the
scene. Absorbent material shall be utilized to remove any leaking fluids
from vehicles involved in a crash or disabled vehicles.
E. The contractor shall provide services as needed, on a seven-day-a-week,
twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. One telephone number shall be supplied
to the Montgomery Township Police Department for use in requesting
service, which shall be available at all times. The contractor must be
available to release vehicles to owners Monday to Friday 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. and Saturday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. Outside of business
hours, an additional gate fee may be charged.
F. Contractors shall dispatch towing equipment in a timely fashion to
ensure that services are being provided within 20 minutes of the
assistance call from the Montgomery Township Police Department.
Failure to respond in the aforementioned time period will result in the
calling of an alternate towing agency.
G. The contractor shall own or lease a salvage storage yard within
Montgomery Township, in a properly secured area, sufficient in size for
the storage of 20 or more vehicles. The area shall be secured for the
safe storage of towed vehicles and shall comply with all other Townshiprelated
ordinances for the storage of vehicles and shall be open for
inspection by the Township and for pickup of vehicles by owners,
provided that they meet the conditions hereof. Authorized person(s)
seeking to recover a towed vehicle shall have proper identification and
shall be permitted to remove their vehicles upon payment of proper
fees.
§ 220-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:619
§ 220-4. Nonexclusive towing contractor.
The provision of towing services within the Township shall not be on an
exclusive basis. The Township reserves the right to execute towing
contracts with multiple contractors. If more than one contractor is selected,
then the services to be performed by the contractor shall be on a weekly,
monthly, bimonthly, quarterly or other basis as determined within the sole
H. The contractor shall not charge more than the established rate per the
fee schedule. No fee shall be charged to the Township for the towing of
abandoned or salvage vehicles.
I. If more than one contractor is selected, they will work on a rotation
basis prescribed by the Township.
J. All complaints against a contractor will be investigated and recorded.
Any violation of the towing contract shall be sufficient cause to suspend
or terminate the contractor at issue. Suspension or termination
determinations shall be at the sole discretion of the Township.
K. The contractor shall acquire and maintain communications (i.e., twoway
non-police radio frequency) equipment that is compatible with that
used by the Police Department (i.e., cell phone). If the contractor has
not complied with this specification within 30 days after the execution
of the towing contract, then the appointment of the contractor and the
towing contract shall become null and void and terminated upon
written notice by the Township.
L. (Reserved)
M. If a vehicle owner or lessee or other authorized representative of the
owner or lessee requests the vehicle to be towed to another location,
the contractor shall advise the customer in advance of any charges in
addition to the towing fee schedule.
N. If the contractor is called by the Montgomery Township police to
perform any other service(s), the contractor agrees to charge only the
amount designated in the towing fee schedule for such service(s).
O. As required by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, Subsection 7301,202 the
contractor shall comply with the requirements of that chapter, possess
a salvor's certificate of authorization and be capable of performing the
duties of a salvor in a manner consistent with the public interest. The
contractor shall file a copy of salvor's certificate of authorization with
the Montgomery Township Police Department.
P. The contractor shall pay workers employed in the performance of the
towing contract not less than the prevailing minimum wage rate as
determined for various crafts or classifications by applicable federal
and state governmental agencies.
202. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301.
§ 220-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 220-4
1:620
discretion of the Police Department. The Police Department shall establish
a schedule on a rotating basis and provide each contractor with a copy
thereof.
§ 220-5. Qualifications of contractor.
§ 220-6. Insurance.
A. The contractor shall have its principal place of business and the
equipment to be used in fulfillment of the Towing Contract located in
Montgomery Township.
B. The contractor shall possess a Pennsylvania certificate of authorization
as a salvor.
C. The contractor and its shareholders, officers, members and directors
shall not have been convicted of fraud, theft, receiving stolen property
and/or other dishonest business practices.
D. The contractor shall have a clean business record that withstands a
police background investigation.
E. The contractor shall supply a complete list of all towing vehicles, setting
forth a description of the make, model, towing capacity, and license
numbers so that the Montgomery Township Police Department shall be
able to properly identify the towing equipment available.
F. The contractor shall comply with the specifications and all other terms
of this chapter and other applicable law.
A. The contractor shall be responsible for the care and protection of all
vehicles and their contents when towing or storing vehicles for the
Township and shall be required to procure and maintain proper
insurance coverage. The contractor shall supply five copies of current
certificates of insurance from companies licensed to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the Township, as
follows:
(1) Workers' compensation insurance: workers' compensation for its
employees in accordance with statutory requirement of the
commonwealth.
(2) Public liability: public liability insurance coverage to include injury
or damage caused directly or indirectly by it or its employees for
the limits as noted by the Township Solicitor. Such insurance shall
include coverage for bodily injury (each person); bodily injury (each
occurrence); property damage (each occurrence); and garage
keepers legal liability (all risk coverage each occurrence).
(3) Vehicles: liability insurance for all vehicles with the limits as noted
by the Township Solicitor. Such insurance shall include coverage
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-6
1:621
§ 220-7. Contractor default.
If the contractor fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of
the Towing Contract, the Township may, upon 48 hours' written notice
(by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery), suspend
or terminate the contractor at issue and proceed as set forth in the
specifications. In the event of such termination, and at the cost and expense
of the contractor, the Township shall have the power to determine, at its
sole discretion, that there has been a default or violation by the contractor
as to any of the provisions of the Towing Contract.
§ 220-8. Towing agreement.
The contractor shall enter into the Towing Contract as prepared by the
Township.
§ 220-9. Heavy-duty vehicles.
Class 9 heavy-duty vehicles (26,001 pounds to 30,000 pounds and above)
shall be towed by qualified tow companies designated and dispatched by the
Montgomery Township Police Department.
Chapter 222
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 201.
for bodily injury (each person); bodily injury (each occurrence); and
property damage (each occurrence).
B. The contractor shall ensure that Montgomery Township shall be named
as an additional insured on all insurance policies. Thirty days notice of
cancellation of any such policies shall be provided to the Township.
C. If the contractor receives notice of cancellation or nonrenewal of any or
all of the coverages set forth above, the contractor shall notify
Township in writing of such cancellation or nonrenewal within two
business days. Such notification shall be addressed to the current
Township Manager, Montgomery Township, 1001 Stump Road,
Montgomeryville, PA 18936 and forwarded either by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or personal delivery.
D. The Township, at its option, may require the contractor to cease all
work under the Towing Contract until coverage acceptable to the
Township is obtained by the contractor.
§ 220-6 MONTGOMERY CODE § 220-9
1:622
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 222-1. Word usage; definitions.
§ 222-2. Interpreting direction of streets.
Although the streets in the Township run generally in a northeast-southwest
and northwest-southeast direction, for the purpose of this chapter,
Doylestown Road (Rt. 202), DeKalb Pike (Rt. 202) and Upper State Road
and the streets running parallel or generally parallel to these streets shall
be deemed to run in a north-south direction, and Horsham Road - Cowpath
Road and the streets parallel or generally parallel to Horsham Road -
Cowpath Road shall be deemed to run in an east-west direction. Bethlehem
Pike (Rt. 309) will be considered a north-south route.
§ 222-3. Manner of adopting permanent regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Montgomery except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 222-4. Temporary and emergency regulations; violations and
penalties.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.203
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — Includes New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
203. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-4
1:623
§ 222-5. Experimental regulations; penalty.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those locations
by proper signs and markings. Those regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority
of this section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in
this chapter for a violation of that nature and, in case of a violation for which
no specific penalty is set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a
fine of $25 and costs, provided that the purpose of this section is to allow
for test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 222-6. Closing streets; penalty.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such regulation
shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be liable to the
penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of
that nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The Township Manager shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station flagmen at each end of the closed portion while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion.
B. The Township Manager or Roadmaster shall have authority to establish
a restricted traffic area upon an street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the
flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling
that vehicle by a flag or other device not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 222-4 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-7
1:624
§ 222-7. Processions and assemblages; penalty.
A. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A "procession" shall not include a funeral caravan
or military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Township Manager, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held,
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Township Manager, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in
any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 222-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-8
1:625
§ 222-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Township shall have authority to direct traffic on
the streets in the Township, at intersections in public and in other places
where the Vehicle Code204 or this chapter applies.
204. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 222-8 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-8
1:626
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 222-9. Speed limits.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
[Amended 7-22-1985 by Ord. No. 87B; 4-27-1987 by Ord. No.
87E; 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 87F; 8-22-1988 by Ord. No. 87G;
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H; 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. 87J; 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Aaron Way [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Abbey Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Acorn Drive 25 Entire length
Adams Court 25 Entire length
Addison Lane [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
99-105]
25 Entire Length
Amber Place 25 Entire length
Andrew Lane 25 Entire length
Applewood Lane 25 Entire length
Arbor Way [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Arbour Green Circle
[Added 10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-67]
25 Entire length
Arden Circle 25 Entire length
Armada Circle [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Arrowhead Circle 25 Entire length
Ashley Circle 25 Entire length
Aspen Place 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:627
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Auburn Circle 25 Entire length
August Lane [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Azalea Place 25 Entire length
Banbury Avenue [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Bartlett Drive 25 Entire length
Beacon Court 25 Entire length
Beaumont Terrace
[Added 10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-67]
25 Entire length
Bedford Lane 25 Entire length
Beechwood Drive 25 Entire length
Bellows Way 25 Entire length
Bell Run Boulevard
[Amended 3-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-105]
25 Entire length
Bettys Avenue [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Blue Jay Way [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Bonnie Lane 25 Entire length
Bradford Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Braxton Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Bridle Path 25 Entire length
Brighton Circle 25 Entire length
Brittany Place 25 Entire length
Broad Acres Road
[Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
25 Entire length
Brook Circle 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-9
1:628
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Brookshyre Way [Added
4-30-2001 by Ord. No.
01-138
25 Entire length
Brookwood Drive 25 Entire length
Brunswick Place 25 Entire length
Bryan Circle 25 Entire length
Bryan Drive [Amended 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67; repealed
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Bryan Way 25 Entire length
Buckingham Lane
[Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
25 Entire length
Cambridge Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Camp Drive 25 Entire length
Canterbury Lane 25 Entire length
Cathedral Drive 25 Entire length
Cedar Lane 25 Entire length
Chamberlain Circle
[Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
25 Entire length
Chaps Way [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Chatham Place 25 Entire length
Chaucer Court 25 Entire length
Chester Circle [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Churchill Circle [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Citadel Court [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Claremont Drive 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:629
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Clayton Court [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Clover Leaf Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Colonial Court [Repealed
10-11-2005 by Ord. No.
05-202]
Colt Circle [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Colwyn Terrace [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Commerce Drive 35 Entire length
Compton Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Congress Drive 25 Entire length
Conrad Lane [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Constitution Court
[Repealed 10-11-2005
by Ord. No. 05-202]
Country Club Drive
[Added 10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-67]
25 Entire length
Cove Circle 25 Entire length
Covenant Circle
[Repealed 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
Coventry Circle 25 Entire length
Crestwood Circle 25 Entire length
Crestwood Drive 25 Entire length
Cricklewood Circle 25 Entire length
Damson Lane 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-9
1:630
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Darter Lane [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Daufer Lane 25 Entire length
David Lane 25 Entire length
Davis Drive [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Deerpath Lane 25 Entire length
Devonshire Drive 25 Entire length
Domorah Drive 35 Entire length
Douglass Road 25 Entire length
Drake Lane [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Drayton Circle 25 Entire length
Duchess Place 25 Entire length
Durham Way 25 Entire length
Eagle Lane 25 Entire length
East Lawn Avenue 25 Entire length
Elberta Drive 25 Entire length
Elizabeth Court
[Repealed 10-11-2005
by Ord. No. 05-202]
Enclave Boulevard
[Added 11-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-301]
25 Entire length
Enterprise Road 35 Entire length
Essex Court [Repealed
10-11-2005 by Ord. No.
05-202]
Fairacres Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Fairview Drive 25 Entire length
Falling Leaf Way 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:631
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Field Terrace [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Flintlock Circle 25 Entire length
Forest Trail Drive 25 Entire length
Franklin Court
[Repealed 10-11-2005
by Ord. No. 05-202]
Freedom Drive 25 Entire length
Glasgow Circle 25 Entire length
Glen Road 25 Entire length
Goodwin Road 25 Entire length
Gordon Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Grays Lane 25 Entire length
Greenbriar Road 25 Entire length
Green Spring Circle
[Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
25 Entire length
Grouse Court 25 Entire length
Guilford Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Gwynedd Lea Drive
[Added 10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-67]
25 Entire length
Gwynmont Circle [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Gwynmont Drive [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Halloway Circle 25 Entire length
Hampton Circle 25 Entire length
Hancock Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Harbob Lane 25 Entire length
Hawthorne Circle 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-9
1:632
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Hawthorne Drive 25 Entire length
Heartwood Drive 25 Entire length
Hedgerow Place 25 Entire length
Hemlock Drive 25 Entire length
Hemingway Drive 25 Entire length
Henning Drive 25 Entire length
Herron Court 25 Entire length
Holly Circle [Amended
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Holly Drive [Amended
12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
03-174]
25 Rosewood Drive
Hopkins Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Horseshoe Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Independence Drive 25 Entire length
Jason Place 25 Entire length
Jefferson Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Jonathan Drive 25 Entire length
Kelsey Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Kent Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Keystone Drive 35 Entire length
Knapp Road [Amended
4-30-2001 by Ord. No.
01-138]
35 Entire length
Knollwood Drive 25 Entire length
Lantern Lane 25 Entire length
Lea Drive 25 Entire length
Lenape Drive 25 Entire length
Lennox Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Lindsey Place 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:633
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Line Street 35 Entire length
Livingston Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Longleat Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Lower State Road 35 Entire length
MacIntosh Drive 25 Entire length
Madison Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Magdalena Lane [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99; amended
4-30-2001 by Ord. No.
01-138]
25 Entire length
Magella Court 25 Entire length
Magnolia Place 25 Entire length
Mallard Drive 25 Entire length
Manor Drive [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99; amended
3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
99-105]
25 Entire length
Matthew Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
McKean Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
McLaughlin Road [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Meadow Glen Road 25 Entire length
Meadowood Drive 25 Entire length
Mele Avenue 25 Entire length
Merton Circle [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Montgomery Avenue
[Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
25 Entire length
§ 222-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-9
1:634
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Montgomery Glen Drive 25 Entire length
Morgan Street
[Amended 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
25 Entire length
Morningside Drive 25 Entire length
Moro Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Morris Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Naomi Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Narcissus Place 25 Entire length
North Buckingham Lane
[Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
25 Entire length
North Stone Ridge Drive
[Added 7-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-35]
25 Entire length
North Wales Road
[Amended 10-11-2005
by Ord. No. 05-202]
25 Between Montgomery
Glen Drive and Tree
Line Drive
North Wales Road
[Amended 10-11-2005
by Ord. No. 05-202]
35 Between Route 63 and
Montgomery Glen Drive
Old Oak Tree Road 25 Entire length
Orchard Drive 25 Entire length
Oval Lane [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Oxford Lane [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Park Drive 25 Entire length
Parliament Circle [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Pauline Circle [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Pecan Drive 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:635
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Pemberton Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Pine Crest Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Pintail Court 25 Entire length
Pioneer Drive 25 Entire length
Pioneer Spur 25 Entire length
Preston Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Progress Drive 35 Entire length
Quail Court 25 Entire length
Quaker Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Ravenwood Place 25 Entire length
Red Haven Drive [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Regency Drive [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Richardson Road 35 Entire length
Ridgeview Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Rolling Hill Drive [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Rose Lane 25 Entire length
Rose Twig Lane 25 Entire length
Rosewood Drive 25 Entire length
Ross Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Runnemede Drive 25 Entire length
Rutledge Drive [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Samantha Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
§ 222-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-9
1:636
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Sassafras Drive 25 Entire length
Schreiner Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Scott Circle [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Shady Lane 25 Entire length
Shelbourne Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Simpson Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Somerset Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
South Drive 25 Entire length
South Plantation Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
South Stone Ridge Drive
[Added 7-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-35]
25 Entire length
Sparks Circle [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Springdale Lane [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Spur Road 25 Entire length
Stafford Circle 25 Entire length
Stayman Drive 25 Entire length
Steeplechase Drive
[Added 7-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-35]
25 Entire length
Stockton Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Stoney Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Stratford Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:637
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Stump Road [Amended
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
35 Entire length
Stump Road [Added
12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
03-174]
25 Between Routes 109
and 63 (below "S" curve
sign)
Stump Road 15 Between Montgomery
Elementary School
property lines, while
flashing school-zone
signs are in operation
Summer Ridge Drive
[Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
25 Entire length
Summit Place [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Sunrise Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Sunset Drive 25 Entire length
Swallow Court 25 Entire length
Swan Court 25 Entire length
Sycamore Drive 25 Entire length
Tanglewood Drive 25 Entire length
Terwood Lane [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
99-105]
25 Entire length
Thames Drive [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Thatcher Court [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
25 Entire length
Thornton Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Torey Circle 25 Entire length
Tree Line Drive [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Tree Top Drive [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
§ 222-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-9
1:638
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Trotter Lane [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
94-35]
25 Entire length
Twining Road 25 Entire length
Union Court [Repealed 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-202]
Village Drive 25 Entire length
Vilsmeier Road 35 Entire length
Walden Circle 25 Entire length
Walden Court 25 Entire length
Walden Lane 25 Entire length
Wentworth Drive [Added
3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
99-105]
25 Entire length
Westgate Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
West Lawn Avenue 25 Entire length
Westminster Drive
[Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
25 Entire length
Weston Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
West Thomas Road 25 Entire length
Weymouth Circle 25 Entire length
White Pine Drive [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
98-99]
25 Entire length
Willowood Court [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Windsor Circle 25 Entire length
Winter Drive 25 Entire length
Witchwood Drive [Added
4-30-2001 by Ord. No.
01-138
35 Entire length
Woodland Drive 25 Entire length
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:639
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Woodlea Terrace [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No.
96-67]
25 Entire length
Wren Court 25 Entire length
B. NOTE: The following speed limits have been established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for portions of state roads
within Montgomery Township. They are noted here for reference only
and are not part of this chapter. These speed limits are subject to
change by action of the Department of Transportation.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Bethlehem Pike 40 From Route 463 ("Five Points") to
Upper State Road ("Montgomery
Square")
Bethlehem Pike 45 From Line Street to Route 463
("Five Points")
Bethlehem Pike 55 From DeKalb Pike ("Montgomery
Square") to Township line (south)
County Line
Road
45 Entire length
Cowpath Road 40 From Line Street to Bethlehem
Pike
DeKalb Pike 55 From Welsh Road to Bethlehem
Pike
Doylestown Road 55 From Bethlehem Pike to County
Line Road
Evans Road 40 Entire length
Hartman Road 55 Entire length
Horsham Road 45 From Bethlehem Pike to Stump
Road
Horsham Road 55 From Stump Road to Lower State
Road
Kenas Road 45 Entire length
Lansdale Avenue 40 Entire length
Limekiln Pike 45 Entire length
Taylor Road 40 Entire length
§ 222-9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-9
1:640
§ 222-10. Traffic signals; penalty.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Upper State
Road
45 Entire length
Welsh Road 40 Entire length
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Intersection Type of Signal
County Line Road and Limekiln
Pike (Route 152)
Traffic control signal
County Line Road and Lower
State Road [Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
County Line Road and Stump
Road [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
County Line Road and Upper
State Road
Traffic control signal
Cowpath Road (Route 463) and
entrance at Five Point Plaza
[Added 4-27-1987 by Ord. No.
87E]
Traffic control signal
Cowpath Road and Lansdale
Avenue/Taylor Road [Added
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
Traffic control signal
Cowpath Road (Route 463) and
Line Street
Traffic control signal
DeKalb Pike (Route 202) and
entrance to Montgomery Mall
Traffic control signal
DeKalb Pike (Route 202) and
Knapp Road [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
DeKalb Pike (Route 202) and
Welsh Road (Route 64)
Traffic control signal
Doylestown Road (Route 202) and
County Line Road
Traffic control signal
§ 222-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-10
1:641
Intersection Type of Signal
Doylestown Road (Route 202 and
Montgomery Glen Drive [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
Horsham Road (Route 463) and
Hartman Road [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
Horsham Road (Route 463) and
Pheasant Run [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
Horsham Road (Route 463) and
Stump Road [Added 4-27-1987
by Ord. No. 87E]
Traffic control signal
Horsham Road (Route 463) and
Upper State Road
Traffic control signal
Limekiln Pike (Route 152) and
Lower State Road [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
North Wales Road and Harbob
Lane [Added 2-27-1989 by Ord.
No. 87H]
Traffic control signal
North Wales Road and Horsham
Road [Added 2-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 87H]
Traffic control signal
North Wales Road and Knapp
Road
Traffic control signal
North Wales Road and entrance
to Montgomery Mall [Added
4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E]
Traffic control signal
Route 63 at Gwynedd Crossing
Shopping Center [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Doylestown Road
(Route 202) and Horsham Road
(Route 463) and Cowpath Road
(Route 463): "Five Points"
Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Hartman Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Jughandle A
(South)
Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Jughandle B
(North)
Traffic control signal
§ 222-10 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-10
1:642
§ 222-11. Right turn prohibited on red signal; penalty.
Intersection Type of Signal
Route 309 and North Wales Road Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Richardson Road Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Stump Road Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Taylor/McLaughlin
Road [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
Route 309 and Upper State Road
and DeKalb Pike (Route 202)
Traffic control signal
Route 309 at Gwynedd Crossing
Shopping Center [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
Welsh Road (Route 63) and Bell
Run Boulevard [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Traffic control signal
Welsh Road (Route 63) and North
Wales Road
Traffic control signal
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection
Vehicles
Traveling on Facing
Bethlehem Pike (Route 309)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Montgomery
Mall exit/Jug A
South
Bethlehem Pike (Route 309)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
North Wales
Road
South
Bethlehem Pike (Route 309)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Richardson
Road
West
Bethlehem Pike (Route 309)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Stump Road North and South
§ 222-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-11
1:643
Intersection
Vehicles
Traveling on Facing
Bethlehem Pike (Route 309) and
Doylestown Road (Business Route
202) [Added 4-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-304]
Horsham Road
(Route 463)
West and East
Bethlehem Pike (Route 309) and
Horsham Road (Route 463)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Doylestown
Road (Business
Route 202)
South
Cowpath Road and Lansdale
Avenue/Taylor Road [Added
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
Cowpath Road East
Cowpath Road and Lansdale
Avenue/Taylor Road [Added
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
Cowpath Road West
County Line and Route 202
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73; repealed 4-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-304]
County Line and Stump Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73; repealed 4-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-304]
County Line and Stump Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73; repealed 4-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-304]
h
County Line and Upper State
Road [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-73]
County Line West
County Line Road and Upper
State Road [Repealed
4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 17-304[
Dekalb Pike [Added 4-24-2017
by Ord. No. 17-304]
Gateway
Shopping Center
exit
South
Five Points [Repealed 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Horsham Road (Route 463)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Clare Bridge of
Montgomery
Drive
South
§ 222-11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-11
1:644
Intersection
Vehicles
Traveling on Facing
Horsham Road (Route 463)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Lansdale Avenue North
Horsham Road (Route 463)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Stump Road North
Horsham Road (Route 463)
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No.
17-304]
Taylor Road South
Richardson Road and Route 309
[Repealed 4-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-304[
Route 152 and County Line Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73; repealed 4-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-304]
County Line West
Route 63 and North Wales Road North Wales
Road
South
Route 202 and County Line Road
[Repealed 4-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-304[
t
Route 202 and Route 63 Route 63 East and West
Route 309 and Doylestown Pike
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
Route 309 North
Route 309 and North Wales Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73; repealed 4-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-304]
Route 309 and Richardson Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73; repealed 4-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-304]
Route 309 and Stump Road
[Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-73]
Route 309 and Upper State Road
("Montgomery Square")
[Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-73]
§ 222-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-11
1:645
§ 222-12. One-way streets; penalty.
§ 222-13. Prohibited turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following intersections in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/
or a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at any time when
such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Intersection
Vehicles
Traveling on Facing
Route 463 and Hartman Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73; repealed 4-24-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-304]
Route 463 and Stump Road
[Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
Stump Road South
Route 463 and Upper State Road Upper State
Road
North and South
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Cricklewood
Circle
Counter-clockwise From Cricklewood Drive to
Cricklewood Drive
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 222-11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-13
1:646
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Location
Hours/
Days
Applicable
Type of
Vehicle
Jughandle A
Northbound
Exit of
Montgomery
Mall
East Right Southbound
Route 309
All All
Jughandle A
Southbound
Exit
West Right Northbound
Route 309
All All
Jughandle B
Northbound
Exit from
Airport Square
West Right Northbound
Route 309
All All
Jughandle B
Northbound
Exit from
Montgomery
Mall
East Right Southbound
Route 309
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
North Left Shopping
center rear
trafficway
Montgomery
Square
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
North Left Witchwood
Drive
entranceway
at
Montgomery
Square
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
North Right DeKalb
Pike
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
North Right Shopping
center rear
trafficway
Montgomery
Square
All All
§ 222-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-13
1:647
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Location
Hours/
Days
Applicable
Type of
Vehicle
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
South Left DeKalb
Pike
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
South Left Route 309
entranceway
at
Montgomery
Square
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
South Left Shopping
center
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
South Right Route 309
rear
trafficway
Montgomery
Square
All All
Knapp Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
South Right Shopping
center
All All
North Wales
Road [Added
7-13-1998 by
Ord. No.
98-998]
North Left Entrance
to 7-Eleven
Store
All All
Park Drive East Left Northbound
Route 309
All All
Route 309 North Left Park Drive All All
Route 309 at
Jughandle A
North All Airport
Square or
Montgomery
Mall
All All
§ 222-13 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-13
1:648
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Location
Hours/
Days
Applicable
Type of
Vehicle
Route 309 at
Jughandle A
South All Airport
Square or
Montgomery
Mall
All All
Route 309 at
Jughandle B
North All Montgomery
Mall or
Airport
Square
All All
Route 309 at
Jughandle B
South All Airport
Square
All All
Stump Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
East Left Witchwood
Drive
All All
Stump Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
East Right Neshaminy
Falls Drive
All All
Stump Road
[Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
West Right Witchwood
Drive
All All
Witchwood
Drive [Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
North Left Knapp
Road
entranceway
at
Montgomery
Square
All All
Witchwood
Drive [Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
North Left Shopping
center
All All
§ 222-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-13
1:649
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Location
Hours/
Days
Applicable
Type of
Vehicle
Witchwood
Drive [Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
North Right Knapp
Road
All All
Witchwood
Drive [Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
South Left Stump
Road
All All
Witchwood
Drive [Added
4-30-2001 by
Ord. No.
01-138
South Right Stump
Road
All All
§ 222-14. Mandatory right turns; penalty.
§ 222-15. Stop intersections; penalty.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn at any
time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
Vehicle
Traveling on
Direction
of Travel Days
Hours/Right Turn
Only at
Jughandle A
Southbound
Exit from
Montgomery
Mall
Eastbound All Route 309
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections, in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by this article, are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
§ 222-13 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:650
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street in the direction indicated
in each case shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code,205 and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
(1) Meadow Glen (Woodbrook). [Amended 8-5-1991 by Ord. No.
87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Andrew Lane Meadow Glen Road North
Andrew Lane Spur Road (Lower) Southeast
Andrew Lane Spur Road (Upper) Southeast
Meadow Glen Road Doylestown Road
(Route 202)
East
Meadow Glen Road
[Added 9-12-2016
by Ord. No. 16-299]
Glen Road West
Spur Road Douglass Road Southwest
Spur Road Woodland Drive North
(2) Autumn Woods.
Stop Street Intersecting
Street
Direction
Cricklewood Drive Richardson Road East
Crystal Road Richardson Road East
Deerpath Lane Cricklewood Drive North
(3) Montgomery Woods.
Stop Street Intersecting
Street
Direction
Richardson Road County Line Road North
Shady Lane Richardson Road West
Shady Lane Woodland Drive
East
East
Shady Lane Woodland Drive
West
East and West
Woodland Drive East County Line Road North
Woodland Drive West County Line Road North
205. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b).
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:651
Stop Street Intersecting
Street
Direction
Woodland Drive West Shady Lane North and South
(4) Pennwood Gardens.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Bonnie Lane Cowpath Road South
Bonnie Lane [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-299]
Eagle Lane South
Bonnie Lane Line Street West
Cedar Lane [Added
4-27-1987 by Ord.
No. 87E]
East Lawn Avenue West
Eagle Lane [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-299]
Bonnie Lane West
East Lawn Avenue Bonnie Lane West
West Lawn Avenue Bonnie Lane East
West Lawn Avenue Bonnie Lane North
(5) Taylor Park.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Bridle Path Road
East
Taylor Road East
Bridle Path Road
West
Line Street West
Green Briar Drive
[Added 10-24-1994
by Ord. No. 94-41]
Lenape Drive North
Green Briar Drive
[Added 10-24-1994
by Ord. No. 94-41]
Bridlepath Road South
Lenape Drive Line Street West
Line Street Bethlehem Pike North
Mele Avenue Line Street West
Mele Avenue Bethlehem Pike East
(6) Parkwood.
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:652
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Brookwood Drive
[Added 9-12-2016
by Ord. No.
16-299]
Heartwood Drive East
Brookwood Drive Rosewood Drive South
Holly Circle Rosewood Drive North and South
Holly Drive [Added
12-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-174]
Holly Drive Southeast corner
Holly Drive Lansdale Avenue East
Heartwood Drive
East
Meadowood Drive South
Heartwood Drive
West
Meadowood Drive East
Knollwood Drive
[Added 9-12-2016
by Ord. No.
16-299]
Heartwood Drive West
Knollwood Drive Meadowood Drive South
Meadowood Drive Lansdale Avenue East
Meadowood Drive Rosewood Drive North and South
Rosewood Drive Brookwood Drive East and West
Rosewood Drive Holly Circle East
Rosewood Drive Line Street West
Rosewood Drive Meadowood Drive East and West
Tanglewood Drive Cowpath Road North
Tanglewood Drive
[Added 9-12-2016
by Ord. No.
16-299]
Heartwood Drive West
(7) Crestwood.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Crestwood Circle Crestwood Drive West
Crestwood Drive Crestwood Circle East and West
Crestwood Drive Lansdale Avenue West
Crestwood Drive Vilsmeier Road South
(8) Vilsmeier.
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:653
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Morningside Drive Vilsmeier Road North
Morningside Drive
[Added 9-12-2016
by Ord. No. 16-299]
West Thomas Drive North
South Drive [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-299]
Sunset Drive North
Sunset Drive [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-299]
Morningside Drive East
Sunset Drive [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-299]
West Thomas Drive North
Vilsmeier Road Bethlehem Pike East
Vilsmeier Road Lansdale Avenue West
Vilsmeier Road Morningside Drive East and West
Vilsmeier Road West Thomas Road
East
East and West
Vilsmeier Road West Thomas Road
West
East and West
West Thomas Road
East
Vilsmeier Road North
West Thomas Road
West
Vilsmeier Road North
(9) Beechwood.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Beechwood Drive Lansdale Avenue West
Beechwood Drive
[Added 11-14-2016
by Ord. No.
16-301]
Sycamore Drive West
Knapp Road Lansdale Avenue West
Sycamore Drive
[Added 9-12-2016
by Ord. No.
16-299]
Beechwood Drive East
Sycamore Drive
[Added 9-12-2016
by Ord. No.
16-299]
Beechwood Drive West
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:654
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Sycamore Drive Knapp Road South
(10) Montgomery Village.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Acorn Place [Added
10-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-289]
Hemlock Drive West
Aspen Place [Added
10-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-289]
Winter Drive South
Azalea Place [Added
10-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-289]
Hawthorne Drive West
Hemlock Drive Hawthorne Drive East and West
Hedgerow Place
[Added 10-26-2015
by Ord. No.
15-289]
Hemlock Drive West
Hemlock Drive
[Added 10-26-2015
by Ord. No.
15-289]
Sassafras Drive South
Hawthorne Drive
[Added 10-26-2015
by Ord. No.
15-289]
Winter Drive South
Jason Place [Added
10-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-289]
Winter Drive South
Magnolia Place
[Added 10-26-2015
by Ord. No.
15-289]
Rose Lane South
Narcissus Place
[Added 10-26-2015
by Ord. No.
15-289]
Hemlock Drive West
Rose Lane Hawthorne Drive West
Rose Lane North Wales Road East
Sassafras Drive Hawthorne Drive East
Village Drive Hawthorne Drive West
Village Drive North Wales Road East
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:655
(11) Trailwood.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Harbob Lane
[Added 10-26-2015
by Ord. No.
15-289]
Hawthorne Circle West
Harbob Lane North Wales Road East
Hawthorne Circle Hawthorne Drive West
(12)Welsh Valley Industrial Park.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Park Drive Bethlehem Pike East
Park Drive Welsh Road South
(13) Bethlehem Pike Industrial Park.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Keystone Drive Bethlehem Pike East
Keystone Drive Welsh Road West
Progress Drive
[Added 4-27-1987
by Ord. No. 87E]
Keystone Drive South
(14) Montgomeryville Industrial Park.
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Commerce Drive Stump Road West
Corporate Drive
[Added 7-22-1985
by Ord. No. 87B]
Domorah Drive South
Domorah Drive Hartman Road East
Domorah Drive
(extension) [Added
7-22-1985 by Ord.
No. 87B]
Commerce Drive
(circle)
North
Enterprise Road
[Added 7-22-1985
by Ord. No. 87B]
Commerce Drive East
Enterprise Road Stump Road West
(15) Montgomery mall.
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:656
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Driveway DeKalb Pike (Route 202) East
Driveway (lower) [Repealed 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E]
Driveway (upper) North Wales Road West
(16) Airport Square.
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
North service road North Wales Road West
North service road Upper State Road East
North Wales Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
South driveway North Wales Road West
South driveway Upper State Road East
(17) Montgomery Glen.
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Montgomery Glen Drive [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
Montgomery Glen
Drive
Horsham Road South
(18) Montgomery Glen and Woodhollow. [Added 4-27-1987 by Ord.
No. 87E]
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Adams Court Independence Drive North
Braxton Court Independence Drive South
Franklin Court Montgomery Glen Drive West
Hancock Court Montgomery Glen Drive West
Hopkins Court Montgomery Glen Drive North
Independence Drive
Independence Drive
(near the Club
House entrance)
Montgomery Glen Drive
Montgomery Glen Drive
South (near
Stockton Court)
West
Jefferson Court Independence Drive South
Livingstone Court Montgomery Glen Drive East
McKean Court Montgomery Glen Drive East
Montgomery Glen
Drive
Hopkins Court/
Independence Drive
East
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:657
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Montgomery Glen
Drive
Hopkins Court/
Independence Drive
West
Montgomery Glen
Drive (near the Club
House entrance)
Montgomery Glen Drive East
Montgomery Glen
Drive (near the Club
House entrance)
Montgomery Glen Drive South
Morris Court Independence Drive South
Rutledge Court Independence Drive North
Stockton Court
North
Independence Drive West
Stockton Court
South
Independence Drive East
Thornton Court Independence Drive North
(19) Neshaminy Falls.
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Neshaminy Falls
Drive
Stump Road West
Pheasant Run Drive [Added 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E;
repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
(20) Sandy Brooke.
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
East driveway Welsh Road South
West driveway Welsh Road South
Sandy's Lane Knapp Road North
(21) Miscellaneous.
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:658
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Bettys Avenue
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
Route 202 South
Brookshyre Way
[Added 4-30-2001
by Ord. No. 01-138
Taylor Road North
Evans Road Bethlehem Pike East
Evans Road Welsh Road South
Goodwin Lane Lower State Road East
Hartman Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Hartman Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Kenas Road County Line Road North
Kenas Road Horsham Road South
Knapp Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Lansdale Avenue [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Lantern Lane
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
Bridlepath Road South
Lea Drive [Added
4-27-1987 by Ord.
No. 87E]
Richardson Road West
Limekiln Pike (Route 152) [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
Lower State Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Lower State Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Magdalena Lane
[Added 4-30-2001
by Ord. No. 01-138
Addison Lane South
Magdalena Lane
[Added 4-30-2001
by Ord. No. 01-138
Line Street North
McLaughlin Road
[Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Country Club Drive East
McLaughlin Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
McLaughlin Road [Repealed 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99]
Montgomery Avenue Doylestown Road
(Route 202)
West
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:659
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Richardson Road
[Added 4-27-1987
by Ord. No. 87E]
County Line Road North
Stump Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Stump Road [Repealed 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E]
Stump Road Welsh Road South
Taylor Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Taylor Road [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Witchwood Drive
[Added 4-30-2001
by Ord. No. 01-138
Knapp Road North
Witchwood Drive
[Added 4-30-2001
by Ord. No. 01-138
Stump Road South
(22) Applewood. [Amended 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 87F]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Applewood Lane Cowpath Road North
David Lane Applewood Lane North
(23) Heatherknoll. [Added 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E; amended
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Bedford Lane Chatham Place North
Bedford Lane Chatham Place South
Bedford Lane Bellows Way East
Brighton Circle Chatham Place West
Chatham Place Chatham Place North
Chatham Place Doylestown Road
(Route 202)
West
Durham Way Chatham Place East
Hampton Circle Chatham Place West
(24) Canterbury. [Added 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E; amended
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:660
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Arrowhead Circle Twining Road North
Auburn Circle
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive North
Bellows Way Twining Road East
Bellows Way Twining Road West
Bellows Way Grays Lane South
Brunswick Place Canterbury Lane Northwest
Bryan Way [Added
8-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive Southeast
Canterbury Lane Bellows Way South
Canterbury Lane Twining Road East
Canterbury Lane Twining Road West
Cove Circle Grays Lane South
Devonshire Drive Canterbury Lane West
Falling Leaf Way Twining Road West
Flintlock Circle Pioneer Spur South
Glasgow Circle Canterbury Lane North
Grays Lane Canterbury Lane North
Grays Lane Doylestown Road
(Route 202)
West
Holloway Circle
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive Southwest
North Wales Road
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Montgomery Glen
Drive
Southwest
Pioneer Drive
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive South
Pioneer Drive
[Added 2-12-2001
by Ord. No.
01-136]
Walden Lane East
Pioneer Drive
[Added 2-12-2001
by Ord. No.
01-136]
Walden Lane West
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:661
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Pioneer Spur Grays Lane South
Pioneer Spur Twining Road East
Torey Circle [Added
8-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive Southwest
Tree Line Drive
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Grays Lane East
Tree Line Drive
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
North Wales Road East
Tree Line Drive
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
North Wales Road West
Twining Road Grays Lane South
Walden Lane [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K; repealed
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-136]
Walden Lane [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K; repealed
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-136]
Walden Lane
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive North
Walden Lane
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive West
Weymouth Circle
[Added 8-5-1991
by Ord. No. 87K]
Tree Line Drive West
(25) Orchard. [Added 4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E; amended
8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Alberta Drive Orchard Drive Southeast
Alberta Drive Red Haven Drive Northwest
Bartlett Drive Orchard Drive Southeast
Bartlett Drive Red Haven Drive Northwest
Damson Lane Red Haven Drive Northeast
Henning Drive Orchard Drive East
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:662
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Henning Drive Red Haven Drive Northwest
Jonathan Drive Orchard Drive East
Jonathan Drive Red Haven Drive East
MacIntosh Lane Staymen Drive West
Orchard Drive Stump Road Southwest
Orchard Drive Stump Road West
Orchard Drive North
at Commerce Drive
Stump Road East
Orchard Drive South
at Enterprise Road
Stump Road East
Red Haven Drive Jonathan Drive Southeast
Red Haven Drive Orchard Drive South
Staymen Drive Orchard Drive South
Staymen Drive Red Haven Drive South
Windsor Circle Jonathan Drive Northeast
(26) Victoria Woods. [Added 8-22-1988 by Ord. No. 87G; amended
2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Bryan Circle Bryan Way South
Bryan Way Pioneer Drive West
Pioneer Drive Grays Lane North
(27) Thornbury. [Added 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Ashley Circle Montgomery Glen South Drive
Coventry Circle Montgomery Glen South Drive
Drayton Circle Montgomery Glen South Drive
Stafford Circle Montgomery Glen South Drive
(28) Tall Gables. [Added 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 87H]
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:663
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Amber Place Cathedral Drive East
Brittany Place Cathedral Drive West
Cathedral Drive Upper State Road East
Cathedral Drive
(circle)
Cathedral Drive
(entrance)
North and South
Duchess Place Cathedral Drive North
Lindsey Place Cathedral Drive West
Ravenwood Place Cathedral Drive South
(29) Gwynmere. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Arden Circle Fairview Drive South
Brook Circle Claremont Drive East
Claremont Drive Doylestown Pike Northwest
Durham Way Claremont Drive North
Fairview Drive Claremont Drive North
Fairview Drive Claremont Drive South
Runnymede Drive Claremont Drive Southwest
Runnymede Drive Claremont Drive West
(30) Gwynedd Lea. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Arbour Green Circle Clover Leaf Lane North
Clover Leaf Lane Gwynedd Drive North
Clover Leaf Lane Gwynedd Drive South
Gwynedd Drive Stump Road West
Gwynedd Drive Welsh Road Southwest
Kent Drive Gwynedd Drive Northeast
Kent Drive Gwynedd Drive South
Willow Wood Court Gwynedd Drive South
(31) Gwynmont Farms. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:664
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Clayton Court
[Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 94-35]
Gwynmont Circle South
Gwynmont Circle Gwynmont Drive West
Gwynmont Drive DeKalb Pike West
Oval Lane [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-35]
Gwynmont Circle South
Trotter Lane Gwynmont Drive North
Trotter Lane Gwynmont Drive South
(32) Gwynedd Pointe/Montgomery Place. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Bell Run Boulevard Knapp Road Northeast
Carriage Court Bell Run Boulevard West
Congress Drive Bell Run Boulevard Southeast
Freedom Drive Bell Run Boulevard Southeast
Harvard Drive Bell Run Boulevard West
Hemingway Drive Bell Run Boulevard Southeast
Kenwood Drive Bell Run Boulevard Northwest
Midland Drive Bell Run Boulevard North
Rolling Hill Drive Bell Run Boulevard North
Spring Mill Drive Bell Run Boulevard Southeast
(33) Mallard Pond. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Camp Drive Mallard Drive Southeast
Camp Drive Stump Road Northwest
Darter Lane Mallard Drive North
Darter Lane Mallard Drive West
Grouse Court Mallard Drive West
Heron Court Mallard Drive West
Magella Court Mallard Drive Northeast
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:665
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Pintail Court Mallard Drive Northwest
Quail Court Rose Twig Lane West
Rose Twig Lane Kenas Road Southeast
Rose Twig Lane Mallard Drive North
Swallow Court Mallard Drive Northeast
Swan Court Mallard Drive South
Wren Court Mallard Drive South
(34) Montgomery Ridge. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Aaron Way [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-67]
Ridgeview Road South
Matthew Drive Matthew Drive Southeast
Matthew Drive Sunrise Drive Northeast
Ridgeview Road Sunrise Drive South
Ridgeview Road Sunrise Drive Southeast
Sunrise Drive Upper State Road West
(35)Wethersfield. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Beacon Court Claremont Drive Southwest
Claremont Drive Upper State Road Southeast
Essex Court Claremont Drive Southwest
Lennox Court Claremont Drive Southwest
Somerset Court Claremont Drive Southwest
Stanford Court Claremont Drive Southwest
Stratford Court
[Amended
10-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-202]
Claremont Drive Southwest
(36) Stone Ridge. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:666
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Abbey Lane [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-299]
South Stoneridge
Drive
South
Arbor Lane Abbey Lane West
Beamont Terrace Abbey Lane South
Beamont Terrace Grays Lane North
Cambridge Court Abbey Lane West
Colwyn Terrace Fairacres Drive East
Fairacres Drive Stone Ridge Drive Northwest
Fairacres Drive Upper State Road Southeast
Field Terrace Abbey Lane South
Moro Court Abbey Lane Southeast
North Stone Ridge
Drive
Abbey Lane East
South Stone Ridge
Drive
Abbey Lane West
Stoney Court Abbey Lane West
Woodlea Terrace Fairacres Drive West
(37) Forest Trail. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Forest Trail Drive Grays Lane (Lower) Northeast
Forest Trail Drive Grays Lane (Upper) Northeast
(38)Westgate. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Longleat Drive Westgate Drive North
Longleat Drive Westgate Drive West
Preston Drive Longleat Drive
(Lower)
Northeast
Preston Drive Longleat Drive
(Upper)
Northeast
Ross Court Westgate Drive North
Weston Court Longleat Drive North
Westgate Drive Upper State Road Northwest
(39) Spring Valley Park. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:667
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Spring Valley Drive Claremont Drive Northeast
Spring Valley Drive Upper State Road Southeast
(40) Fox Creek. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Broad Acre Road Richardson Road
(Lower)
Northeast
Broad Acre Road Richardson Road
(Upper)
Northeast
(41) PineCrest. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Circular drive
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
200 Block Country
Club Drive
West
Circular drive
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
300 Block Country
Club Drive
East
Circular drive
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
400 Block Country
Club Drive
West
Circular drive
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
500 Block Country
Club Drive
East
County Club Drive Doylestown Pike East
McLaughlin Road
[Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
Country Club Drive West
PineCrest Lane County Club Drive North
PineCrest Lane County Club Drive West
PineCrest Lane Doylestown Pike East
(42) Victoria Court [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K; amended
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-105]
Stop Street Intersecting
Street
Direction
Victoria Drive (West) McLaughlin Road North
Victoria Drive (East) McLaughlin Road North
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:668
(43)Wynwood Estates. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Sparks Circle
[Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
White Pine Drive North
White Pine Drive
[Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Addison Lane West
White Pine Drive Lansdale Avenue Southeast
(44)Winter Creek. [Added 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 87K]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Broad Acre Road Richardson Road South
(45) Ridings of Montgomery. [Added 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-35]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Chaps Way Steeplechase Drive Southwest
Colt Circle Steeplechase Drive Northwest
Steeplechase Drive Stump Road East
(46) Autumn Grove. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Bradford Court Shelburne Drive North
Compton Court Shelburne Drive North
Guilford Court Westgate Drive East
Madison Court Shelburne Drive South
Pemberton Court Shelburne Drive South
Simpson Court Westgate Drive East
(47) Springdale. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Springdale Lane Richardson Road West
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:669
(48) Clayton Hill. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Samantha Lane Richardson Road West
(49) Montgomery Hill. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Colwyn Terrace Kelsey Drive South
Kelsey Drive Upper State Road West
Ravenwood Place Kelsey Drive East
(50) Heatheridge. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Blue Jay Way Schreiner Drive West
Gordon Lane Blue Jay Way South
Schreiner Drive Gordon Lane North
Schreiner Drive Stump Road South
(51) Meadow Lane Farm. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Horseshoe Lane Upper State Road
(Upper)
North
Horseshoe Lane Upper State Road
(Lower)
North
(52) Clearview Estates. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Pauline Circle Forest Trail Drive South
(53) Montgomery Lea. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:670
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Buckingham Lane
[Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Westminster Drive North
Churchill Court Westminster Drive West
North Buckingham
Lane [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-99]
Major Drive North
North Buckingham
Lane [Amended
7-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-99]
Westminster Drive South
Parliament Circle Westminster Drive North
Thatcher Court Westminster Drive West
Westminster Drive Kenas Road West
Westminster Drive Limekiln Pike East
(54) Montgomery Oaks, Phase I. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Armada Circle
[Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Thames Drive South
Banbury Avenue Drake Lane East
Banbury Avenue Regency Drive North
Chamberlain Circle
[Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Thames Drive South
Citadel Court Regency Drive East
Drake Lane Regency Drive
(Lower)
North
Drake Lane Regency Drive
(Upper)
West
Merton Circle
[Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Banbury Avenue East
Regency Drive Hartman Road West
Thames Drive Drake Lane (Lower) West
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:671
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Thames Drive Drake Lane (Upper) West
(55)Winners Circle. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Aquaduct Court Claremont Drive
(Lower)
South
Aquaduct Court Claremont Drive
(Upper)
South
Churchill Downs
Drive
Claremont Drive
(Lower)
West
Churchill Downs
Drive
Claremont Drive
(Upper)
West
Claremont Drive Upper State Road West
Claremont Drive County Line Road North
Delmar Court Claremont Drive South
Pimlico Way Claremont Drive North
Saratoga Way Claremont Drive
(Upper)
West
Saratoga Way Claremont Drive
(Lower)
West
(56) Cambridge Estates. [Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Chester Circle Oxford Lane North
Oxford Lane Kenas Road East
(57) North Penn Estates. [Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Magdalena Lane Addison Lane East
Magdalena Lane Line Street West
(58) Summer Ridge. [Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99]
§ 222-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-15
1:672
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
August Lane Summer Ridge Drive
(Lower)
South
August Lane Summer Ridge Drive
(Upper)
West
Green Spring Circle Summer Ridge Drive
(Lower)
South
Green Spring Circle Summer Ridge Drive
(Upper)
South
Summer Ridge Drive County Line Road North
Summer Ridge Drive Upper State Road East
Summit Place Summer Ridge Drive East
(59) Holly Manor. [Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99; amended
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-105]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Addison Lane Wentworth North
Manor Drive Lansdale Avenue East
Manor Drive Wentworth Drive South
Terwood Lane Wentworth Northwest
Wentworth Drive Line Street West
Wentworth Drive Manor Drive North
(60) Gwynwood Pond. [Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99]
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction
Conrad Lane Davis Drive West
Conrad Lane Lower State Road East
Davis Drive Lower State Road East
Scott Circle Davis Drive North
(61) Enclave at Montgomery. [Added 11-14-2016 by Ord. No.
16-301]
Stop Street
Intersecting
Street Direction
Enclave Boulevard Bethlehem Pike
(Route 309)
South
Enclave Boulevard Hartman Road North
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 222-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-16
1:673
§ 222-16. Yield intersections.
A. The following intersections, in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by this article, are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street in the direction indicated in each case
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code,206 and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
(1) Meadow Glen.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Glen Road Andrew Lane East
Meadow Glen Road
[Repealed 9-12-2016
by Ord. No. 16-299]
(2) Autumn Woods.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Cricklewood Circle Cricklewood Drive North
(counterclockwise)
(3) Pennwood Gardens.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Eagle Lane Bonnie Lane East
(4) Parkwood.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Brookwood Road
[Repealed 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-299]
Holly Circle [Repealed
12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
03-174]
206. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(c).
§ 222-16 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-16
1:674
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Knollwood Drive
[Repealed 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-299]
Tanglewood Road
[Repealed 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-299]
(5) Vilsmeier.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Morningside Drive
[Repealed 9-12-2016
by Ord. No. 16-299]
South Drive [Repealed
9-12-2016 by Ord. No.
16-299]
Sunset Drive [Repealed
9-12-2016 by Ord. No.
16-299]
Sunset Drive [Repealed
9-12-2016 by Ord. No.
16-299]
(6) Beechwood.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Old Oak Tree Road Beechwood Drive North
Pecan Drive Beechwood Drive South
Sycamore Drive
[Repealed 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-299]
Sycamore Drive
[Repealed 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-299]
(7) Montgomery Village.
§ 222-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-16
1:675
§ 222-16.1. No-outlet roads. [Added 4-30-2001 by Ord. No. 01-138
The following are designated as no-outlet roads:
Stop Street Intersection Direction
Brookshyre Way Taylor Road South
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Hawthorne Drive
[Repealed 10-26-2015
by Ord. No. 15-289]
Hemlock Drive [Repealed
10-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-289]
(8) Trailwood.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Harbob Lane [Repealed
10-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-289]
§ 222-16 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-16.1
1:676
ARTICLE III
Vehicle Weight and Type Restrictions
§ 222-17. Weight limits; penalty.
§ 222-18. Truck traffic restricted; penalty. [Added 12-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 87-I]
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,207 it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be: [Amended 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
Street or Bridge
Limits
(tons)
Maximum Gross
Weight
Knapp Road [Repealed
10-11-2005 by Ord. No.
05-202]
Route 152 [Added
10-11-2005 by Ord. No.
05-202]
At Lower State
Road
15
Stump Road [Repealed
10-11-2005 by Ord. No.
05-202]
Stump Road, bridge over
Little Neshaminy Creek
[Amended 10-11-2005
by Ord. No. 05-202;
8-27-2018 by Ord. No.
18-307]
15 Except all combination
vehicles shall be
permitted at 27 tons
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code208 and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150, plus $150 for
each 500 pounds or part thereof in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car, motorcycle, pickup truck or van on any of the following
streets or parts of streets:
207. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a).
208. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g)(1), respectively.
§ 222-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-18
1:677
Name of Street Limits
Montgomery Glen Drive Between Doylestown Road (Route 202)
and Horsham Road (Route 463)
B. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an
emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 222-18 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-18
1:678
ARTICLE IV
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 222-19. Parking within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 222-20. Parking prohibited at all times.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street/Shopping Center/Area Side/Area Location
5 Points Plaza [Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
202 Marketplace [Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
Airport Square [Added 7-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
Bell Run Boulevard [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-35]
Both From Knapp Road
to end of divided
section
Bell Run Boulevard [Added
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-35]
Both From Welsh Road
to end of divided
section
Bell Run Boulevard [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
East From Emerson
Drive South 75
feet and North to
Hemingway Drive
Bell Run Boulevard [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
West From Freedom
Drive South 75
feet and North 75
feet
Bell Run Boulevard [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
West From Hemingway
Drive South 75
feet and North 75
feet
Bethlehem Pike Both Entire length
Bridlepath Road [Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
South From Taylor Road
to Bridle Path
School
Claremont Drive [Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
Both From Upper State
Road to County
Line
§ 222-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-20
1:679
Street/Shopping Center/Area Side/Area Location
Claremont Drive [Added 7-27-1992
by Ord. No. 92-2]
North Upper State Road
and dividing line
between
Wethersfield &
Gwynmere
properties
Claremont Drive [Added 7-27-1992
by Ord. No. 92-2]
South Upper State Road
and end of Spring
Valley Park
property (opposite
Runnymede Drive)
Commerce Drive Both Entire length
Commerce Drive [Added 7-22-1985
by Ord. No. 87B; amended
4-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87E]
Both Between
Enterprise Road
and cul-de-sac
Commerce Drive [Added 7-22-1985
by Ord. No. 87B]
Both Between Stump
Road and
Enterprise Road
Cricklewood Circle Inside of circle Cricklewood
Drive,
counterclockwise
50 feet to sign
Cricklewood Circle Outside of
circle
Entire length
Cricklewood Drive Both Entire length
Davis Drive [Added 12-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-210]
Both From Kenas Road
to Annabel Drive
Domorah Drive [Added 7-22-1985 by
Ord. No. 87B]
Both Entire length
Enterprise Road [Added 7-22-1985
by Ord. No. 87B]
Both Entire length
Fairacres Drive [Added 10-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-67]
Both Between Upper
State Road and
North/South Stone
Ridge Drive
Gwynedd Crossing [Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
§ 222-20 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-20
1:680
Street/Shopping Center/Area Side/Area Location
Horsham Road [Added 9-23-1985 by
Ord. No. 87C]
Both Between Five
Points
(intersection of
Township Routes
309, 202 and 463)
and the Horsham
Township line
Kenas Road [Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
West Windlestrae Park
Keystone Drive [Added 4-27-1987 by
Ord. No. 87E]
Both Between
Bethlehem Pike
(Route 309) and
Welsh Road
Knapp Road [Added 2-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 87H]
Montgomery
Township
Between Lansdale
Avenue and
Norway Drive
McLaughlin Road [Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 94-35]
Both From County Club
Drive to end of
divided section
McLaughlin Road [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Both From County Club
Drive to Route
309
Meadowood Drive Both Between
Fellowship Park
and Rosewood
Drive
Montgomery Commons [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
Montgomery Glen Drive [Added
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-260]
Both From Route 463 to
Independence
Drive at the
playground
Montgomery Glen Drive [Added
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-260]
East From Hopkins
Court to North
Wales Road
Montgomery Glen Drive [Added
10-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-25]
South Between Hopkins
Court and North
Wales Road
Montgomery Glen Drive [Added
5-29-2012 by Ord. No. 12-260]
West From North Wales
Road to
Independence
Drive at the
playground
§ 222-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-20
1:681
Street/Shopping Center/Area Side/Area Location
Montgomery Mall [Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
North Wales Plaza [Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
North Wales Road Both Between Route
463 and Knapp
Road
North Wales Road [Added 3-11-1985
by Ord. No. 87A]
East Between Welsh
Road (Route 63)
and Knapp Road
Progress Drive [Added 4-27-1987 by
Ord. No. 87E]
Both Entire length
Regency Drive [Added 9-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-308]
Both From Hartman
Road to Drake
Lane
Richardson Road Both Entire length
Route 202 (DeKalb Pike) Both Between Welsh
Road and a point
500 feet in a
northerly
direction from
Welsh Road
Route 202 (Doylestown Road) [Added
2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 87F]
Both Between County
Line Road and a
point 500 feet in a
southwesterly
direction from
County Line Road
Stump Road [Added 9-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 87D]
East Widened section
of Stump Road
adjacent to Village
of Neshaminy
Falls
Upper State Road [Added 7-27-1992
by Ord. No. 92-2]
Both County Line Road
and north
property line of
Mary Mother of
the Redeemer
Church
Water Tower Square [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
§ 222-20 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-20
1:682
Street/Shopping Center/Area Side/Area Location
Welsh Road [Added 8-22-1988 by
Ord. No. 87G]
West Between Route
202 and a point
500 feet in a
westerly direction
from Route 202
Windlestrae Park [Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Fire lane Entire length
§ 222-21. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this article shall be under the charge or care of the
Chief of Police of Montgomery Township, who is hereby authorized to have
or to designate, construct, locate, place, repair, maintain and remove all
necessary signs, notices and devices for the purpose of putting this chapter
into effect and controlling traffic on the highways, roadways, Township
roads, trafficways and parking areas within Montgomery Township.
§ 222-22. Temporary restrictions.
The Chief of Police may for special purposes temporarily restrict or prohibit
all traffic and parking on particular highways or parts thereof; and the
regulations and requirements of this article may be temporarily suspended
at certain times or during special emergencies. Such special occasions
shall include time allowed for painting lines, parades, exhibitions,
demonstrations, celebrations and other similar uses. Like permission or
prohibitions may be granted or imposed where special uses are being made
of premises immediately adjoining the highway wherein unusual usages of
the highway may be deemed necessary.
§ 222-23. Methods of parking.
A. All vehicles shall be parked with the right side of the vehicle nearest the
curbline and the right wheels of said vehicle within 12 inches of the
curb and be not nearer than three feet to vehicles in front and back.
B. The following types of parking are prohibited:
(1) Parallel parking when the right wheels of the parked vehicle are
more than 12 inches from the curb.
(2) Double-parking; that is, parking alongside a parked vehicle in a
nondesignated area.
(3) Parking for commercial purposes, including but not limited to
parking a motor vehicle for the sale thereof, for repair or awaiting
repair thereto or for making sales therefrom.
(4) Parking of a motor vehicle which does not have affixed thereto the
valid year's registration plate or valid certificate of inspection.
§ 222-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-23
1:683
§ 222-24. Interference with traffic markings.
§ 222-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-27-1987 by Ord. No.
87E; 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 02-164]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $25 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment thereof, shall undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that it shall be the duty
of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel of the Township
to report to the Chief all violations of any provision of this article, indicating
in each case the section violated; the license number of the vehicle involved
in the violation; the location where the violation took place; and any other
facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of
the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer or other person
making the report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a
(5) Parking that will so obstruct the entrance to a building as to
prevent the usual and proper use of such building at the time,
blocking driveway or entranceway.
(6) Stopping for the purpose of loading or unloading or taking on or
discharging passengers in places where it is not permitted. Such
stopping is permitted where appropriate signs are placed.
(7) Parking in areas designated and marked as loading zones for
commercial purposes.
(8) Parking in an area designated and marked as a fire lane.
(9) Parking by nonhandicapped persons in an area designated and
marked as a parking area for mobility handicapped persons or
those using wheelchairs. No nonhandicapped persons shall park
their vehicles bearing handicapped person registration plates in a
designated handicapped parking area.
(10) Parking on sidewalk.
(11) Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(12) Parking within 20 feet of an intersection.
(13) Parking in area posted as a no-parking zone.
(14) Parking a motor vehicle in a direction opposite to traffic movement
on highway.
A. No person shall deface, damage, move, obstruct, destroy, change the
wording of or alter or otherwise interfere with any official traffic
equipment or traffic tags.
B. It shall be unlawful to attach to a vehicle anything which simulates a
traffic tag in general appearance, color or wording.
§ 222-23 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-25
1:684
notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The
notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that
if he will report to the Montgomery Township Police Station during regular
business hours and pay the sum of $15 or mail the envelope with $15 and
proper postage affixed to the Montgomery Township Police Station within
72 hours after the time of the notice or if he will place the sum of $15
enclosed within the envelope provided in any of the special parking fine
boxes that may be installed at various locations within the Township, that
act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and
costs prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
§ 222-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-25
1:685

ARTICLE V
Off-Street Unmetered Parking
§ 222-26. Unmetered lots established.
The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
Township:
Lot Location
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days in
Operation
Hours of
Operation
Municipal
Building Lot
West side of
Municipal
Building (front
of police
station)
24 hours All All
Autumn
Woods
Fitness Trail
Richardson
Road
While using
the park only
All From sunrise
to 1 hour after
sunset
Fellowship
Park
Meadowood
Drive
While using
the park only
All From sunrise
to 1 hour after
sunset
Taylor Road
Park
Bridle Path
Road
While using
the park only
All From sunrise
to 1 hour after
sunset
Natural Area Pecan Drive While using
the park only
All From sunrise
to 1 hour after
sunset
§ 222-27. Handicapped parking.
The Board of Supervisors, at its discretion, may provide at convenient and
suitable locations in one or both of the unmetered parking lots reserved
parking spaces for handicapped and shall designate those spaces by
appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for
any person to park in any such reserved parking space any vehicle unless
that vehicle bears or displays either a handicapped registration plate or
a handicapped parking placard, provided that all provisions, requirements
and restrictions contained in the other sections of this article shall apply to
vehicles lawfully parked in reserved parking spaces for handicapped.
§ 222-28. Parking after closing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow a vehicle
to remain parked, occupied or unoccupied in any unmetered parking lot for
longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by § 222-26 of this article
or at any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public use.
§ 222-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-29
1:687
§ 222-29. Lots for certain vehicle types.
The unmetered parking lots established by § 222-26 of this article shall
be for the use of passenger cars, passenger vans, passenger buses,
motorcycles, and pickup trucks only, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park any other kind or class of vehicle in any such lot.
§ 222-30. Manner of parking.
Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned
to that vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle
otherwise than as required by this section or to park a vehicle elsewhere
than in an individual parking space, the prohibited areas including but
not limited to the access and exit driveways and turning and maneuvering
spaces.
§ 222-31. Suspension of regulations.
The Chief of Police may, in order to perform routine police functions or for
special occasions, temporarily suspend the regulations and requirements
of this article. Such special occasions may include exhibitions,
demonstrations, celebrations and other similar uses. Like permission may
be granted where special uses are being made of premises in near proximity
to areas defined in § 222-26 of this article.
§ 222-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
§ 222-29 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-32
1:688
ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Vehicles
§ 222-33. Authority to remove or impound.
The authority for removal and/or impoundment of motor vehicles by or at
the direction of the Township police shall be in strict compliance with the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code209 and the written policy of the Montgomery
Township Police Department.
209. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 222-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-33
1:689

ARTICLE VII
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 222-34. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 222-36 of this
article, the Chief of Police, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township
through radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 222-35. Conduct on snow emergency routes.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful at any time
during the continuance of the emergency for any person to:
§ 222-36. Emergency routes designated.
A. Park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked anywhere
on any snow emergency route designated in § 222-36 of this article; or
B. Drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless that
vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
(1) Meadow Glen.
Street Limits
Glen Road [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Meadow Glen Road
Spur Road
Meadow Glen Road Between Glen Road and
Doylestown Road
Spur Road [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Glen Road and
Woodland Road
(2) Autumn Woods. (Reserved)
(3) Montgomery Woods. [Amended 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Street Limits
Shady Lane Between Richardson Road and
Woodland Drive
Woodland Drive Between Shady Lane and Spur
Road
(4) Pennwood Gardens.
§ 222-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-36
1:691
Street Limits
Bonnie Lane Entire length
(5) Taylor Park. [Amended 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Street Limits
Bridle Path Road Entire length
(6) Parkwood.
Street Limits
Holly Circle [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Holly Drive [Added 7-13-1998
by Ord. No. 98-99]
Between Lansdale Avenue and
Rosewood Drive (western
portion only)
Holly Drive [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Meadowood Drive Entire length
Rosewood Drive Entire length
(7) Crestwood. (Reserved)
(8) Vilsmeier.
Street Limits
Vilsmeier Road Entire length
(9) Beechwood. [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
(10) Montgomery Village.
Street Limits
Hawthorne Drive [Amended
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Hawthorne Circle and
Village Drive
Rose Lane [Repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Village Drive Entire length
(11) Trailwood.
Street Limits
Harbob Lane Entire length
Hawthorne Circle [Amended
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Hawthorne Drive and
Harbob Lane
(12)Welsh Valley Industrial Park. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
Street Limits
Park Drive Entire length
§ 222-36 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-36
1:692
(13) Bethlehem Pike Industrial Park. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-73]
Street Limits
Keystone Drive Entire length
(14) Montgomeryville Industrial Center. [Added 7-22-1985 by Ord.
No. 87B]
Street Limits
Commerce Drive Entire length
Domorah Drive Entire length
Enterprise Road Entire length
(15) Montgomery Mall. (Reserved)
(16) Airport Square. (Reserved)
(17) Montgomery Glen. (Reserved)
(18) Neshaminy Falls. (Reserved)
(19) Sandy Brooke. (Reserved)
(20) Miscellaneous.
Street Limits
Bellows Way [Added 2-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 87H; 4-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-73]
Bell Run Boulevard [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Entire length
Canterbury Lane [Added 2-27-1989
by Ord. No. 87H; amended
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Upper State Road
and Grays Lane
Chatham Place [Added 2-27-1989
by Ord. No. 87H; repealed
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Claremont Drive [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Upper State Road
and County Line Road
Claremont Drive [Added
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
From Route 202 to Upper
State Road
Grays Lane [Added 2-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 87H]
Between Route 202 and
Canterbury Lane
Knapp Road [Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
Entire length
§ 222-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-36
1:693
Street Limits
Line Street [Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
Entire length
Lower State Road [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between County Line Road
and Route 152
Lower State Road [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Route 152 and
terminus at Horsham
Township
Montgomery Glen Drive [Added
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Route 202 and
North Wales Road
North Wales Road Entire length
Richardson Road [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Entire length
Stump Road [Added 4-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-73]
Entire length
Tree Line Drive [Added 4-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Grays Lane and
North Wales Road
(21) The Orchard. [Added 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-35]
Street Limits
Orchard Drive Entire length
(22) Meadow Lane Farm. [Added 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-35;
repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
(23) Pine Crest. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Street Limits
Country Club Drive From Route 202 to Pine Crest
Lane
McLaughlin Road From Route 309 to Pine Crest
Lane
Pine Crest Lane From Country Club Drive to
Route 202
(24) Mallard Pond. [Added 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-67]
Street Limits
Camp Drive From Stump Road to Mallard
Drive
Mallard Drive [Amended
4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Between Camp Drive and Rose
Twig Lane
Rose Twig Lane From Mallard Drive to Kenas
Road
§ 222-36 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-36
1:694
§ 222-37. Violations and penalties; towing.
(25) Summer Ridge. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Street Limits
Summer Ridge Drive Entire length
(26) Montgomery Lea. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-73]
Street Limits
Westminster Drive Entire length
(27) Montgomery Oaks/Montgomery Crossing Development. [Added
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-213]
Street Limits
Regency Drive Entire length, between
intersections with Hartman Road
and Hartman Road
(28) Estates of Windlestrae/Gwynwood Pond Development. [Added
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-213]
Street Limits
Davis Drive Entire length, from Kenas Road to
Lower State Road
(29) Holly Manor. [Added 3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-213]
Street Limits
Wentworth Drive and Manor
Drive
From Line Street to Lansdale
Avenue
(30) Enclave at Mongomery. [Added 11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 16-301]
Street Limits
Enclave Boulevard Entire length
A. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 222-34 of this article a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
B. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 222-34 of this article a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 222-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-37
1:695
C. In addition to the fine cited above, vehicles may be removed from the
road by authority of the Police Department if they are found to be
hindering regular traffic or snowplowing/salting operations. All towing
shall be done in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
§ 222-37 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-37
1:696
ARTICLE VIII
Interpretation
§ 222-38. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, and intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 222-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-38
1:697
Chapter 230
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 65.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 69.
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 128.
Noise — See Ch. 151.
Nuisances — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
205.
Fees — See Ch. A236.
§ 222-38 MONTGOMERY CODE § 222-38
1:698
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 230-1. Short title; when effective.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Montgomery
Township Zoning Ordinance of 1952, as amended in 1959." This
amendment, revision and reenactment shall become effective five days after
its adoption.
§ 230-2. Purpose.
§ 230-3. Interpretation.
A. This chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
morals and the general welfare of the Township, is in accordance with a
Comprehensive Plan and is designed to lessen congestion in the roads
and highways, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to
provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to
avoid undue congestion of population, to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public improvements, to conserve the value of buildings and to
encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Township.
B. Statement of community development objectives. The Comprehensive
Plan of Montgomery Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
adopted by resolution on January 4, 1971, and in particular those
portions of the Plan entitled "The Statement of Objectives of
Montgomery Township," "The Land Use Policies and Objectives," "A
Plan for the Movement of People and Goods," "Community Facilities and
Utilization Plan," and "Relationship of Montgomery Township to
Adjacent Municipalities," shall constitute the statement of community
development objectives of and for the Township of Montgomery, and
this Zoning Ordinance shall implement said statement of community
development objectives.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and the general welfare of the Township. The
Comprehensive Plan, in accordance with which this chapter is enacted
and which is reflected in the provisions of this chapter, has been
formulated to implement the purpose set forth in § 230-2 hereinabove,
in the respects therein stated and more particularly with a view toward
the following objectives, insofar as such objectives are consistent with
the purpose set forth in § 230-2 and with the aforesaid minimum
requirements therefor:
(1) Guiding and encouraging the future development of the Township
in accordance with comprehensive planning of land use and
population density that represents the most beneficial and
convenient relationships among the residential, commercial,
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:699
§ 230-4. Effect on existing provisions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere with
any existing Zoning Ordinance or enactment or with any other ordinance,
rule, regulation or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as
the same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this
chapter, then the provisions of this chapter shall control.
industrial and recreational areas within the Township, having
regard to their suitability for the various uses appropriate to each
of them and their potentiality for such uses, as indicated by
topography and soil conditions, existing man-made conditions and
trends in population, in the direction and manner of the use of land,
in building development and in economic activity, considering such
conditions and trends both within the Township and with respect to
the relation of the Township to surrounding areas.
(2) Protecting the character and the social and economic stability of
each of such areas and encouraging their orderly and beneficial
growth.
(3) Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings
throughout the Township appropriate to the various zoning
districts established herein.
(4) Bringing about through proper timing a gradual conformity of land
use to the Comprehensive Plan aforesaid and minimizing conflicts
among the uses of land and buildings.
(5) Aiding in bringing about the most beneficial relations between land
use and the circulation of traffic throughout the Township, having
particular regard to traffic and to avoidance of congestion in the
streets and the provision of safe and convenient access appropriate
to the various land uses.
(6) Aiding in providing a guide for public policy and action in the
efficient provision of public facilities and services, in the provision
of safe and proper sanitary sewage disposal and the development of
water resources and for private enterprise in building
development, investment and other economic activity relating to
land use.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted, administered and
applied in such manner as will facilitate attainment of said objectives.
§ 230-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-4
1:700
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 230-5. Word usage; definitions.
A. The present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural the singular; the masculine gender includes the
feminine and neuter; the word "used" includes the words "designed,
arranged or intended to be used"; the word "person" includes any
individual or group of individuals, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or organization; the word "occupied" includes the words
"designed or intended to be occupied"; and the word "shall" is always
mandatory. The word "Township" means Montgomery Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania; the term "Board of Supervisors"
means the Board of Supervisors of said Township; the term "Zoning
Hearing Board" means the Zoning Hearing Board of said Township.
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings
indicated in this article:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or
significant portion of its stock and trade in, or an establishment which,
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale, books, films,
video cassettes or magazines and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and, in conjunction therewith, has facilities for the
presentation of adult entertainment for observation by patrons.[Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-107Z]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT [Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-107Z]
—
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity of less than 50 persons which has a principal business
purpose of exhibiting, presenting or selling material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons.[Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-107Z]
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, meaning those
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(1)
A live performance, display or dance of any type which has as a
significant or substantial portion of the performance any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition
and viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of
clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomiming, modeling or any
other personal services offered to customers.
(2)
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:701
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons which has a principal business purpose
of exhibiting, presenting or selling material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons.[Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-107Z]
ADULT USES — Adults uses shall include, and shall be limited to,
the following defined terms: “adult bookstore,” “adult entertainment,”
“adult mini motion-picture theater” and “adult motion-picture theater”
as defined herein.[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
AGRICULTURE I — Uses limited to the growing of nursery stock, the
cultivating and tilling of the soil, and the raising and harvesting of
products of the soil.[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-226Z]
AGRICULTURE II — Agriculture I uses and normal agricultural
operations which shall include the activities, practices, equipment and
procedures that farmers adopt, use or engage in the production and
preparation for market of poultry, livestock and their products and
in the production, harvesting and preparation for market or use of
agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural
crops and commodities and is:[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
07-226Z]
ANIMAL HOSPITAL (VETERINARY HOSPITAL) — A place where
animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the
boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the
hospital use. Facilities that breed and/or board animals (i.e., kennels)
are not permitted.[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
AUTOMOBILE COURT — A building or a group of two or more detached
or semidetached buildings containing rooms or apartments having
separate entrances provided directly or closely in connection with
automobile parking or storage space servicing such rooms or
apartments, which building or group of buildings is designed, intended
or used principally for the providing of sleeping accommodations for
automobile travelers and other transients and is suitable for occupancy
at all seasons of the year; a motel.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land around the periphery of a site area
measured inwardly from the property line of abutting properties or the
street line or lines and used for the purpose of insulating the site area
and adjacent land area one from the other. The buffer area is to be
planted and maintained in shrubs, bushes, trees, grass or other natural
ground cover material and contains no parking areas, buildings or
structures except a wall or fence which meets Township requirements.
(1) Not less than 10 contiguous acres in area; or
Less than 10 contiguous acres in area but has an anticipated yearly
gross income of at least $10,000.
(2)
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:702
BUILDING — Any structure which has enclosing walls, floor and roof,
is permanently affixed to the land, including mobile homes which are
properly secured to the ground, and has one or more floors or stories.
A "building" shall not include such structures as billboards, signs,
fences or structures with interior surfaces not normally accessible to
human use, such as gas tanks or similar structure. Notwithstanding
the above, for the purposes of Article IV, FP Floodplain Conservation
District, of this chapter, a "building" shall be defined to include a gas
or liquid storage tank. Buildings are further classified by type of use
for which they are constructed, such as an agricultural, commercial,
industrial, public, institutional or residential building, or as a combined
use building when a mix of the foregoing uses is contained in the same
building or as an accessory building.[Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord.
No. 17-021]
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinated to the principal
building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those
of the principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal
cross-section areas of all buildings on a lot, including sun parlors,
foyers, porches, breezeways, except that windows, awnings and
balconies projecting not more than two feet and steps shall not be
included, and the relation of said area on a lot to the total area of the lot
on which all buildings are located. For purposes of this chapter, parking
structures and garages, and outside areas used for display and retailing
purposes, shall be included in the calculation and limitations which
govern building coverage and building location.[Amended 1-28-2002
by Ord. No. 01-140Z; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot, so designated on
a subdivision or land development plan, between which line and the
ultimate right-of-way line of the street on which the lot abuts a building
may not be erected.[Amended 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 17-018]
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract
basis, such as advertising and mailing; building maintenance;
employment services; management and consulting services; protective
services; equipment rental and leasing; commercial research;
development and testing; photo finishing; and personal supply
services.[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
CONDITIONAL USE — A form of permitted use, authorized by this
chapter, under the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors. The Board
of Supervisors is empowered to grant permission for conditional uses,
consistent with the public interest, in compliance with the standards
and procedures established in this chapter in accordance with Article
XXI, § 230-156.2, herein, following thorough examination of the
proposal and under any reasonable safeguards necessary to implement
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:703
the purposes and intent of this chapter and to protect the general
welfare.[Added 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-11Z]
CONGREGATE CARE/INDEPENDENT SENIOR LIVING — A long-term
housing community (which may include both attached and detached
cottages) constructed on a lot of at least four acres, exclusively for
persons 62 years of age or older, or persons under 62 years of age (but
at least 55 years of age or older) who have needs for congregate care
and assistance with living similar to a person 62 years of age or older,
which facility may include, without limitation, private suites (each to
be occupied by not more than two persons), cottages, common dining
facilities, recreational features, special safety and convenience features
designed for the needs of the elderly, and services for residents which
may include the following: transportation, housekeeping, linen/laundry,
and organized social and recreational activities. Such communities may
have up to two manager dwelling units which may contain full kitchen
facilities.[Added 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 15-293Z]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.[Added 4-23-1984
by Ord. No. 17-021]
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER — A minor commercial
facility generally containing no more than five units and occupying no
more than three acres, designed to serve everyday needs of residents
in its immediate vicinity and whose commercial goods and hours of
operation encourage short stops for specific items rather than extensive
shopping trips. Its primary component is a drugstore or a small food
and household goods store, but not a supermarket, and the center may
contain a few other establishments as well, such as a beauty shop,
laundry and dry cleaning establishment or similar facilities.
DAY-CARE FACILITY — Any dwelling or building which provides childcare
services. Day-care facilities shall be further differentiated by the
following three classifications:[Added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any residence other than the child's
own home, operated for profit or not-for-profit, in which child day
care is provided at any one time to four, five or six children who are
not relatives of the resident caregiver.
(1)
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided by
a resident caregiver for more than six but fewer than 12 children at
any one time, where the child-care areas are being used as a family
residence.
(2)
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in which care is provided for seven
or more children at any one time, where the child-care areas are
not being used as a family residence.
(3)
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:704
the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling
operations.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 17-021]
DWELLING — A building or part of a building constructed for or
intended for occupancy as a permanent residence, containing one or
more dwelling units. Housing facilities for rental to transient guests
or which are part of a medical, instructional or religious institution,
such as hotels and motels, rooming houses, tourist homes, institutional
homes, hospitals, residential clubs, automobile courts or tourist homes
and training centers, are excluded from the definition of "dwelling."
For purposes of this chapter, dwelling types include the following, not
considering ownership or leasing arrangements:
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A freestanding residential building
of one or more dwelling units, which may or may not have common
walls or floors; constructed on one lot or adjacent lots; each
dwelling unit having direct entrance from the outside and having
yard or private open space assigned for the exclusive use of the
occupants of the dwelling unit located immediately adjacent to
the unit. Single-family dwellings, for purposes of this chapter, are
further defined as follows:
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building of one dwelling unit
constructed on one lot and having yard area on all sides of the
dwelling unit.
(a)
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A building of more than one
dwelling unit constructed to be a:
TOWNHOUSE — Three or more dwelling units on one lot
or adjacent lots, attached side by side or side to back so
that each unit has one or two common walls and at least
two exterior walls, with yard area or private open space on
at least two sides of each dwelling unit and on three sides
of the end units of each building.
[1]
DUPLEX — Two dwelling units on one lot, attached ceiling
to floor, with yard area on all sides of the dwelling.
[2]
TWIN — Two dwelling units, each dwelling unit on
separate adjacent lots, the dwelling units being attached
side by side, having one unpierced wall in common and
with yard area on at least three sides of the dwelling unit.
[3]
(b)
PATIO HOME — A single-family detached dwelling unit on a
separate lot, which may have no side yard setback on one
boundary or, alternatively, no side yard setback on portions
of two boundaries and shall have outdoor living space (patios
and courts) integrated into the building design. [Added
4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 17-041]
(c)
(1)
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:705
DWELLING UNIT — That part of a dwelling designed for use by one
family only and containing one or more rooms and facilities for living,
including cooking, sleeping, storage of possessions and sanitary needs.
Units designed for transient occupancy, such as hotels, motels or tourist
homes, or for sleeping and sanitary needs only, such as a club, rooming
house, fraternity or institutional home, are not considered as dwelling
units for the purpose of this chapter.
DWELLING UNITS PER GROSS ACRE (also "density of development")
— The total number of dwelling units which may be constructed per
acre of land measured prior to designation of areas for streets, open
space or other lands not to be included in building lots, provided that in
the case of a lot or tract abutting one or more existing streets, no area
of said lot or tract lying within any street line shall be deemed a part of
the gross area of the same.
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS CHAPTER — The effective date of this
chapter is five days after its adoption, except that with respect to the
subject matter of any amendment, the effective date of this chapter
shall mean the date upon which the particular amendment became or
becomes effective (passed November 2, 1959; law November 7, 1959).
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — Buildings or structures and equipment
erected and used for the purpose of transmission, switching or
transforming of electrical current between customers and the utility
company facilities, not including the storage of materials, trucks, repair
facilities or housing of repair crews, such buildings or structures being
appropriately planted or screened to blend the installation with the
surrounding landscape.
FAMILY — Any group of individuals living together permanently or
long-term, as opposed to transiently or short-term, as the functional
equivalent of a family where the residents may share living expenses,
chores, eat meals together and are a close group with social, economic
and psychological commitments to each other. A family includes, for
example, the residents of residential care facilities and group homes for
people with disabilities. A family does not include larger institutional
group living situations such as student-housing, dormitories,
fraternities, sororities, monasteries or nunneries.[Amended
4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-10Z; 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 13-275Z]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A freestanding residential building
of three or more dwelling units, with common walls and floors;
constructed on one lot or adjacent lots; it may or may not have
direct entrance from the outside to each dwelling unit; and yard
area or open space may be assigned to each dwelling unit for
exclusive use or common use. Multiple-family dwellings are further
distinguished as:
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling no more than
two stories in height from ground level.
(a)
(2)
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:706
FARM BUILDING — Any structure, other than a dwelling, used for
the housing of poultry or livestock or for the storage of equipment,
implements or products directly related to agriculture.
FENCE — A structure that is an artificially constructed barrier of any
material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, or
decorate areas of land. Fences shall not have any building walls, floors
or roofs.[Added 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-3Z]
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 17-021]
FLOOD, BASE — The flood which has been selected to serve as the
basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter
and other ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter,
the one-hundred-year flood, as referenced in the current Flood
Insurance Study, Township of Montgomery, prepared by the Federal
Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management
Agency.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 17-021]
FLOOD BASE ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation,
as referenced in the Flood Insurance Study, Montgomery Township,
prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Within the approximated floodplain, alluvial soils,
floodplain or areas to be determined as floodplain as documented by
the Township Engineer, the one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be
established as a point on the boundary of the approximated floodplain
nearest to the construction site in question.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord.
No. 17-021]
BOUNDARY FENCE — A fence lying parallel to a property line for
the purpose of enclosing a parcel of ownership.
(1)
DECORATIVE FENCE — A fence located in any yard of a parcel
which is designed to be aesthetically attractive.
(2)
PRIVACY FENCE — A fence located within the building envelope of
a residentially zoned parcel which is intended to block from view
portions of a lot for outdoor living areas.
(3)
PROTECTIVE FENCE — A fence for the enclosure of nonresidential
premises and uses, for preventing entry to commercial swimming
pools, for providing a safety barrier from dangerous commercial or
manufacturing activities or for enclosing an attractive nuisance.
(4)
RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL FENCE — A fence which
encloses a residential swimming pool in accordance with § 230-153
of this chapter.
(5)
TEMPORARY FENCE — A fence for the enclosure of construction
activities or abandoned or condemned properties.
(6)
(7) WALL — A fence that is constructed of masonry or stone.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:707
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that has one chance in 100
or a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. For the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base
flood) as defined by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, in the Flood Insurance Study,
Montgomery Township.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 17-021]
FLOODPLAIN — That area defined in this chapter as the Floodplain
Conservation District; the "floodplain" definition (see § 230-12)
contained therein shall be considered the definition for "floodplain" for
all purposes and uses of this chapter.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No.
17-021]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures
are set forth in floodproofing regulations published by the Office of the
Chief Engineer, United States Army, Publication No. EP 1165 2 314
(June 1972 and as subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures
for all new construction and substantial improvements of structures
shall satisfy the requirements of the Completely Dry Spaces (W1) and
Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) classes referenced in these regulations. In
said publication, where reference is made to below or above the BFD
(base flood datum), it shall be interpreted as meaning below or above
the base flood elevation. Said regulations are contained in the Building
Code of Montgomery Township, as amended.210[Added 4-23-1984 by
Ord. No. 17-021]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of all the floors of the building
or structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for
the conduct at the business or use, and basements, attics, unenclosed
porches, and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the
walls. It does not include attics not over six feet in height in
nonresidential uses, attics not used for human occupancy, nor any floor
space in an accessory or main building intended or designed for the
parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements
of this chapter, nor any such floor space intended and designed for
accessory heating, ventilating and air-conditioning equipment, or
parking structures.[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal
building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the
owner or tenant of the premises and for the storage of not more than
two motor vehicles owned and used by persons other than the owner or
tenant of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, other than a private or storage garage,
one or more stories in height, used solely for the commercial storage,
service or repair of motor vehicles.
210. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:708
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building, not a private or public garage, used
solely for the storage of motor vehicles (other than trucks) but not for
the service or repair thereof nor for the sale of fuel, accessories or
supplies.
GARDEN APARTMENTS — A group of garden apartment buildings up
to two stories in height designed for rental or condominium ownership
of the individual housekeeping units and having common open spaces.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, or any building or part thereof that is used for the sale of
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel or accessories and which may
or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing or otherwise
servicing motor vehicles, but which shall not include painting or body
and fender repairs nor the sale of vehicles.
GOLF COURSE — A golf course shall consist of 18 holes, par 70 or
greater, and a minimum length of not less than 6,000 yards measured
from the deepest tee position to the center of green. Landing areas and
isolation distances shall comply with the design standards published by
the U.S. Golf Association.[Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z]
GREEN AREA — The land area composed of previous surfaces set
aside for the growing of vegetation, including lawn area, trees, shrubs,
grasses, plants and flowers and also including lakes, ponds, streams
and other natural features.[Added 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — A building's vertical measurement from
the mean level of the ground surrounding the building to a point
midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided
that chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses tanks and similar
projections shall not be included in calculating the height.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any lawful occupation or business activity
which is conducted in whole or in part by a resident from his/her
primary residence.[Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-8Z]
HOSPITAL/MEDICAL CENTER — An institution specializing in
providing patient health-care services. Such institutions may include
but are not limited to allied and adjunct medical facilities such as
medical schools, nursing schools, student residences, laboratories,
research facilities and medical offices which may be in the same or
separate buildings.[Added 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 01-152Z]
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. This use shall include
extended stay or suites only operation provided that the maximum stay
for guests shall not exceed four consecutive weeks during a period of
six months.[Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
HOUSE, ROOMING — A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations
are provided for rent to less than 10 persons, whether or not the
serving of meals is included.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:709
IMPERVIOUS MATERIALS — Any materials that do not permit the
natural absorption and permeation by soils of rain or other surface
water, to include but not be limited to all concrete, asphalt, and similar
paving products, earthen materials (brick, stone), chemical treatment
of soils or artificial ground covers as may be used in the construction
of roads, walks, driveways, parking areas, patios and recreation
facilities.[Amended 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029; 7-23-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-219Z]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — Shall be calculated by dividing the
total area of building coverage and impervious materials by the lot
area, which includes the area within the lot lines, excluding the street
rights-of-way. For the purposes of this chapter, the area of water within
a swimming pool shall not be classified as impervious. The term
"impervious lot coverage" and "impervious material coverage" shall
mean the same as impervious surface ratio.[Added 7-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-219Z]
KENNEL — Any structure used as an establishment to confine two or
more domesticated animals, i.e., dogs, cats, etc., commonly kept for the
use or pleasure of man. It is intended that such use shall not be for
any wild creature whether or not native to the locale of this Township.
The use contemplated is for the purpose of breeding, boarding, sale or
show. The structures shall be such that the creatures cannot voluntarily
stray therefrom and shall be constructed of materials that shall produce
sound attenuation at the property line.[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No.
01-140Z]
LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which are located
the facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing and
experimentation, but whose primary activity is not the manufacture of
products for sale.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
(3) Development in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:710
LOADING SPACE — A space, accessible from a street or way, in a
building or on a lot for the temporary use of vehicles while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT —
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area of the lot lying within the lot
lines, provided that no area of land lying within any street line shall be
deemed a portion of any lot area; the area of any lot abutting a street
shall be measured to the ultimate right-of-way line.[Amended 8-22-88
by Ord. No. 17-048]
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change in direction of a
single street, the interior angle of which is not greater than 135º.
LOT, FLAG (also known as REAR LOT) — A lot that does not provide at
least 50% of the required lot width as frontage along a public street or
does not provide the required lot width at a point equal to the required
front yard established for the district in which located. Such lots shall
be connected to a public street by an access strip which shall be held
in fee-simple ownership as a part of the flag (or rear) lot. The area of
the access strip, up to a point where the minimum required lot width
is achieved, shall not be included in calculating the minimum lot area
required for the zoning district in which located.[Added 11-28-2005
by Ord. No. 05-203Z]
LOT INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot, except that in the case
of any lot abutting a street, the lot line for such portion of the lot as
abuts such street shall be deemed to be the same as the ultimate rightof-
way line and shall not be the center line of the street or any other line
within the street line even though such may be the legal description of
property boundary line.[Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No. 17-048]
A parcel of land which is occupied or is to be occupied by one
principal building or other structure or use or, where authorized
in this chapter, a group of buildings, together with any necessary
buildings or other structures or uses customarily incidental to
such principal building or other structure or use, and such open
spaces are arranged or designed to be used in connection with
such principal building or other structure or use, such open spaces
and the area and dimensions of such lot being not less than the
minimum required by this chapter.
(1)
In R-3 and R-6 Districts, the term "lot," as used in this Zoning
Ordinance, describes a land area for purposes of describing zoning
requirements and as such is not limited to being a tax lot or
deeded lot. The terms "lot" or "building lot" mean the same when
used in describing regulations based upon buildings. [Amended
4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 17-041]
(2)
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:711
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line abutting a street and coinciding with
the ultimate right-of-way line and, in the case of a corner lot, whichever
street-abutting lot line is elected by the owner or person applying for
a building permit. For purposes of determining front yard setback, see
definition of "yard, front."[Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No. 17-048]
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line opposite and most distance from the front
lot line; if the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length or if the lot forms
a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line 10 feet
in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from
the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.[Added 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
MANUFACTURED HOME — Within this chapter, the term
"manufactured home" is interchangeable with the term "mobile home"
and is defined exactly the same as the term "mobile home."[Added
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
MEDICAL, DENTAL CLINIC — A building which contains professionals
who dispense health services and provide testing where patients are
admitted for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by
two or more medical disciplines or other medical personnel.[Added
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit
or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation. This term includes but is not
limited to the definition of a mobile home, as set forth in regulations
governing Mobile Home Safety and Construction Standards Program
(23 CFR 3282.7a).[Amended 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 17-021]
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park provided
with the necessary utility connections, patio and other appurtenances
necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which is
leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home installed
and/or erected on the lot for the exclusive use of its occupants, though
it may instead be designed, developed and used for a modular or
conventionally built single-family detached home rather than a mobile
home.
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:712
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved in compliance with the requirements
of the Mobile Home Park District for the placement of mobile homes,
conventionally built or modular single-family detached homes, or
combinations thereof, for nontransient use; consisting of two or more
mobile home lots and 15 acres or greater in size.
MOBILE HOME STAND — The part of an individual lot which has been
reserved and prepared for the placement of the mobile home.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family or multifamily dwelling intended
for permanent occupancy, made by assembling one or more factoryproduced
three-dimensional sections into an integral living unit, whose
construction materials and specifications conform to those of
conventionally built units.
MOTOR HOME — A travel trailer which combines the living section and
the power source into a single unit.[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1211]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESSES — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
of those normally associated with residential use.[Added 3-10-2003
by Ord. No. 03-166Z]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING, LOT OR STRUCTURE — A building, lot
or structure the size, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to
the adoption or amendment of these zoning provisions but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption or amendment.[Added 6-22-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-1]
NONCONFORMING USE — A land use which was lawful prior to the
adoption or amendment of these zoning provisions but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption or amendment.[Added 6-22-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-1]
OPEN SPACE —
In R-3 and R-6 Districts, that portion of gross site area not required
or assigned as area for:
(a) Buffer area.
Building coverage, excluding structures necessary to the open
space purpose such as but not limited to recreational buildings
and shelters, swimming pools, etc.
(b)
(1)
211. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the original definition of “nonconforming,”
which immediately followed this definition.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:713
OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE — The area or portion of an area adjacent
to a building or dwelling unit as set by yard, setback or other area
requirements and which is assigned for private or in common use of the
dwelling residents of the building.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space available for the parking
of one motor vehicle, the size of which shall be measured exclusive
of passageway, driveways or other means of circulation or access (see
§ 230-138). For residential uses, a garage or garage area shall not be
counted toward the requirements of a parking space except where
provided as part of the parking plan for garden apartments and
townhouses; provided, however, that in the R-3A District, each garage
shall be counted as one parking space and each driveway shall be
counted as one space regardless of length. (Examples of parking
arrangements which are acceptable under the terms of the off-street
parking and loading space requirements in residential districts are
found later in this chapter.)[Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No.
01-140Z]
PARKING SPACE, ALL-WEATHER — A parking space having adequate
base stone and paved with cement, asphalt or other material with like
qualities.
Site service facilities and systems such as streets, parking
areas, service buildings and the like where recreation activities
are prohibited, but excluding those facilities necessary to the
open space purpose.
(c)
Outdoor living adjacent to building and dwelling units,
including but not limited to yards.
(d)
Further, "open space" is defined as the area to be utilized for the
practice of natural preservation or passive and/or active recreation
or a combination of these uses.
(2)
Additionally, "open space" may be classified by the limitations to
site resident use because the open space is used for:
Reservation open space, where, by physical features, plan
design or regulation, the use of the space is limited for reason
of health, safety, land and water preservation, sight amenity or
site utility or accessibility.
(a)
Private open space, where, by design or regulation, the open
space is limited by assignment, membership or service fee (golf
course, boating, tennis courts, etc.).
(b)
Common open space, where open space is not limited to site
resident use except by the limitations placed on use by the
nature of the activity to be performed within the space. By way
of illustration, a tennis court is part of open space as long as it
is not private open space, even though some residents cannot
or may not want to use the facility.
(c)
(3)
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:714
PARKING STRUCTURES — An accessory structure of more than one
level designed for the temporary storage of vehicles and which may
contain access ramps. "Parking structure" shall include the term
"parking garage."[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
PAVED AREA — All areas, excluding buildings, surfaced with concrete,
paving brick, bituminous or other materials to create a nonpervious
surface, including parking areas, drives, roadways and sidewalks.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal
goods or apparel.[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
PUBLIC UTILITY — A company regulated by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission. Cellular communications companies and uses and
other companies not regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission shall not be considered a public utility.[Added 1-11-1999
by Ord. No. 98-97Z]
RESTAURANT, OUTDOOR CUSTOMER DINING AREA — An area with
seats and/or tables located outdoors of a restaurant, coffee shop, or
other food service establishment; also includes any outdoor area where
beverages are consumed with or without the provision of dining
facilities.[Added 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-167Z]
RETAIL — Selling of goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental
to the sale of such goods.[Added 5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15Z]
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of property by
any person, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of any
adjoining property.
SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed and used exclusively as a
residence for one family.
SITE AREA — A land area having a legal description and distinguished
by the fact that it is or is intended to be comprehensively developed as a
whole area containing all, if any, buildings, building lots, the circulation
system and parking, open space and other improvements. "Site area" is
further defined as follows:
SITE AREA, GROSS — The total land and water surface area
contained in a site.
(1)
NET SITE AREA — The part of the site surface area upon which
structures and supporting facilities are existing or intended to exist
as a part of the development. Net site area shall be calculated by
deducting from gross site area:
All area necessary to meet the buffer requirements of this
chapter;
(a)
(2)
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:715
SKY EXPOSURE PLANE — The theoretical plane created by the
technique of stepping higher elevations of a building back from the
edge of yards required for lower building heights. The actual degree is
created by ordinance setback requirements, such as one foot horizontal
for each one foot in height which would result in a plane of 45º. (See
figure attached to Ord. No. 01-152Z.)212[Added 2-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 01-152Z]
SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary event held indoors or outdoors on
private or public property that may significantly impact the property,
normal vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and/or the safety of citizens
and visitors, extends beyond the normal use(s) or standards allowed by
Chapter 230, Zoning.[Added 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — Permission, approval or authorization granted
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XXIII,
§ 230-185, herein, in situations where express provision therefor is
made by the terms of this chapter.[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS [Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
99-107Z] —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES [Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No.
99-107Z] — The term includes any of the following:
All area necessary to meet the floodplain requirements or
otherwise unbuildable land areas as set out in this chapter or
other prevailing ordinance or law; and
(b)
All areas lying within street or other legal right-of-way or
permanent drainage easements.
(c)
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(a) Human genitals or pubic region;
(b) Buttocks; or
Female breasts (shall include breasts of transvestites and
female impersonators) below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
(c)
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts (including those of transvestites and
female impersonators).
(3)
212. Editor's Note: Said figure is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:716
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual "start"
means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of the slab or footings, the installation of
piers, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. Time extension shall be granted only if a written
request is submitted by the applicant which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Building Inspector to approve such a
request.[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 17-021; amended
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
STORY — That portion of a building above the surface of the ground
comprised between the surface of any floor and the surface of any floor
or roof next above.
STREET — A public or privately owned right-of-way, serving as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian travel and furnishing access to abutting
properties.
STREET LINE — The common dividing line between a lot and the
outside boundary or right-of-way line of a public street, road or highway
legally open or officially plotted or between a lot and a privately owned
street, road or way over which the owners or tenants of two or more
lots, each held in single and separate ownership, have the right-of-way.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the
supporting or structural members of a building or other structure, such
as the bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
change which could convert an existing building or other structure
into a different structure or adapt it to a different use or which would
prolong the life of a building or other structure.
STRUCTURAL UNIT — One or more buildings enclosed by continuous
exterior walls and a continuous roof.
STRUCTURE — Any form or arrangement of materials involving the
necessity of providing proper support, bracing, tying, anchoring
(whether above, below or partially above and partially below ground)
or other protection against the forces of the elements.
SWIMMING CLUB, PRIVATE — A club, a dominant feature of which
includes a structure or group of structures for swimming and other
recreational purposes for the exclusive use of club members and their
guests.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:717
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A structure for swimming as an
accessory use to a dwelling for the exclusive use of the owner and
guests.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A structure for swimming for use by the
general public as a commercial or community enterprise.213
TENURE — The form of occupancy of a unit, i.e., fee simple sale, rental,
condominium, cooperative, etc.
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations for
less than 10 persons are provided or offered primarily for automobile
travelers or other transients for compensation.
TRACT AREA — The total acreage within the lot lines, excluding that
area continuously covered by water and rights-of-way of existing public
roads.
TRADE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL — A secondary or higher education
facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs
in a trade and meeting the state requirements as a vocational
facility.[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
TRAILER, HOUSE — Any vehicle used for living or sleeping purposes.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle requiring a separate power
source for pulling it, which may include living, sleeping, eating and
sanitary facilities, but which is designed for vacation travel and not for
long-term or permanent occupancy.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The expected future right-of-way
computed from the center line of an established right-of-way, as shown
on the official Ultimate Classification of Roads Map for Montgomery
Township.[Added 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 17-018]
USE, ACCESSORY — A use subordinate to the principal use of land or of
a building or other structure on a lot and customarily incidental thereto.
USED CAR LOT — Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying
and selling secondhand motor vehicles and storing said motor vehicles
prior to sale.
VARIANCE — Permission, approval or authorization granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with Article XXIII, § 230-184,
herein, constituting a modification of or deviation from the exact
provisions of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of
property.[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
VETERINARIAN — Limited to treatment and prevention of disease and
injury to domestic animals; not an animal hospital or kennel.[Added
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
WALKWAY, PUBLIC — Any space designed or maintained solely for
pedestrian use.
213. Editor's Note: The former definition of "telephone central office," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 98-97Z.
§ 230-5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-5
1:718
WHOLESALE — Selling of merchandise to retailers, to industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other
wholesalers or action as agents or brokers and buying merchandise
for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.[Added
5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15Z]
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or
other structure or use, open from the ground to the sky, except for trees
or other foliage.
YARD FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot, measured
from the ultimate right-of-way line and extending in depth from the
ultimate right-of-way line to the closest projecting part of the structure
with the front door oriented to the street of lower classification. The
street address will be established from the orientation of the house. The
exception to this is when a building is placed on a flag lot whereupon
the front yard and thus the front door may be oriented at the builder's
option, provided that all setbacks from adjoining properties are in
compliance.[Amended 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 17-018; 5-24-1999
by Ord. No. 99-108Z]
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear
lot line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the nearest
permissible point of any structure on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along a side
lot line and extending in width from such side lot line to the nearest
permissible point of any structure on the lot.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:719

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 230-6. Classes of districts; Zoning Map.
§ 230-7. Interpretation of boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the
center lines of streets, lanes, watercourses and rights-of-way of power lines,
railroads and other public utilities or such lines extended or lines parallel
thereto. Where the boundaries of a single district are indicated as including
directly opposite sides of a street, lane, lake or watercourse or right-ofway
of a power line or other public utility for any portion of its length,
the district so indicated shall be construed to apply to the entire bed of
such street, lane, lake or watercourse or right-of-way of such power line,
railroad or other public utility lying within such portion of its length. Where
uncertainty exists as to the location of any said boundaries as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into 14
classes of districts, which shall be designated as follows: [Amended
4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 17-041; 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
FP Floodplain Conservation District
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
Cluster Development District
R-3 Residential District
R-3A Residential District
R-5 Residential District
R-6 Golf Course Residential District
BP Business Office and Professional District
C Commercial District
S Shopping Center District
LI Limited Industrial District
RS Regional Shopping Center District
MHP Mobile Home Park District (R-4)
ECPOD Expressway Corridor Preservation Overlay District
[Added 9-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-60; amended
2-3-1997 by Ord. No. 96-68]
B. The locations and boundaries of such districts shall be as shown upon
the map attached to and hereby made a part of this chapter, which shall
be designated "Zoning Map." Said map and all the notations, references
and other data shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as
if fully described herein.
§ 230-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7
1:721
§ 230-8. Federal and state property.
Whenever federal or state-owned property is included in one or more zoning
districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter only insofar as
permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 230-9. Uses by Township. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
12-262Z]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to land and buildings owned
for the performance of the governmental functions of the Township of
Montgomery.
A. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following the
center line of a street, lane, lake or watercourse or right-of-way of a
power line or other public utility, such center line shall be construed to
be such boundary.
B. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot
or other property line, such lot or property line shall be construed to be
such boundary.
C. Where a boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided property, the
location of such boundary, unless otherwise specified by figures on the
Zoning Map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on
said map.
D. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street and a
district boundary, they shall indicate that the district boundary runs
parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equivalent to the
number of feet so indicated, unless otherwise specified. Where scaled
distances do not agree with such figures, the figures shall control.
§ 230-7 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-9
1:722
ARTICLE IV
FP Floodplain Conservation District
[Added 4-23-1984 by Ord. No. 17-021; amended 6-22-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-1; 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-240Z; 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
16-297ZS]
§ 230-10. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,214 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Montgomery Township does hereby order
in the FP Floodplain Conservation District the following regulation shall
apply.
§ 230-11. General provisions.
A. Intent. In addition to the purpose stated in Article I, § 230-2, of the
Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance, the specific intent of this
article shall be to protect areas of floodplain subject to and necessary
for the containment of floodwaters. Furthermore, in light of the
Township's certification as eligible for federal flood insurance, it is the
intent of this article to provide adequate protection for flood-prone
properties within Montgomery Township. In advancing these principles
and the general purposes of the Zoning Ordinance and the adopted
Township Comprehensive Plan, the following shall be the specific
objectives in the FP Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) Protect areas of the floodplain necessary to contain floodwaters.
(2) To permit only those uses in the floodplain that are compatible with
preserving natural conditions and stream flow.
(3) To combine with present zoning requirements certain restrictions
made necessary for flood-prone areas to promote the general
health, welfare and safety of the Township.
(4) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(5) To minimize danger to public health by protecting the quality and
quantity of surface and subsurface water supplies adjacent to and
underlying flood hazard areas and promoting safe and sanitary
drainage.
(6) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
214. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 230-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-11
1:723
(7) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
(8) To prevent the erection of structures in areas unfit for human usage
by reason of danger from flooding, unsanitary conditions or other
hazards.
(9) To provide retention areas for the temporary storage of
floodwaters.
(10) To permit only those uses which can be appropriately located in the
floodplain, as herein defined, and which will not impede the flow or
storage of floodwaters or otherwise cause danger to life and
property at, above or below their locations along the floodplain.
(11) To provide sufficient drainage courses to carry abnormal flows of
stormwater in periods of heavy precipitation.
(12) To protect those individuals who, despite the flood dangers,
develop or occupy land on a floodplain resulting from a use which is
nonconforming by virtue of this article.
(13) To protect adjacent landowners and those both upstream and
downstream from damages resulting from development within a
floodplain and the consequent obstruction or increase in flow of
floodwaters.
(14) To protect the entire Township from individual uses of land which
may have an effect upon subsequent expenditures for public works
and disaster relief and adversely affect the economic well-being of
the Township.
(15) To protect other municipalities within the same watershed from the
impact of improper development and the consequent increased
potential for flooding.
(16) To provide areas for the deposition of flood-borne sediment.
(17) To require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities,
be constructed so as to be protected from damage in accordance
with the requirements of the Federal Flood Insurance Program, P.L.
90-448, and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, P.L.
851, No. 166 of 1978, and as either is amended.215
B. Abrogation and greater restriction. This article supersedes any other
conflicting provisions which may be in effect in the Floodplain
Conservation District. However, any other ordinance provisions shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
215. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 230-11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-11
1:724
§ 230-12. Identification of floodplain areas.
C. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the article, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
D. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain
Conservation District, or that land uses permitted within such
areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This article shall not create liability on the part of Montgomery
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. District established. The Floodplain Conservation District is defined
and established as follows:
(1) The Floodplain Conservation District is defined and established as
a district applicable to those areas of Montgomery Township
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) dated March 2, 2016, (and all subsequent
revisions and amendments), and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 2, 2016 (and all
subsequent revisions and amendments), and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent
revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study. Said floodplains shall be comprised of the
following specific areas:
(a) The Floodway Area/District shall be those areas identified as
floodway on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special floodplain areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS. The floodway
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation by more than one foot at any point.
§ 230-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-12
1:725
[1] Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
[2] No new construction or development shall be allowed,
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for
which base flood elevations have been provided.
[1] The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have
been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(c) Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas
where Montgomery Township has identified local flood hazard
or ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood
Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally
derived information such as flood of record, historic high water
marks, soils or approximate study methodologies.
(d) The A Area/District shall be the areas identified as an A Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which no one-percent-annual-chance flood elevations have
been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway
information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
source shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the elevation shall be determined
by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
Floodplain Conservation District which is nearest the
construction site.
(e) In lieu of the above, Montgomery Township may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that
the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations,
etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the municipality.
(f) (Reserved)
§ 230-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-12
1:726
(g) Alluvial soils.
[1] Soils with a frequency of flooding of 1% or greater per
year, as delineated by the Natural Resources Conservation
Service, United States Department of Agriculture Web-
Based Soil Survey (available online at
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/), including, but not
limited to, the following soils:
[a] Bowmansville (Bo).
[b] Knauers (Bo).
[c] Rowland (Rt).
[2] Any party wishing to develop in such areas shall supply
engineering studies to the Township sufficient so that the
Township Engineer may determine if said area(s) are to be
considered as a one-hundred-year floodplain. If said
area(s) is not part of the area proposed for building, the
Township may not require such studies at the advice of the
Township Engineer, but the Township shall require said
soil areas to be appropriately identified on all subdivision,
development or building plans to be submitted to the
Township.
(2) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be delineated on the
Floodplain Overlay Map of Montgomery Township, which is hereby
made a part of this chapter and is available for inspection at the
Township office. Whenever there is a difference between said map
and the data contained in the sources described in § 230-11A(1) of
this section, the data contained in said sources shall determine the
boundary of the district.
(3) Studies used to establish the floodplain boundaries shall be
available in the Township Building for reference.
(4) Use of information. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source as
criteria for requiring that all new construction, substantial
improvements or other developments in Zone A shown on the
FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps adhere to the requirements
under the NFIP § 60.3(c)(2), (3), (5) and (6) and § 60.3(d)(3).
(5) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on
any zoning district now of hereafter applicable to any lot.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within Montgomery
§ 230-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-12
1:727
Township unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
(7) A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
B. Changes in the FP Floodplain Conservation District Area. The
Floodplain Conservation District may be revised or modified by the
Board where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as
soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the
changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
C. Boundary disputes: appeals procedure.
(1) In case of any dispute concerning the boundaries of a Floodplain
Conservation District, initial determination shall be made by the
Township Code Enforcement Officer, who shall seek the advice of
the Township Engineer as necessary in making said determination.
(2) Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer as to the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation
District, as defined above, which may include the grounds that said
map referred to therein is or has become incorrect because of
changes due to natural or other causes or changes indicated by
future detailed hydrologic and hydraulic studies, may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board as provided in Article XXIII, §§ 230-182 to
230-185 of this chapter. The burden of proof in such an appeal shall
be on the applicant.
(3) Whether a proposed use is within the Floodplain Conservation
District shown on the Floodplain Overlay Map shall, upon appeal
from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, be determined
by the Zoning Hearing Board upon receipt of the findings of the
detailed on-site survey by the petitioner. The Zoning Hearing
Board, in addition to other evidence and standards, shall request
the review and recommendations of the Township Planning
Commission and other Township agencies or officials at least 45
days before the public hearing.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board may request the review and
recommendations of the following agencies, on a case-by-case
basis, to be determined by a consultation with the Code
Enforcement Officer and the appropriate agency or individual: the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, Philadelphia District; the
Soil Conservation Service; the Township Engineer; the
Montgomery County Planning Commission; the Neshaminy or
Wissahickon Watershed Associations; and other technical agencies
as necessary. Such request shall be made 45 days prior to the
public hearing.
§ 230-12 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-12
1:728
§ 230-13. Use regulations.
(5) All changes to the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation
District are subject to the review and approval of the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
D. Overlay concept. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed
an overlay on any zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.
(1) Should the Floodplain Conservation District be declared
inapplicable to any tract by reason or action of the Township Board
of Supervisors in amending this article; or the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board or any court of competent
jurisdiction in interpreting the same; or the Zoning Hearing Board
or any court of competent jurisdiction in determining a legal effect
of the same, the zoning applicable to such lot shall be deemed to be
the district in which it is located without consideration of this
article.
(2) Should the zoning of any parcel or any part thereof in which the
Floodplain Conservation District is located be changed through any
legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, such
change shall have no effect on the Floodplain Conservation District
unless such change was included as part of the original application.
(3) Where this article does not define the boundaries of the floodplain
as defined in § 230-12 herein, the minimum setback from any
watercourse for a structure shall be equal to the horizontal
distance from the top of the bank of the watercourse extended to a
point at which the elevation is one foot above the elevation of the
top of the bank, as verified by the Township Engineer, or 50 feet,
whichever is greater. All such changes to the boundaries of the
Floodplain Conservation District are subject to the review and
approval of the Federal Insurance Administrator.
E. Corporate boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in areas
where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are proposed
or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data
affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community shall
adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation
or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR
60.3.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses and no other will be permitted in a
Floodplain Conservation District. All such uses shall be subject to the
floodproofing requirements as stipulated in this article, as well as the
Township Building Code and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, both as amended.216
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention, and Ch. 205,
Subdivision and Land Development, respectively.
§ 230-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-13
1:729
(1) Agricultural uses conducted in compliance with methods
prescribed in the latest version of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Manual.
(2) Pasture and grazing land in accordance with recognized soil
conservation practices.
(3) Outdoor plant nursery or orchard in accordance with recognized
soil conservation practices, but permitting no structures.
(4) Harvesting of any wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss,
berries or wild rice.
(5) Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted to extend into the floodplain, including wildlife
sanctuary, nature preserves, woodland preserve, fishing areas,
passive areas of public and private parklands, reforestation, and
arboretum. Any construction, development or grading shall only be
permitted in strict compliance with the provisions of this article.
(6) Streambank stabilization.
(7) Game farm, fish hatchery (if approved and supervised by the
Pennsylvania Fish and Game Commission) or hunting and fishing
preserve for the preservation or propagation of wildlife, but
permitting no structures.
(8) Forestry, lumbering and reforestation operations in accordance
with recognized natural resource conservation practices and
reviewed by the Montgomery County Conservation District, but
permitting no structures; provided, however, that the provisions of
§ 230-14 are adhered to.
(9) Utility transmission lines.
(10) The following floodplain crossings are permitted, provided
disturbance to any existing woodlands and degradation of water
quality are minimized to the greatest extent practicable:
Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, driveways
serving single-family detached dwelling units, roadways,
recreational trails, railroads, and utilities.
(11) Sealed public water supply wells, with the approval of the
Township Engineer.
(12) Sealed sanitary sewers, with the approval of the Township
Engineer.
(13) Culverts, with the approval of the Township Engineer and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Resources, when applicable.
§ 230-13 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-13
1:730
(14) Front, side or rear yards and required lot area for any district,
provided that such yards are not to be used for on-site sewage
disposal systems or for fence or any other structure; further
provided, however, that if it is not feasible, due to the amount of the
floodplain, to provide adequate buildable area in accordance with
the setbacks prescribed by the underlying district, the lot area shall
be required to be increased an amount commensurate with that
portion of the floodplain area which renders it impossible to
achieve adequate buildable area.
B. Prohibited uses. Any use or activity not authorized within § 230-13A,
herein, shall be prohibited within the Floodplain Conservation District
and the following activities and facilities are specifically prohibited.
(1) The following uses shall be specifically prohibited in a Floodplain
Conservation District, except where permitted by variance:
(a) Construction, alterations, or improvements to freestanding
structures, buildings, retaining walls, or any other permanent
structure including fences with the exception of flood-retention
dams and bridges, as approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
(b) The encroachment, alteration, improvement or relocation of
any watercourse.
(c) Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor
crossings in compliance with § 230-13A, herein.
(d) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any areas not designed to
accommodate adequately the type and volume.
(e) Parking lots.
(f) Sod farming.
(2) The following uses shall be specifically prohibited in a Floodplain
Conservation District and shall not be subject to further
consideration, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act, P.L. 851, No. 166 of 1978, as amended.217
(a) Sanitary landfills, dumps, junkyards, outdoor storage of
vehicles and materials and toxic chemicals and hazardous
wastes as defined in Act 97 of 1980, the Solid Waste
Management Act.218
(b) Development which may endanger human life. In accordance
with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
217. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
218. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 230-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-13
1:731
substantially improved structure which will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances; or will be used for any activity
requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will
involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances; shall be subject to the provisions of
this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The
following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
[1] Acetone.
[2] Ammonia.
[3] Benzene.
[4] Calcium carbide.
[5] Carbon disulfide.
[6] Celluloid.
[7] Chlorine.
[8] Hydrochloric acid.
[9] Hydrocyanic acid.
[10] Magnesium.
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
[12] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
[13] Phosphorus.
[14] Potassium.
[15] Sodium.
[16] Sulphur and sulphur products.
[17] Pesticides, including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides.
[18]Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are
not otherwise regulated.
(c) All manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and
manufactured home subdivisions.
(d) On-site/subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(e) Private water supply wells.
§ 230-13 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-13
1:732
(f) Hospitals (public or private).
(g) Nursing homes (public or private).
(h) Jails or prisons.
(i) Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing
is necessary to prepare land for a use permitted under
§ 230-13A, herein, and where the effects of these actions are
mitigated by reestablishment of vegetation.
(j) Placement of fill within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(k) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and/or other chemicals
in excess of prescribed industry standards.
C. Uses permitted by special exception. The following special exceptions
shall be allowed or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board after
recommendations by the Planning Commission pursuant to the
standards set forth in this article:
(1) Sewage treatment plant, outlet installations for sewage treatment
plants and sewage pumping stations, with the approval of the
Township Engineer and pertinent sewer authorities.
(2) Dams and bridges approved by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Resources.
(3) Paved roads and driveways and parking lots, where required by the
regulations of the zoning district applicable to the property without
consideration of this article, provided that:
(a) In the case of roads and driveways, no such facilities shall be
permitted as a special exception if alternative nonfloodplain
alignments are feasible, as determined by the Township
Engineer.
(b) In the case of parking lots, no such lot shall be permitted as a
special exception unless satisfactory evidence is submitted
that such parking will not be used during periods of flood flow,
thus posing no threat to the safety of the vehicles, their
occupants and/or to downstream properties. Temporary
parking for periods not to exceed one hour and/or parking for
recreation uses would be examples of such exceptions.
(c) Any road, driveway or parking lot located within the Floodplain
Conservation District shall, to the extent feasible, upon the
review and recommendation of the Township Engineer, be
constructed of paving materials in accordance with the
provisions of the Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.219
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-13
1:733
(4) Grading or regrading of lands, including the deposit of topsoil and
the grading thereof. The application for a special exception for such
a use shall be accompanied by the following:
(a) Detailed engineering studies indicating the effects on drainage
and streams on all adjacent properties as well as the property
in question, including the necessary data to determine whether
the boundaries of the Floodplain Conservation District would
be affected if the application was granted.
(b) An application for amending the boundaries of the Floodplain
Conservation District if the boundaries are affected by the
grading or regrading of land.
(c) A plan indicating the deposition of any fill or materials
proposed to be deposited by the grading or regrading of land;
such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion
by riprap, vegetative cover or bulkheading.
(d) Fences of wood, wire or other materials which will not impede
the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Storm sewers or detention/retention basins, with the approval of
the Township Engineer.
(6) Any other similar uses not listed herein are to be considered special
exceptions and subject to the requirements herein.
D. Nonconforming uses and structures. Following the adoption of this
article, any use or structure which is situated within the boundaries of
the FP Floodplain Conservation District and which does not conform to
the permitted uses specified in § 230-13A herein shall become a
nonconforming use or structure, regardless of its conformance to the
district in which it is located, without consideration of this article.
(1) The expansion or continuance of a nonconforming use or structure
which is nonconforming with respect to the district in which it is
located, without consideration of this article, shall be governed by
the requirements of Article XX of this chapter. However, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall ensure that the standards contained in
§ 230-14D herein are applied to the expansion or continuance of
said nonconforming use or structure.
(2) The expansion or continuance of a nonconforming use or structure
which is rendered nonconforming by the adoption of this article
shall be governed by the standards contained in § 230-14D herein.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall ensure that these standards are
enforced with respect to said nonconforming use or structure.
E. Improvements to existing structures. The following provisions shall
apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any Floodplain Conservation District:
§ 230-13 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-13
1:734
§ 230-14. Procedures and conditions for variances and special
exceptions.
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the base flood elevation.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any AE Area/District with floodway, as defined in
§ 230-12A(1)(b) that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at
any point.
(3) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
undertaken in the direction of the streambank.
(4) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of
any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this article.
(5) Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this article must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained
from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Any exemption from the ordinance requirements will be the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(6) The above activity shall also address the requirements of
§ 230-15C(14).
(7) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
A. Application and procedure for considering special exceptions and
variances.
(1) A floodplain use permit shall be required for all construction and
development in the floodplain. An application for a floodplain use
permit shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer who shall
make the initial determination on the application. For uses other
that those permitted in § 230-13A, an application seeking approval
of special exception or variance shall be forwarded to the Zoning
§ 230-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-14
1:735
Hearing Board along with required studies or information and the
findings of the Zoning Officer.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(3) Any application involving the use of fill, the construction of
structures or the storage of materials shall be accompanied by the
following:
(a) A plan certified by a registered professional engineer which
accurately locates the proposed floodplain use with respect to
the floodplain district limits, channel or stream, existing
floodplain developments, together with all pertinent
information such as the nature of the proposal; legal
description of the property fill limits and elevations; and
proposed floodproofing measures, including those required by
the Township Building Code, as amended, and the provisions of
this article.
(b) Such of the following additional information as is deemed
necessary by either the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Zoning Hearing Board for evaluation of the effects of the
proposal upon flood flows and floodplain storage and to render
a decision on the proposed floodplain use:
(c) A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the
stream, the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, the
cross-sectional area to be occupied by the proposed
development and high-water information.
(d) A plan surface view showing the elevation or contours of the
ground at vertical intervals of two feet; pertinent structures,
fill or storage elevation; the size, location and spatial
arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the
site; the location and elevation of streets, water supply,
sanitary facilities and soil types and other pertinent
information.
(e) A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel.
(f) Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities in
accordance with the provisions contained in the Montgomery
Township code, as amended.
(4) The application for special exception or use by variance shall be
accompanied by detailed engineering studies indicating the effects
on drainage and streams on all adjacent properties as well as on
the property in question.
§ 230-14 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-14
1:736
B. Procedures for considering special exceptions and variances.
(1) All applications for approval of special exceptions or variances shall
be considered using standards listed in § 230-14D of this article.
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hold a public hearing within
60 days after an application is filed. Public notice of the
hearing shall be given in accordance with § 230-171 of this
chapter.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board, in addition to other evidence and
standards, shall request the review and recommendations of
the Township Planning Commission and other Township
agencies or officials as least 45 days before the public hearing.
(c) The Zoning Hearing Board may request, at least 45 days prior
to a public hearing, the review and recommendations of
following agencies on a case-by-case basis to be determined by
a consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer and
appropriate agency or individual: the Montgomery County
Planning Commission, the Neshaminy or Wissahickon
Watershed Association, the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, the Soil Conservation Services, the Township
Engineer or other planning agencies, groups or individuals to
assist in determining the impact of the proposed use.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board shall render a decision within 45
days after the public hearing. In rendering a decision, the
Zoning Hearing Board may impose special measures or
conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary and
appropriate for the use to conform with the intent of this
article.
C. Special requirements.
(1) All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at
least 50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood
hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not available,
shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway
information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision.
(2) Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30 and AE must either.
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the permit requirement for manufactured homes in this
section.
§ 230-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-14
1:737
D. Standards for granting special exceptions and variances.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall exercise discretion in allowing
only those uses which are substantially in accord with the stated
provisions in § 230-11 herein. The Zoning Hearing Board, in
considering special exceptions or variance applications, shall
consider the following:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(e) The effect of the use shall not alter the carrying capacity of the
stream and floodplains at the location of the proposed use.
(f) Lands abutting the waterway, both upstream and downstream,
shall not be adversely affected by the proposed use.
(g) The general welfare or public interest of Montgomery
Township or of other municipalities in the same watershed
shall not be adversely affected, nor create nuisances, causer
fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any other
applicable state or local ordinances or regulations.
(h) Any new or substantially improved structures permitted by
special exception or by variance shall be constructed and
placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of water and shall be designed to have no effect upon the
flow and height of floodwater on other properties. Such
structures shall be elevated in accordance with the provisions
contained in the Montgomery Township Building Code, as
amended.
§ 230-14 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-14
1:738
(i) Any new or substantially improved structure permitted as a
special exception or by variance shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the provisions contained in the Montgomery
Township Building Code, as amended.
(2) All new or substantially improved structures shall be firmly
anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(a) All such structures shall be constructed so as to prevent the
entrance of floodwaters into the water supply and waste
treatment systems as well as other utility systems. In addition,
waste treatment systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate discharges from such systems into the floodwaters.
(b) In all such structures, there shall be provision in all fully
enclosed areas below the base flood elevation of a minimum of
two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) In all such structures, the electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities shall be designed and located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(3) Any additions to existing structures permitted as a special
exception or by a variance shall be elevated to the greatest extent
possible according to the provisions contained in the Montgomery
Township Building Code, as amended.
(4) An affirmative decision shall not be issued by the Zoning Hearing
Board for an application within the designated floodway if any
increase in the flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(6) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(c) Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
decisions as required in this section.
§ 230-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-14
1:739
§ 230-15. Technical provisions.
(7) The Zoning Hearing Board shall maintain a complete record of all
variance requests and decisions affecting the Floodplain
Conservation District, including the written justification of the
reason for the issuance of any special exception or variance, and
report such decisions in the Township's biennial report submitted
to the Federal Insurance Administration and FEMA.
E. Additional standards for granting variances. A property owner of a lot
of record, as of the date of the enactment of this article, who is able to
prove that the strict enforcement of this article would create undue
hardship by denying a reasonable use of an existing lot which is
situated either wholly or partially in the Floodplain Conservation
District may seek relief by applying for a variance from the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board, after deciding upon the merits of the
application, may permit the applicant to make some reasonable use
of the property in question, while ensuring that such use will not
violate the basic objectives of this article as specified in § 230-11
herein.
(2) In considering a use as a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider those standards outlined in § 230-14 herein.
(3) Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the following:
(a) Affirmative decisions shall only be issued by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon a determination that failure to grant the
appeal would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant
and a determination that the granting of an appeal will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety or extraordinary public expense or create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
(b) Affirmative decisions shall only be issued upon determination
that it is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to provide relief.
A. General. In granting any variance, Montgomery Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall attach the following technical provisions to the
proposal for which the variance has been granted. These conditions and
safeguards are necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the municipality.
(1) Pertaining to the alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
§ 230-14 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-15
1:740
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have
been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protections Regional Office.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless is can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(c) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(2) The municipality shall require technical or scientific data to be
submitted to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six
months of the completion of any new construction, development, or
other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. A LOMR or
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is required for:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(b) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base elevation; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a stream, including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges.
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed by
variance within any Floodplain Conservation District shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in
this article and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations. In addition, when such development is proposed within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of any
watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(1) Residential structures.
(a) In AE and A1-30 Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(b) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 230-12A(1)(d) of this article.
§ 230-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-15
1:741
(c) The design and construction standards and specifications shall
address the requirements of § 230-15C(14).
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) In AE and A1-30 Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the
regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so
that the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
[1] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
[2] Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(b) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 230-12A(1)(d) of
this article.
(c) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above referenced standards.
(d) The design and construction standards and specifications shall
address the requirements of § 230-15C(14).
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
§ 230-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-15
1:742
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] Minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall
comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(c) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(d) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 230-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-15
1:743
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any Floodplain Conservation District except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so
as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages and
§ 230-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-15
1:744
the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 230-13B(2)(b), Development which may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory
flood elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent
possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
§ 230-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-15
1:745
§ 230-16. Administration.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(14) Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters
401-405), as amended and not limited to the following provisions
shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this
article, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or
supplement the requirements of this article.
(a) International Building Code (IBC) the latest edition thereof:
Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(b) International Residential Building Code (IRC) the latest edition
thereof: Sections R104, R105, R106, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Planning and Zoning
Director within the Planning and Zoning Department is hereby
appointed to administer and enforce this article and is referred to
herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 230-15 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-16
1:746
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended);220 and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been
made.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. The Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
(5) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the Floodplain Conservation District, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to
enforce the provisions of this article.
(6) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board for
whatever action it considers necessary.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of
§ 230-15C(14).
220. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 230-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-16
1:747
C. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township of
Montgomery. Such application shall contain the following:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(c) Name and address of contractor.
(d) Site location including address.
(e) Listing of other permits or variances required.
(f) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any Floodplain Conservation District, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and
all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(e) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used.
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
§ 230-16 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-16
1:748
(a) A completed permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale, and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available;
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
[4] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
[5] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, the Floodplain Conservation District, and, if
available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the
flow of water including direction and velocities.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100 feet
or less showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under
§ 230-15C(14).
(5) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation; and detailed information
concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
(b) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development.
(c) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 230-15C(6), Storage, and § 230-13B(2)(b), Development
which may endanger human life, including:
§ 230-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-16
1:749
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 230-13B(2)(b) and 230-15C(6)
which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 230-13B(2)(b) during a base flood.
(d) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(e) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(6) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administration.
D. Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications and
plans for any proposed construction or development in any Floodplain
Conservation District to be considered for approval shall be submitted
by the Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation District for
review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by
the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
E. Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any Floodplain
Conservation District to be considered for approval may be submitted
by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
F. Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted
with the application without the written consent or approval of the
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in
writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain
Administrator for consideration.
G. Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the permit and the date of its issuance and shall be signed by the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 230-16 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-16
1:750
§ 230-17. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
H. Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction shall begin within 180 days
after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The term "start of construction" shall be understood
as defined in § 230-5 of this chapter.
(2) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such
a request.
A. Violation. A structure or other development not fully compliant with the
community's floodplain management regulations is in violation of this
article. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or
(e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
B. Notice. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall be in accordance with Article XXV of this
chapter.
C. Penalties.
(1) Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements
or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to comply with
any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain Administrator or
any other authorized employee of the municipality shall pay a fine
in accordance with Article XXV of this chapter.
(2) In addition to the above penalties all other actions are hereby
reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement
of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation
of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation
or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development
initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this article
may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be a public
nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 230-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-18
1:751
§ 230-18. through § 230-22. (Reserved)
§ 230-23. Certificate of compliance.
No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected,
altered or moved on the floodplains of any creek or stream shall be occupied
until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall request the
applicant to submit a certification by a registered professional engineer
or land surveyor that the finished fill and building floor elevations,
floodproofing measures or other flood protection factors were accomplished
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall, within 10 days after receipt of such certification from the
applicant, issue a certificate of compliance only if the building or premises
and the proposed use thereof conform with all the requirements of this
article.
§ 230-24. Municipal liability.
The granting of a zoning permit or approval of a subdivision or land
development plan in or near the Floodplain Conservation District shall
not constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the
municipality or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or
safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability upon Montgomery
Township, its officials or employees. The degree of flood protection intended
to be provided by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. This
article is not intended to imply that areas outside Floodplain Conservation
District boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will always
be totally free from flooding or flood damages.
§ 230-18 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-24
1:752
ARTICLE V
R-1 Residential District
§ 230-25. Declaration of legislative intent. [Amended 2-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 04-190Z]
In expansion of the purpose and community development objectives
contained in Article I, § 230-2, of this chapter, as amended, the primary
intent of this District is to provide low-density residential land use in
accordance with the Future Land Use Plan of the Montgomery Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time.
§ 230-26. Use regulations. [Amended 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063;
2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any one of the following principal purposes and no other,
unless specifically provided for herein, i.e., home occupations.
A. One single-family detached dwelling.
B. Municipal parks and municipal recreation facilities.
C. Agriculture I uses, provided that such uses are located on a lot of 10
acres or larger in size. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-226Z]
D. Passenger shelter for local stops of public transportation.
E. Any of the following purposes when authorized as a special exception:
(1) Educational and/or religious use, provided that such use is located
on a lot five acres or larger in size, buildings are set back at least
100 feet from all property lines, impervious lot coverage shall not
exceed 30% of the total lot area, parking areas are set back at least
30 feet from all property lines and all other regulations of the R-1
Residential District are met.
(2) Day camp, provided that such use is located on a lot 10 acres or
larger in size, impervious lot coverage does not exceed 30% of the
total lot area, buildings are set back at least 100 feet from all
property lines, parking areas are set back at least 30 feet from all
property lines, and all other regulations of the R-1 Residential
District are met.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) Golf course, athletic field, riding academy, or other outdoor
recreational use with less than 5% impervious lot coverage.
(5) Cemetery, provided that the parcel devoted to this use shall contain
not less than 10 acres.
§ 230-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-26
1:753
(6) Group day-care home, subject to the provisions of Article XXI
herein.
F. Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XVIII.
G. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the foregoing uses.
H. Family day-care home, subject to the provisions of Article XXI,
§ 230-156.1, herein. [Added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063]
I. Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of facility, in
compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
98-97Z]
J. Open space design overlay option. [Added 10-22-2012 by Ord. No.
12-264Z; amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-273Z]
(1) For an applicant seeking a lot size reduction, the open space design
option may be used only on property designated as open space
design overlay option eligible on the Montgomery Township Zoning
Map, and only after obtaining a conditional use approval from the
Board of Supervisors, which shall be subject to the following
criteria:
(a) Tract size. Any tract of land to be developed shall be a
minimum of eight acres in area. Subsequently, an adjoining
tract of land of any size may be added to the initial tract and
become subject to the open space design overlay option
criteria set forth herein, when approved as a conditional use
and subject to a revised Master Plan.
(b) Ownership. Land proposed for this option shall be under single
and separate ownership or be subject to a unified application.
(c) Common open space. At least 20% of the area of the tract, or
1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater, shall
be set aside as common open space. Common open space areas
shall be contiguous with open space areas on adjacent tracts
wherever possible, and shall be designed in a manner
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors. Common open space
areas shall be deed restricted to allow public use and to
prevent further development.
(d) Required transportation improvements. Applicants seeking to
develop property under the open space design overlay option
shall dedicate any land necessary for the construction and
right-of-way of new public roads (or extensions of existing
public roads) which are an essential element of Montgomery
Township-supported roadway or signalization improvements.
In addition to providing the required dedication, the applicant
§ 230-26 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-26
1:754
shall design, obtain necessary approvals, construct and
dedicate required improvements.
(e) Master Plan. Applicants seeking to develop property under the
open space design overlay option must submit a Master Plan
indicating how interior roadway access will be provided to
adjacent parcels in conjunction with its application.
(f) Utilities. The tract shall be served by public sewer and public
water facilities.
(2) Development regulations.
(a) Density. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted
shall be two dwelling units per developable acre.
(b) Dimensional standards.
[1] Minimum lot frontage: 70 feet.
[2] Open space preservation easements. On land not
dedicated as open space, open space easements to the
Township shall be placed on all floodplains, wetlands and
watercourses for environmental preservation and passive
recreation purposes, including trails.
[3] Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet (exclusive of areas
within utility easements, steep slopes, floodplain and
wetlands).
[4] Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
[6] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
[7] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
[8] Maximum building coverage per lot: 25%.
[9] Maximum impervious coverage per lot: 35%.
[10] Minimum parking requirements per dwelling unit: two offstreet
spaces plus garage.
[11] Minimum guest parking requirements: 0.75 off-street
space per unit.
(3) Permitted uses. All allowed uses in the R-1 Zone and such other
accessory uses which are permitted in the underlying zone are
consistent with an approved master site plan.
(4) Additional dimensional and development regulations. For reasons
of traffic safety and congestion, vehicular access from existing
streets shall be limited to a minimal number of major access
§ 230-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-26
1:755
§ 230-27. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged
in the district shall be:
§ 230-28. Area, width and yard regulations.
locations. These intersections shall be justified by a traffic impact
analysis that complies with the Township's requirements.
Otherwise, all new development shall be internalized so that access
occurs from new internal streets.
A. For any dwelling: 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2 stories.
B. For any nondwelling, farm building or other structure: 35 feet, except
that such height may be increased to a maximum of 65 feet, provided
that for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to
each yard requirement one corresponding foot of width or depth.
A. Minimum lot area and width. A lot area of not less than 40,000 square
feet and a lot width of not less than 200 feet at the building line shall be
provided.
B. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall be not
less than 60 feet in depth.
C. Side yards.
(1) On each interior lot there shall be two side yards having an
aggregate width of not less than 60 feet, neither side yard having a
width of less than 15 feet.
(2) On each corner lot there shall be two side yards, the side yard
abutting the street having a width of not less than 60 feet and the
side yard not abutting the street having a width of not less than 20
feet.
D. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot, the depth of which
shall be not less than 30 feet.
E. Building coverage. Not more than 10% of the area of any lot shall be
occupied by buildings.
F. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Montgomery
Township Subdivision Ordinance No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI.
[Added 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033]
G. Impervious surface ratio. [Added 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
(1) The maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on a lot used for
a single-family detached dwelling or agriculture shall be 30%.
§ 230-26 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-28
1:756
§ 230-29. Other provisions. [Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
See Article XXI of this Zoning Ordinance for general provisions that may
also relate to this District.
(2) The maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on a lot used for
any other purpose permitted in the district shall comply with the
provisions of § 230-26E or, if not specifically regulated, shall not
exceed 30%.
§ 230-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-29
1:757

ARTICLE VI
R-2 Residential District
§ 230-30. Legislative intent. [Amended 10-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-52Z; 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
In addition to the statement of community development objectives set forth
in § 230-2 of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the specific intent
of this article, in the R-2 Residential District, to provide a transition from
intensely developed portions of the Township and intended to protect the
environment and property by providing ample rear yard space and a low
building coverage. The primary intent of this District is to provide medium
low density residential land use in accordance with the Future Land Use
Plan of the Montgomery Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended from
time to time.
§ 230-31. Use regulations. [Amended 10-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-52Z; 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any one of the following principal purposes and no other:
A. One single-family detached dwelling.
B. Municipal parks and municipal recreation facilities.
C. (Reserved)
D. Passenger shelter for local stops of public transportation.
E. Any of the following purposes when authorized as a special exception:
(1) Educational and/or religious use, provided that such use is located
on a lot five acres or larger in size, buildings are set back at least
100 feet from all property lines, impervious lot coverage shall not
exceed 30% of the total lot area, parking areas are set back at least
30 feet from all property lines and all other regulations of the R-2
Residential District are met.
(2) Day camp provided that such use is located on a lot 10 acres or
larger in size, impervious lot coverage does not exceed 30% of the
total lot area, buildings are set back at least 100 feet from all
property lines, parking areas are set back at least 30 feet from all
property lines, and all other regulations of the R-2 Residential
District are met.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) Golf course, athletic field, riding academy or other outdoor
recreational use with less than 5% impervious lot coverage.
(5) Cemetery, provided that the parcel devoted to this use shall contain
not less than 10 acres.
§ 230-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-31
1:759
§ 230-32. Height regulations. [Amended 10-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-52Z]
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged
in the district shall be:
§ 230-33. Area, width and yard regulations. [Amended 8-3-1987 by
Ord. No. 17-033; 10-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-52Z]
(6) Group day-care home, subject to the provisions of Article XXI
herein.
F. Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XVIII.
G. Accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to any of
the foregoing uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXI, § 230-149
herein.
H. Family day-care home, subject to the provisions of Article XXI,
§ 230-156.1 herein.
I. Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of facility, in
compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
98-97Z]
A. For any dwelling: 35 feet, not exceeding 2 1/2 stories.
B. For any nondwelling farm building or other structure: 35 feet, except
that such height may be increased to a maximum of 65 feet, provided
that for every foot of height in excess of 35 feet there shall be added to
each yard requirement one corresponding foot of width and depth.
C. For any nonfarm accessory building: 20 feet.
A. Minimum lot area and width. A lot area of not less than 20,000 square
feet and a lot width of not less than 100 feet at the building line shall be
provided.
B. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall be not
less than 50 feet in depth.
C. Side yards.
(1) On each interior lot there shall be two side yards having an
aggregate width of not less than 30 feet, neither side yard having a
width less than 15 feet.
(2) On each corner lot there shall be two side yards, the side yard
abutting the street having a width of not less than 40 feet and the
side yard not abutting the street having a width of not less than 15
feet.
D. Rear yard.
§ 230-31 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-33
1:760
§ 230-34. Other provisions. [Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
See Article XXI of this Zoning Ordinance for general provisions that may
also relate to this District.
(1) There shall be a rear yard on each lot, the depth of which shall be
not less than 30 feet.
(2) Setbacks for accessory buildings and uses shall be as defined in
§ 230-149.
E. Building setback from secondary and major roads. All buildings shall be
set back a depth of not less than 60 feet from the ultimate right-of-way
line of secondary and major roads, regardless of a less restrictive
setback for that specific yard area.
F. Building coverage. Not more than 15% of the area of any lot shall be
occupied by buildings.
G. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening, and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Montgomery
Township Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI, as
amended.
H. Impervious surface ratio. [Added 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
(1) The maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on a lot used for
a single-family detached dwelling or agriculture shall be 30%.
(2) The maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on a lot used for
any other purpose permitted in the district shall comply with the
provisions of § 230-31E or, if not specifically regulated, shall not
exceed 30%.
§ 230-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-34
1:761

ARTICLE VII
R-3 Residential District
§ 230-35. Community development objectives.
The district established by this article is in accordance with the land use
policies and objectives established by the Montgomery Township
Comprehensive Plan. It is intended to achieve the following:
§ 230-36. Use regulations.
A. To encourage construction of mixed housing types to meet the housing
needs of a changing population in Montgomery Township.
B. To preserve and support the character of existing residential uses in the
Township.
C. To assure light, air and privacy, as far as possible, by controlling the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
D. To protect residential areas against hazards of fire, offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, glare or other objectionable influences.
E. To prevent congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density of
population and the bulk of buildings and by providing for sufficient offstreet
parking.
F. To protect residential neighborhoods, as much as possible, from heavy
or through traffic.
A. Uses by right. In any R-3 District, land, buildings or premises shall be
used by right for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Residential dwellings and uses to include:
(a) Townhouse and garden apartment dwellings, singularly or in
groups, subject to the area, height and bulk regulations under
§ 230-37.
(b) Duplex, twin and townhouse dwellings, singularly or in groups,
subject to area, height and bulk regulations under § 230-50.
(c) Single-family detached dwellings as regulated at a minimum by
the R-5 Residential District. [Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 04-190Z]
(2) Passenger shelters for local stops of public transportation.
[Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
(3) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the foregoing uses, including noncommercial recreation
facilities and signs permitted under § 230-126B of this chapter.221
[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; 2-28-2005 by Ord. No.
04-190Z]
§ 230-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-36
1:763
§ 230-37. Area, height and bulk regulations.
In the R-3 Residential Districts, the following area, height and bulk
regulations shall apply as to townhouse and garden apartment
development:
Site Area Townhouse Apartment
Size (minimum acres) 10 10
Buffer
Front (minimum feet from
property line)
75 75
B. Any of the following purposes when authorized as a special exception:
[Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
(1) Private or semi-private recreation facilities as a primary use of a
tract and subject to § 230-154 of this chapter.
(2) Educational and/or religious use, provided that such use is located
on a lot five acres or larger in size, buildings are set back at least
100 feet from all property lines, impervious lot coverage shall not
exceed 30% of the total lot area, parking areas are set back at least
30 feet from all property lines and all other regulations of the R-3
Residential District are met.
(3) Day camp, provided that such use is located on a lot 10 acres or
larger in size, impervious coverage does not exceed 30% of the
total lot area, buildings are set back at least 100 feet from all
property lines, parking areas are set back at least 30 feet from all
property lines, and all other regulations of the R-3 Residential
District are met.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Accessory use on the same lot and customarily incidental to any of
the foregoing uses.
C. Dwelling unit mix. In any R-3 District, site development shall be
permitted to mix dwelling types with the overall density directly in
proportion to the numbers of each type of dwelling.
D. Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of facility, in
compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
98-97Z]
221. Former § 230-36A(4), Family-day care home, added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063, which
previously followed this subsection, was repealed 6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 99-111Z.
§ 230-36 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-37
1:764
Site Area Townhouse Apartment
Side (minimum feet from
property line)
50 50
Rear (minimum feet from
property line)
50 50
Common open space (minimum
percentage of total open space)
50 50
Building coverage (maximum
percentage of net site area)
35 35
Impervious material coverage,
excluding building coverage
(maximum percentage of net site
area)
30 30
Dwelling (building) lot area N/A
Lot size (minimum square feet per
dwelling unit)
Building coverage (maximum
percentage of lot area)
50 50
Impervious material coverage
(maximum percentage of net site
area)
30 30
Outdoor living space (minimum
square feet per dwelling unit)
(See entry below) 750
Dwelling unit lot area
Lot size (minimum square feet) N/A
Outdoor living space adjacent to
exterior:
Front walls of unit (minimum
feet from wall)
15 N/A
Side walls of unit (minimum feet
from wall)
10 N/A
Back walls of unit (minimum
feet from wall)
10 N/A
Dwelling (building)
Height (maximum feet) 35 35
Setback from:
Main distribution roads
(minimum feet)
40 40
Building service roads (minimum
feet)
30 30
§ 230-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-37
1:765
Site Area Townhouse Apartment
Common parking area (minimum
feet)
15 15
Other buildings (minimum feet)
Option A 40 40
Option B (townhouse, dwelling
only)
Front to front 60 N/A
Front to back 60 N/A
Back to back 60 N/A
Side to front/back 40 N/A
Side to side 25 N/A
Dwelling unit
Number of units per gross acre
(maximum number)
9 10
Number of units per building
(maximum number)
Under Option A 12 16
Under Option B (townhouse only) 8 N/A
Setback from other units, same
building, wholly facing or end-to-end
(minimum feet)
40 40
Parking spaces per dwelling unit
(minimum)
2 2
§ 230-38. General requirements.
In an R-3 Residential District, the following requirements shall apply:
A. The development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall
plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with approved
landscaping.
B. Provision shall be made for ownership and maintenance responsibility
of all property contained in the development, and the development plan
shall indicate areas to be held in single ownership and in common
ownership.
C. All paved areas for vehicular use, all pedestrian walks and other paved
areas shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable Township regulations, including those of the Subdivision
Ordinance.222
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-37 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-38
1:766
D. Fire lanes, as required by the Fire Marshal, and areas for loading and
unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing of
refuse collection, fuel and other services shall be provided and shall be
adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blockage or interference with the use of accessways or automobile
parking facilities.
E. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and
from public streets and highways serving the development site without
undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow.
F. All utility lines servicing the development shall be placed underground.
G. All buildings shall be served by a municipal public sanitary sewage
disposal system and municipal public water supply, including fire
hydrants.
H. Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable
direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities
shall be required where deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors
for the safety and convenience of the residents.
I. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Montgomery
Township Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI.
[Amended 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033]
J. The developer shall preserve or incorporate natural features such as
woods, streams, floodplains and open space areas which add to the
overall cohesive development of the Apartment Residential District and
adjacent districts.
K. The developer shall give consideration to the provision of community
areas, laundry facilities, playgrounds, open space and other services
necessary for the comfort and convenience of the residents.
L. Trash receptacles. All buildings shall be provided with trash
receptacles convenient to service entrances and screened or enclosed
as a part of the architectural treatment of the building. Incinerators are
not permitted in the buildings.
M. All mechanical equipment shall be installed and maintained so that no
noise therefrom can be heard at the property line.
N. Elevators. Where elevators are provided, the developer shall submit
detailed information of the size and rate of elevators and their adequacy
to serve the proposed building. In order to provide adequate room in
elevators for ambulance stretchers and emergency equipment, at least
one elevator must have one horizontal dimension which is at least eight
feet (inside cab).
§ 230-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-38
1:767
§ 230-39. Procedural requirements.
O. Snow removal. Snow shall be removed from all roadways, sidewalks
and parking areas within four hours after snow has ceased to fall. The
application for a building permit shall indicate the method of removing
snow, including storage areas for such snow located so that they will
not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement or visibility.
P. Security. Sliding patio doors shall be equipped with jam-proof dead
locks and exterior and interior five-pin cylinder locks. All hinged
entrance doors to apartments shall be equipped with heavy-duty
locksets having a minimum throw of 3/4 inch on latches and an auxiliary
latch/deadlocking latch bolt when door is closed.
Q. All buildings shall be designed to meet all requirements of Building
Regulations for Protection from Fire and Panic, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry. No building permits
are to be issued until evidence of submittal and approval by the above
agency is furnished to the Township. No buildings or dwelling units are
to be occupied until copies of the Department of Labor and Industry
occupancy permit are furnished to the Township, showing evidence that
buildings have been inspected and comply with the approved drawings
and all other requirements of the Department of Labor and Industry.
R. All surface water drainage shall be collected and conveyed in
accordance with proper engineering practices and design, as approved
by the Township Engineer.
S. Attached buildings shall have breaks in both the roofline and the front
and rear building walls as specified below. Breaks shall be utilized so as
to minimize earthmoving and removal or impacting, due to cut or fill, on
adjacent existing vegetation.
(1) Vertical breaks. A total break footgage of four vertical feet in
minimum increments of 18 inches shall be included in every 160
horizontal building feet or within three firewalls.
(2) Horizontal breaks. A total break footgage of eight horizontal feet in
minimum increments of three feet shall be included in every 160
horizontal building feet or within three firewalls. In addition,
angles in the building wall of 22º or more shall be considered
equivalent to a five-foot break. Breaks in walls shall be varied by
change in building texture, provided that a common architectural
theme is carried out by means of consistent exterior detailing,
materials and colors.
A. Any application for a building permit for erection or alteration of or
addition to any building or structure or portion thereof shall be
accompanied by a development plan, as required by this section.
B. Any development plan shall be deemed a land development or
subdivision plan within the meaning of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
§ 230-38 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-39
1:768
Planning Code223 and shall be subject to the requirements of said state
law and to the requirements of the Montgomery Township Subdivision
Ordinance and regulations.224
C. Any development plan for townhouse development where the dwelling
units and lots are intended to be sold in fee simple to individual owners
shall show courses and distances for such lots.
D. Any development plan shall include the following items, without
limitation:
(1) All property lines and names of adjoining owners.
(2) Existing contours at two-foot intervals.
(3) Finished contours after grading.
(4) Existing utility poles.
(5) Existing major trees (having a diameter of eight inches or more at a
point measured three feet from ground) and outline of significant
tree groups.
(6) Outline of proposed buildings, including main floor elevation and
estimate of floor area.
(7) Location and slopes of all roads and parking lots.
(8) Outline of all existing structures and an indication of what
structures are going to be demolished.
(9) Road rights-of-way, including ultimate rights-of-way.
(10) Existing watercourses and floodplain.
(11) Existing and proposed drainage structures.
(12) Outline and description of any proposed recreational facilities,
including information on hours of operation, use or membership
restrictions, illumination, fencing and screening and all other
information required under § 230-154 of this chapter.
(13) Plans for control of erosion and sedimentation during construction.
Said plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Montgomery
County Soil and Water Conservation District prior to the issuance
of any building permit.
(14) Landscaping and screening plans as required by § 230-38I.
(15) Condominium ownership agreements or homeowners' association
agreements or similar documents of covenants and agreements
providing for the maintenance and ownership of all areas and
223. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
224. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-39
1:769
§ 230-40. Other provisions. [Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
See Article XXI of this Zoning Ordinance for general provisions that may
also relate to this District.
facilities proposed for common use. Such agreements shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township Solicitor as being in
accordance with applicable law.
(16) Sewer and water. Plans shall show evidence of available public
sewer and water service.
(17) Architect's drawings showing the external appearance of the
garden apartment buildings, with a certification thereon by the
owner and developer that the buildings will be constructed as to
appearance in accordance with the drawings.
E. The application shall be accompanied by a processing fee in addition to
such other fees as may be required by the Township. The amount shall
be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time. The
processing fee shall be used by the Township to retain such experts as it
determines are necessary to adequately review the application for
apartment residential development, including, without limitation,
attorneys, engineers, traffic engineers, planners, architects and
landscape architects. Any portion of the processing fee not expended by
the Township for professional fees shall be returned to the applicant
upon completion of processing of the application. Further, the Township
reserves the right to require additional processing fees if it determines
that its processing cost will exceed the initial fee deposited. [Amended
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
§ 230-39 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-40
1:770
ARTICLE VIII
Cluster Development District
§ 230-41. Community development objectives.
In addition to the goals listed elsewhere in this chapter, the district
established by this article in accordance with the Township land use policies
and objectives of the Montgomery Township Comprehensive Plan, as
adopted by the Board of Supervisors. It is intended to achieve the following:
§ 230-42. Applicable zoning districts. [Amended 9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-143Z]
The Cluster Development District shall be an overlay on the existing R-1 and
R-2 Districts of the Zoning Map of Montgomery Township if permitted as a
conditional use by the Board of Supervisors but shall not apply to properties
where there exist historic structures as identified pursuant to the Historic
Preservation Cluster District. Permitted uses shall be those provided in the
district within which the Cluster Development District is permitted, and no
other. Permitted uses shall not be altered by further designation as a Cluster
Development District.
§ 230-43. General requirements.
Applications for designation as a Cluster Development District shall meet
the following minimum requirements:
A. To provide for the preservation and protection of open spaces in the
Township and for the protection of existing residential districts.
B. To encourage a more creative, varied, efficient, attractive and
economical development pattern.
C. To provide an effective means of responding to site conditions,
including preserving floodplains, historic areas, recreation sites and
other areas in a manner consistent with the Township development.
D. To encourage the development of single-family areas, supported with
open space, community facilities and utilities.
E. To encourage the development of housing meeting the needs of the
population at all income levels.
A. The proposed subdivision shall be a contiguous tract of land in single
and separate ownership of not less than 20 acres. The Cluster
Development District shall permit only single-family detached dwellings
and common open space as provided for in this District. [Amended
2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
B. Designation as a Cluster Development District may be requested only
for properties zoned as an R-1 Residential District or R-2 Residential
District at the time of application.
§ 230-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-43
1:771
C. The proposed development must be served by municipal public sewer
and municipal public water systems.
D. Common open space shall be required for each tract area developed
pursuant to the Cluster Development District net of ultimate rights-ofway
of existing streets in the minimum amount of 20%. [Amended
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-143Z]
E. Open space areas created by the application of the Cluster
Development District shall be either:
(1) Retained for private use of the residents or owners of properties
within or adjacent to the development, pursuant to a covenant or
legal corporation in a form approved by the Township Solicitor and
the Township Board of Supervisors; or
(2) Dedicated to and accepted by Montgomery Township or to any
other public agency with the concurrence of the Montgomery
Township Board of Supervisors.
F. No open space parcel shall be proposed for public dedication of less
than 10 acres except where such open space is:
(1) Part of lands designated for public open space in the Montgomery
Township Comprehensive Plan, including stream valleys,
floodplains or park or historic sites;
(2) Contiguous to existing public open space; or
(3) Connected to existing public open space by an easement or rightof-
way other than a dedicated public road.
G. Areas to be preserved as open space should include those possessing
the following characteristics:
(1) Woodlands.
(2) Lands adjoining and including any water or drainage course or
body of water subject to periodic flooding or overflow and
delineated as alluvial soils by the Soil Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture, in the Soil Survey of
Montgomery County, 1960 - 1963.
(3) Lands having slopes in excess of 15% or other natural features
worthy of preservation.
(4) Historic sites or areas providing vistas of historic sites.
(5) Lands suitable for development of public or private recreation
areas.
(6) Areas providing unique or ecological characteristics, including bird
or wildlife sanctuaries and botanical preservation areas.
§ 230-43 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-43
1:772
§ 230-44. Density standards. [Amended 6-13-1983 by Ord. No.
17-019]
The overall density of development within the Cluster Development
Districts shall not exceed:
District Dwelling Units
per Gross Acre
R-1 Residential 1.00
R-2 Residential 2.00
§ 230-45. Lot area.
Minimum lot area in a Cluster Development District shall be:
Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
R-1 Residential 25,000 (square feet)
R-2 Residential 12,500 (square feet)
§ 230-46. Yard and impervious surface coverage regulations.
[Amended 5-24-1999 by Ord. No. 99-109Z; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No.
07-219Z]
Minimum front, rear and side yard and maximum impervious surface
regulations shall be as follows:
Minimum
R-1
Residential
(feet)
R-2
Residential
(feet)
Lot width at street line 50 50
Width at building line 100 80
Building setback 40 40
Side yard 15 10
Side yard abutting street 40 40
Rear yard 30 15
Maximum impervious surface
ratio
30% 40%
H. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Montgomery
Township Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI.
[Added 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033]
§ 230-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-47
1:773
§ 230-47. Initiation of district.
Application. An application for designation as a Cluster Development
District may be initiated by the owner of lands meeting the minimum
requirements of § 230-48 or by the Montgomery Township Planning
Commission or Board of Supervisors.
§ 230-48. Application procedure.
An application for designation as a Cluster Development District shall be
submitted and processed in two parts.
A. Preliminary application.
(1) The preliminary application shall be submitted to the Board of
Supervisors and shall include:
(a) A map and legal description of the land to be developed.
(b) A sketch plan of the development, showing the proposed
locations of all lots, roads, easements, watercourses, tree
masses and areas proposed for open space.
(c) Evidence of availability of municipal public sewer and
municipal public water.
(d) A statement as to the proposed use or dedication for all open
space areas.
(2) Approval of the preliminary application for designation as a Cluster
Development District shall be conditional. No approval shall
become final until completion of final application processing and
final subdivision plan approval.
B. Final application.
(1) The final application shall be submitted concurrently with a
subdivision plan pursuant to the Montgomery Township
Subdivision Ordinance.225 The application shall include the
following information in addition to the requirements of the
Subdivision Ordinance:
(a) The site plan, showing the exact location of all lots, open space
areas, streets and other proposed facilities, public or private.
(b) Detailed plans for all open space, including:
[1] Site plans for all open space areas. Such plans shall
include the following information.
[a] Existing contours at two-foot intervals.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-47 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-48
1:774
[b] Finished contours at two-foot intervals after grading
or other proposed changes.
[c] Delineation of all areas subject to periodic flooding or
overflow and delineated as alluvial soils in the soil
survey of Montgomery County.
[d] Delineation of all tree masses and of major trees
having a diameter of eight inches or more at a point
measured three feet above the ground.
[e] Outline of existing or proposed buildings.
[f] Location and slopes of all roads, drives, parking lots
and other hard surface areas.
[2] Cost estimates for all proposed improvements in open
space areas.
[3] Legal documents providing for preservation of all open
space areas. Such documents shall be in a form approved
by the Township Solicitor and Board of Supervisors and
shall include:
[a] Deed of dedication for all open space areas proposed
for public dedication.
[b] Performance bond escrow agreement or other
approved means of insuring completion of all required
improvements to open space areas proposed for
dedication.
[c] Deed restriction to ensure preservation of all open
space areas not proposed for public dedication.
[d] Form of corporation or other approved nonprofit
ownership of open space areas not proposed for public
dedication.
[e] A trust indenture or other approved means of insuring
maintenance of open space areas not proposed for
public dedication.
(c) Erosion and sedimentation control plans. Such plans shall be
submitted to and approved by the Montgomery County Soil and
Water Conservation District prior to commencement at any
grading, regrading or construction within the Cluster
Development District.
(2) Final approval shall be contingent upon approval of a subdivision
plan for the area designated as a Cluster Development District.
§ 230-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-48
1:775
(3) The final application shall be submitted within 180 days of
preliminary approval. Failure to submit the final application within
the required time shall void preliminary approval.
§ 230-48 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-48
1:776
ARTICLE IX
R-3A Residential District
§ 230-49. Uses and regulations.
§ 230-50. Area, height and bulk regulations. [Amended 4-14-1986
by Ord. No. 17-034; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
In the R-3A Residential Districts, the following area, height and bulk
regulations shall apply:
Type of Regulation Twin Duplex Townhouse
Site area
Size (minimum acres) 10 10
Buffer
A. Uses by right. In any R-3A Residential District, land, buildings or
premises shall be used for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Residential dwellings and uses to include only, singularly or in
groups, duplex/twin/townhouse dwellings or, under the provisions
of the R-2 Residential District area and bulk regulations, singlefamily
detached dwellings.
(2) Passenger shelters for local stops of public transportation.
[Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
(3) Accessory uses on the same lot which are customarily incidental to
any of the foregoing uses, including noncommercial recreation
facilities and signs permitted under § 230-126B of this chapter.
[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; 2-28-2005 by Ord. No.
04-190Z]
(4) (Reserved)226
(5) Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of
facility, in compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999
by Ord. No. 98-97Z]
B. (Reserved)227
C. Dwelling unit mix. In any R-3A Residential District, site development
shall be permitted to mix dwelling types with the overall density
directly in proportion to the numbers of each type of dwelling.
226. Editor's Note: Former § 230-49A(4), Family day-care home, added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No.
17-063, was repealed 6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 99-111Z.
227. Editor's Note: Subsection B, Uses by special exception, was repealed 2-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 04-190Z.
§ 230-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-50
1:777
Type of Regulation Twin Duplex Townhouse
Front (minimum feet from
property line)
60 75
Side (minimum feet from
property line)
40 50
Rear (minimum feet from
property line)
40 50
Common open space (minimum
percentage of total open space)
50 50
Building coverage (maximum
percentage of net site area)
25 35
Impervious material coverage,
excluding building coverage
(maximum percentage of net site
area)
30 30
Dwelling (building) lot area
Lot size (minimum square feet
per dwelling unit)
5,000 3,200
Building coverage (maximum
percentage of lot area)
50 50
Impervious material coverage
(maximum percentage of net site
area)
30 30
Dwelling unit lot area
A. Not fully deeded out
Outdoor living space adjacent
to exterior
Front walls of unit (minimum
feet from wall)
15 15
Side walls of unit (minimum
feet from walls)
10 10
Back walls of unit (minimum
feet from walls)
10 10
Parking spaces per dwelling
unit (minimum)
2 2
B. Fully deeded out
Lot size (minimum square
feet per dwelling unit)
5,000 3,200
Front yards (minimum feet
from lot line)
40 40
Side yards (minimum feet
from lot line)
12.5 12.5
§ 230-50 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-50
1:778
Type of Regulation Twin Duplex Townhouse
Back yards (minimum feet
from lot line)
40 40
Parking spaces per dwelling
unit* (minimum)
3** 3**
Maximum impervious surface
ratio
80% 80%
Dwelling (building)
Height (maximum feet) 35 35
Not fully deeded out
Setback from:
Street (minimum feet) 50 50
Common parking area
(minimum feet)
25 25
Other buildings:
Front to front (minimum
feet)
60 60
Front to back (minimum
feet)
60 60
Back to back (minimum
feet)
60 60
Side to front/back
(minimum feet)
40 40
Side to side (minimum feet) 25 25
Dwelling unit
Number of units per gross
acre (maximum number)
5 6
Number of units per building
(maximum number)
2 8
Setback from other units,
same building, wholly facing
or end-to-end (minimum feet)
N/A 40
Parking spaces per dwelling
unit (minimum)
2 2
NOTES:
*See the end of this chapter for examples of parking arrangements which
are acceptable under the terms of the off-street parking and loading space
requirements in residential districts.
**Each garage shall be counted as one parking space; a driveway shall be
counted as one parking space, regardless of length.
§ 230-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-51
1:779
§ 230-51. General requirements.
In an R-3A Residential District, the general requirements shall be as
provided in § 230-38 of this chapter.
§ 230-52. Procedural requirements.
In an R-3A Residential District, the procedural requirements shall be as
provided in § 230-39 of this chapter.
§ 230-53. Other provisions. [Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
See Article XXI of this Zoning Ordinance for general provisions that may
also relate to this District.
§ 230-51 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-53
1:780
ARTICLE IXA
R-3B Age Qualified Residential District
[Added 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 195Z]
§ 230-53.1. Statement of community development objectives.
§ 230-53.2. Use regulations.
A. The District established by this article is intended to address the
housing needs of older persons who do not require the more intensive
needs of an assisted living facility or nursing home, but who desire the
security, safety and special design of a residential environment which
can provide residential units particularly conducive to older persons in
the form of affordable, independent living units.
B. For tracts of land with a gross site area in excess of 100 gross acres, a
comprehensive development alternative shall be permitted. This
alternative is intended to provide an expanded range of uses for large
tracts and shall include a minimum of 50% age-qualified residential
uses in combination with non-age-qualified single-family detached and
attached residential uses and a complementary commercial component
not to exceed 5% of the tract's gross site area. Development criteria for
this alternative are set forth in § 230-53.11. [Added 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-237Z]
A. Uses by right. In any R-3B Residential District, land, buildings or
premises shall be used for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Residential dwellings and uses to include only, singularly or in
groups, age-qualified single-family attached, single-family
detached, and multiple-family dwellings, duplex/twin/townhouse
dwellings. (See § 230-53.9 hereinbelow as to "age-qualified"
restriction.) [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-263Z]
(2) Agriculture.
(3) Accessory uses on the same lot which are customarily incidental to
any of the foregoing uses, including private recreation facilities and
signs permitted under § 230-126B of this chapter. Gatehouses, bus
shelters and similar accessory structures shall be permitted within
required front yard perimeter setback specified at § 230-53.3
hereinbelow.
(4) No-impact home-based business
(5) Municipal parks and municipal recreation facilities.
(6) Comprehensive development alternative in accordance with
§ 230-53.11 below. [Added 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-237Z]
B. Uses by special exception. Special exceptions shall be as follows:
§ 230-53.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-53.2
1:781
§ 230-53.3. Area, height and bulk regulations. [Amended 9-10-2012
by Ord. No. 12-263Z]
In the R-3B Residential Districts, the following area, height and bulk
regulations shall apply:
Type of Regulation
Age-Qualified
District
A. Gross site area size (minimum acres) 50
(If area is not in single ownership, minimum acre requirement may
be satisfied by combining lands, provided initial overall plan of
development contains this specified acreage. Lands contiguous to
initial development area must contain minimum of five acres.)
Building setback from perimeter boundaries of the site (decks or
patios may encroach into setback areas by not more than ten (10)
feet.):
Front (minimum feet from ultimate road
right-of-way line)
100
Side (minimum feet from property line) 50
Rear (minimum feet from property line) 50
Minimum building setback from ultimate rightof-
way of Route 309 or other arterial highway -
single-family attached dwellings and singlefamily
detached dwellings
60
Minimum building setback from Route 309 or
other arterial highway - multifamily dwellings/
buildings
300
Common open space (minimum percentage of
gross site area) offered for dedication for active
or passive park use and which shall be
configured as one generally regular-shaped
property
15
Building coverage (maximum percentage of
gross site area)
25
Impervious material coverage, including
building coverage (maximum percentage of
gross site area)
50
(1) Public utility uses, such as electric substations.
(2) Passenger shelters for local stops of public transportation.
C. Dwelling unit mix. In any R-3B Residential District, site development
shall be permitted to mix dwelling types, provided the provisions of
§ 230-53.3, inclusive of the density provisions therein, are strictly
applied to the overall site development.
§ 230-53.2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-53.3
1:782
Type of Regulation
Age-Qualified
District
B. Single-family attached dwelling unit lot area
without fee simple lotting, outdoor living space
adjacent to exterior front walls of unit (minimum
feet from wall)
5
Side walls of unit (minimum feet from walls) 10
Back walls of unit (minimum feet from walls) 10
C. Single-family attached dwelling (building) without fee simple lotting
Setback from:
Street or private access drive (minimum
feet)
20
Common parking area (minimum feet) 20
Other buildings:
Front to front (minimum feet) 60
Front to back (minimum feet) 60
Back to back (minimum feet) 50
Side to front/back (minimum feet) 40
Side to side (minimum feet) 20
N.B. The spacing and setback criteria set forth in Subsections B and
C hereinabove apply to single-family attached dwellings in a courtyard
configuration. For single-family attached dwellings constructed in a
straight line configuration, essentially parallel to public or private streets,
spacing and setback requirements shall be as follows:
Setback from:
Street or private access drive (minimum feet) 25
Common parking area (minimum feet) 20
Other buildings:
Front to front (minimum feet) 60
Front to back (minimum feet) 60
Back to back (minimum feet) 50
Side to front/back (minimum feet) 40
Side to side (minimum feet) 20
C1 Single-family detached dwelling (building) with
fee simple lotting. [Amended 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 14-284Z]
Lot size minimum (square feet) 6,000 (inclusive of
any easement area)
Minimum lot width, at actual building setback
(feet)
60
§ 230-53.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-53.3
1:783
Type of Regulation
Age-Qualified
District
Minimum lot width, at curbline (feet) 15
Front yard, measured from curb of private
street or back of sidewalk (feet)
22
Side yard (feet) 5/20
(both/minimum)
Rear yard (minimum feet) 20
Corner lots shall meet front yard requirement
on street parallel to front of dwelling with two
side yards minimum; 10-foot side yard on yard
abutting other street
Required spacing between dwellings (minimum
feet)
20
Building coverage (maximum) 50%
Impervious coverage (maximum) 65%
Building height (maximum feet) 35
Decks, patios or covered porches, and exterior
access structures for basements, may extend
not more than 15 feet into the rear yard setback
Width of private street for two-way access
(minimum feet)
26
Width of private street for one-way access
(minimum feet)
16
Dwelling setback from curb of guest parking
(minimum feet)
15
Shared driveways are permitted for lots having
minimum width at curbline
D. Density of development
Number of dwelling units per gross acre
(maximum number)
5.0
E. Type of Regulation Singlefamily
Multifamily
Number of units per building
(maximum number)
6 40
(Limitation on single-family attached
units at six shall apply to units in linear
arrangement. If courtyard arrangement,
not more than six units in row prior to
right angle arrangement of further
units.)
§ 230-53.3 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-53.3
1:784
Setback from other units, same
building, wholly facing or end-toend
(minimum feet)
20 50
Parking spaces per dwelling
unit (minimum)
2.5 2.3
Height (maximum feet) 30 65*
Setback from site boundary See
§ 230-53.3
125 feet from
all gross site
boundaries
* Not to exceed four levels of living space over one level of parking
§ 230-53.4. General requirements.
In an R-3B Residential District, the general requirements shall be as
provided in § 230-38 of this chapter.
§ 230-53.5. Procedural requirements.
In an R-3B Residential District, the procedural requirements shall be as
provided in § 230-39 of this chapter.
§ 230-53.6. Other provisions.
See Article XXI of this Zoning Ordinance for general provisions that may
also relate to this District.
§ 230-53.7. Dedication of parkland and improvements in lieu of
contribution.
A development in this District which provides active park/recreational lands
in a contiguous parcel in a location and configuration acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors, to be dedicated to the Township for public use, along
with such access as shall be deemed acceptable to the Board of Supervisors,
same to be improved at the cost of the developer, may be accepted in lieu of
park and recreation contributions as might otherwise be required.
§ 230-53.8. Unified developments in phases.
The Board of Supervisors may approve a unified development of more than
one property within this District, provided that a sketch plan is submitted
depicting development of all properties to be included demonstrating
compliance with all provisions of this Article IX-A. Final plan approval may
be granted for any phase thereof, provided that the Board of Supervisors
receives satisfactory executed restrictions requiring that any remaining
phase or phases, when combined with such initial approved phase or phases
will satisfy all requirements of this Article IX-A.
§ 230-53.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-53.9
1:785
§ 230-53.9. Declaration of age restriction. [Amended 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-237Z]
At the time of subdivision and land development, as a prerequisite to the
recording of any final plan, the developer shall record a declaration against
the lands proposed for development in a form acceptable to the Township,
binding all portions of the site and present and future owners thereof to a
restriction requiring, as to a minimum of 80% of the occupied units, that at
least one of the permanent residents of any dwelling unit be a minimum of
55 years of age or older and which shall further provide that any resident
of any individual dwelling unit under the age of 19 years of age shall not
reside in that unit more than three months in any calendar year. This article
and the content and substance of any declaration prepared and recorded
hereunder shall conform with all federal and state regulations pertaining to
age-qualified housing.
§ 230-53.10. Homeowners' association or condominium declaration.
At the time of subdivision and land development, as a prerequisite to the
recording of any final plan, the developer shall record a declaration, with
respect to the lands then being developed, the phase then being developed,
in form satisfactory to the Township Solicitor, addressing, as relevant,
the homeowners' association details or the specifics with regard to the
condominium regime.
§ 230-53.11. Development criteria: comprehensive development
alternative. [Added 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-237Z228]
A. Uses by right:
(1) Age-qualified residential uses defined hereinabove, expressly
excluding multifamily dwellings and buildings.
(2) Non-age-qualified residential dwellings and uses that include feesimple
single-family detached dwellings with a variety of lot sizes
and single-family attached dwellings on fee-simple lots.
(3) Complementary commercial uses in compliance with Article XIII, C
Commercial District, regulations, except § 230-75A(1), shall follow
uses permitted in Appendix Table 230-A under R-3B.229 All planting
and buffering requirements shall follow § 205-52.
B. Tract area.
(1) Gross site area: 100 acres, minimum.
C. Density of overall development (number of dwelling units per gross
acre exclusive of complementary commercial area): 3.2, maximum.
228. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance also provided that all provisions in this section
apply to the comprehensive development alternative and supersede any inconsistent
provisions or criteria set forth hereinabove in this Article IXA.
229. Editor's Note: Table 230-A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 230-53.9 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-53.11
1:786
D. Development mix criteria.
(1) Age-qualified residential (as percent of total dwelling units): 50%,
minimum.
(2) Non-age-qualified single-family detached residential (as percent of
the remaining dwelling units): 30%, minimum.230
(3) Non-age-qualified single-family attached residential (as percent of
the remaining dwelling units): 70%, maximum. [Amended
6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-243Z]
(4) Complementary commercial uses 5% (as percent of gross site
area): 5%, maximum.
E. Area, height and bulk regulations.
(1) Age-qualified residential uses: in accordance with § 230-53.3
above, expressly excluding multifamily dwellings and buildings.
(2) Non-age-qualified uses:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling estate lots:
[1] Lot size: 18,000 square feet, minimum.
[2] Lot width at ultimate setback line: 100 feet, minimum.
[3] Front yard (from right-of-way): 40 feet, minimum.
[4] Side yard: 10 feet/40 feet both, minimum.
[5] Rear yard: 35 feet, minimum.
[6] Corner lots: shall meet front yard requirement on street
parallel to front of dwelling with two side yards, minimum
thirty-foot side yard abutting other street.
[7] Required spacing between dwellings: 30 feet, minimum.
[8] Building coverage: 30%, maximum.
[9] Impervious coverage: 45%, maximum.
[10] Building height: 35 feet, maximum.
[11] Accessory uses: decks, patio, pools and sheds shall comply
with the R2 zoning requirements.
(b) Single-family detached dwelling village lots:
[1] Lot size: 9,500 square feet, minimum.
230. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2)(a) and (b), which contained additional development
mix criteria for non-age-qualified single-family detached dwelling units, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-243Z.
§ 230-53.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-53.11
1:787
[2] Lot width at ultimate setback line: 70 feet, minimum.
[3] Front yard (from right-of-way): 25 feet, minimum.
[4] Side yard: five feet/20 feet both, minimum.
[5] Required spacing between dwellings: 20 feet, minimum.
[6] Corner lots: shall meet front yard requirement on street
parallel to front of dwelling with two side yards, minimum
twenty-foot side yard abutting other street.
[7] Rear yard: 20 feet, minimum.
[8] Maximum building coverage: 40%, maximum.
[9] Maximum impervious coverage: 55%, maximum.
[10] Building height: 35 feet, maximum.
[11] Accessory uses: decks, patio, pools and sheds shall comply
with the R2 cluster zoning requirements.
(c) Single-family attached on fee-simple lots:
[1] Lot size: 2,400 square feet, minimum.
[2] Lot width: 24 feet, minimum.
[3] Front yard from edge of curb/paving (undedicated drives):
25 feet, minimum.
[4] Side yard: 10 feet for end units, minimum.
[5] Rear yard (deck, porch or patio may encroach up to 10
feet): 20 feet, minimum.
[6] Building coverage: 65%, maximum.
[7] Impervious coverage: 80%, maximum.
[8] Building height: 35 feet, maximum.
[9] Building length: 160 feet/6 DU, maximum.
[10] Parking spaces per dwelling unit: 2.5, minimum.
[11] Required width of undedicated drives: 26 feet, minimum.
(3) Complementary commercial uses. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-263Z]
(a) Complementary commercial uses: in accordance with all
provisions of Article XIII, C Commercial District, including the
Table of Permitted Uses, Table 230-A, for R-3B, as amended,
and all dimensional requirements shall comply with Article XIII
§ 230-53.11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-53.11
1:788
of the Zoning Code, provided that a unified architectural style
and facade treatment shall be consistent for all buildings and
shall be applied to all sides, and no individual building, with or
without party wall, may exceed 15,000 square feet on one floor
and a maximum height of 35 feet. All uses must have frontage
on a major arterial roadway, with average site depth measured
from ultimate right-of-way not to exceed 325 feet.
(b) All or a portion of a designated complementary commercial use
area may be developed for age restricted residential uses
otherwise provided for hereinabove at § 230-53.2A(1) if
designed and developed as an integrated plan with abutting
lands in the R-3B Age Qualified Residential District. The
density of the comprehensive development alternative
permitted at § 230-53.11C shall be a maximum of 3.5 units per
acre if all or a portion of a designated complementary
commercial use area is so developed, provided that the
percentage of age restricted residential units within the overall
comprehensive development alternative is increased to a
minimum of 60%.
(c) The spacing and setback criteria set forth hereinbelow apply to
single-family attached age restricted dwellings integrated with
abutting commercial use area, dwellings located along private
streets or drives. Spacing and setback requirements shall be as
follows:
Building setback from:
Curb of private street or
drive (face of garage)
22 feet or back of
sidewalk
Private street or drive (nongarage
face)
15 feet
Emergency access drive 10 feet
Guest parking - curbline 10 feet
Overall tract boundary 25 feet
Internal parcel lines 15 feet
Ultimate right-of-way of
Route 309 or other arterial
roadway
60 feet
Other buildings:
(distance measured
from face of building
wall)
Front to front 60 feet
Front to back 40 feet
Back to back 25 feet
§ 230-53.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-53.11
1:789
Side to front/back 20 feet
Side to side 20 feet
Decks, patios, porches, or other building projections,
including exterior access structures for basements, may
extend into the required minimum setbacks by not more than
10 feet, provided same is clearly depicted on the recorded
subdivision/land development plan. [Amended 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 14-284Z]
Units arranged in a courtyard driveway configuration are
permitted to count two spaces in each garage toward the
minimum of 2.5 spaces per unit parking requirement. All
other units are permitted to count one space in each garage
and one space in each driveway toward the minimum parking
requirement.
F. Other governing provisions.
(1) Sections 230-53.4 through 230-53.10 are applicable to the
comprehensive development alternative. Section 230-53.9 is
applicable to the age-qualified portion only.
§ 230-53.11 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-53.11
1:790
ARTICLE X
MHP Mobile Home Park District (R-4)
§ 230-54. Legislative intent.
In addition to the statement of community development objectives set forth
in § 230-2B of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the specific intent
of this article, with respect to the MHP Mobile Home Park District, to
establish standards of performance and promote the desirable benefits
which planned mobile home parks may have upon the community and the
residents within them. It is further the intent of this article to endure the
interdependency and compatibility of proposed mobile home parks with
essential utilities and surrounding land uses in the Township. It shall further
be the intent of this District to:
§ 230-55. Use regulations.
Mobile home parks are allowed only in an MHP Mobile Home Park
District(s), and provided that the tract to be used as a mobile home park
meets the criteria specified in § 230-57 of this article. The uses which are
permissible in a mobile home park are as follows:
A. Reflect the changes in the technology of home building and land
development so that resulting economies may enure to the benefits of
those who need homes;
B. Further the general welfare by extending greater opportunities for
better and more affordable housing to all present and prospective
residents of Montgomery Township;
C. Provide for better quality and greater variety in type, design and layout
of mobile home parks than has been evident in many mobile home parks
in the past by enforcing uniform standards, desirable design criteria
and encouraging innovative site design approaches;
D. Provide for a diversity in housing types and prices; and
E. Encourage mobile home parks that are beneficial rather than
detrimental to property values and the general welfare of the area in
which they are proposed.
A. Residential uses. A mobile home park may include mobile homes of
single width or multiple width or both, single-family detached modular
homes, conventionally built single-family detached homes, or any
combination thereof, but shall not include travel trailers or motor
homes. No more than 40% of the total number of dwelling units in a
mobile home park may be conventionally built or modular single-family
dwellings.
B. Passenger shelters for local stops of public transportation. [Amended
1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z]
§ 230-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-55
1:791
§ 230-56. Procedure.
§ 230-57. General use criteria.
A mobile home park may be allowed by the governing body as a use in an
MHP Mobile Home Park District only pursuant to the procedure specified
in § 230-56 and subject to the following standards. The burden of proving
compliance with these standards shall be on the applicant.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the
maintenance, servicing and well-being of mobile home park
residents shall be permitted only as part of an approved
development plan for the site.
(2) Accessory uses on individual mobile home lots, customarily
incidental to mobile homes, or other dwellings, such as storage
sheds, shall be permitted on the individual mobile home lots,
provided that the provisions of §§ 230-59 and 230-60 and other
applicable ordinances are complied with.
(3) Added rooms specifically designed by the mobile home
manufacturers for enlargement of mobile homes and other
additions architecturally compatible with the unit may be joined
onto a mobile home, provided that all requirements of § 230-60 and
other applicable ordinances are met.
D. Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of facility, in
compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
98-97Z]
A. Application. Any person desiring to use a tract of land which is zoned
MHP Mobile Home Park shall make application, in writing, to the
Township Board of Supervisors. Such applications shall include, as a
minimum, a tentative sketch plan indicating basically how the applicant
intends to develop the property and sufficient data to document
compliance with the standards in § 230-57.
B. Public hearing. Prior to deciding to approve or deny the use of a tract
for a mobile home park, the governing body shall hold a public hearing
thereon pursuant to public notice. At least 45 days prior to the date of
the hearing, one copy of the development proposal and all additional
submitted information shall be transmitted to the Township Planning
Commission, together with a request that this agency submit
recommendations regarding said use.
A. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or shall be
the subject of an application filed by the owners of the entire tract, and
it shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed under single
direction and in the manner approved.
§ 230-55 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-57
1:792
B. Any parcel to be used as a mobile home park must have a minimum
tract area of 15 contiguous acres of land.
C. At least 50% of the site shall be composed of developable land.
D. Any site proposed for a mobile home park shall not be subject to
adverse environmental influence, such as swamps, marshes, garbage or
rubbish disposal areas or other potential breeding places for insects or
rodents.
E. Any site proposed for a mobile home park shall not be subject to any
hazard or nuisance, such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic
matter, radiation, heat, odor or glare, as defined by the governing body
and all appropriate ordinances.
F. The location of all mobile home parks shall be protected by screening or
other appropriate means against any undesirable off-site views or any
adverse influence (such as heavy commercial or industrial use, heavy
traffic or brightly lighted activities) from adjoining streets and areas.
G. Mobile home parks shall not be located directly abutting conventionally
built single-family detached housing of significantly different unit value
and density than the proposed mobile homes except where extensive
natural buffering exists and will be retained or can be created so as to
functionally and visually separate the two sites or where compatible
units of modular or conventionally built homes will be located in the
mobile home park adjacent to the existing residences. The developer
shall provide any necessary transition between differing residential
structural types, unit values and densities within the mobile home park
tract.
H. Any site proposed for a mobile home park shall, in the opinion of the
governing body, be easily accessible to essential community facilities
and services, such as employment centers, shopping centers, schools
and police and fire protection, and shall be within one mile by roads or
pedestrian walkway to existing or planned convenience commercial
facilities. The site should also preferably be within the same one mile
distance of existing or planned public transit routes (if available).
I. Every area to be used as a mobile home park must be served exclusively
by the municipal sanitary waste disposal system and a centralized
water supply system, if those facilities are available and if each system
is found to contain the available capacity to serve the proposed park or,
alternatively, the area to be used as a mobile home park must, if it
cannot connect to either or both the centralized water supply and
municipal sanitary sewer systems, be served by a common single water
supply system serving all dwelling units and other structures in the
park and/or a common single sanitary sewer system doing likewise,
either or both of which, as applicable, must have the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. Furthermore,
those on-site facilities must, when constructed, meet the following
criteria:
§ 230-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-57
1:793
(1) The satellite system shall be designed and constructed in a manner
that will permit adequate connection to the centralized or public
system in the future.
(2) The administrative structure for the satellite system shall be
organized in a manner that will facilitate easy interconnection of
the two systems.
(3) The developer shall be required to show proof that the satellite
system intending to serve the proposed park will not interfere with
any existing sewage disposal system or any existing water supplies,
be they wells for nearby properties or sources of water for other
community systems.
(4) When the centralized or public system reaches the park site,
connection to it shall be mandatory, and the cost of the eventual
interconnection shall be borne by the developer or the organization
that is set up to own and operate the satellite system.
(5) If, after development occurs, the satellite water system is deemed
to be the cause of interference with existing water supplies or the
satellite sewer system is deemed to be the cause of any pollution,
extension of the centralized or public systems may be required at
that time. The cost of the extension and hookup shall be borne by
the developer or organization owning and operating the satellite
system.
J. Any tract intended for a mobile home park must have direct access to
the feeder-type road (or a road of a higher classification), as defined by
the Township Comprehensive Plan or Ultimate Right-Of-Way Ordinance,
which the Township governing body deems capable of accommodating
the transport of mobile home units, upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer. Plans evidencing provisions for safe and efficient
ingress and egress to and from the public streets and highways
servicing the mobile home park, without causing undue confusion or
interference with the normal traffic flow, shall be submitted to the
Township governing body and must be approved by the Township
Engineer, who shall make the determinations based on the adequacy of
the thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic generated by the mobile
home park.
K. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the municipal
governing body that he has complied with or will comply with all
requirements of Chapter 179 of Title 25, Part I, Subpart D, Article II, of
the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, and with all other pertinent regulations of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are applicable to mobile
home parks.
L. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Montgomery
§ 230-57 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-57
1:794
§ 230-58. Density.
The total number of lots in a mobile home park shall not exceed a maximum
density of five units per gross acre.
§ 230-59. Site design for conventional and modular homes.
The lot size required under the MHP Mobile Home Park District shall be a
minimum of 7,000 square feet for lots which are used for modular homes or
conventionally built single-family detached homes located with the mobile
home park. All other requirements applicable to mobile homes as specified
in § 230-60 remain applicable to modular and conventionally built singlefamily
homes.
§ 230-60. Site design for mobile homes.
Township Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI.
[Added 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033]
A. Setback from tract boundary. No mobile home or other primary building
may be located closer than 40 feet to any boundary of a mobile home
park, regardless of whether the boundary abuts a lot, water body, road
or other right-of-way. In the event that a mobile home park abuts
another such park, this provision will not apply; however, all other
applicable setbacks prescribed herein shall apply.
B. Setback from streets. In no case shall the long side of a mobile home or
any side of any other primary building or accessory building be located
closer than 25 feet to the ultimate right-of-way line of any public streets
or to the edge of the cartway or the equivalent roadways or to the edge
of any common pedestrian walkway within the mobile home park;
provided, however, that the short side of a mobile home may be located
no closer to these facilities than 15 feet. No more than six homes in a
row shall have the same setback; where varied setbacks are utilized,
the difference shall be at least four feet.
C. Setback from common parking facilities. No mobile home or accessory
use shall be located within 25 feet of any common parking area.
D. Lot size. All mobile home lots in a mobile home park, regardless of
tenure, shall have a minimum lot size of:
(1) Four thousand square feet for single-width mobile homes.
(2) Five thousand square feet for double-width mobile homes.
E. Lot width. No individual mobile home lot shall be less than 40 feet in
width for a single-width home and no less than 50 feet in width for a
double-wide home at the building setback line. No individual mobile
home lot shall be less than 25 feet in width at the right-of-way line of a
public street or the equivalent right-of-way line or the edge of the
pavement of a private street, as applicable.
§ 230-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-60
1:795
§ 230-61. Common open space.
In a mobile home park, some of the total open space as defined in this
Zoning Ordinance for an R-3 Residential District shall be assigned as
common open space in an amount at least equal to 20% of the gross site
area.
F. Side and rear setbacks. No mobile home or accessory building may be
located closer than four feet to any side or rear lot line of an individual
mobile home lot; provided, however, that all minimum requirements of
Subsection H below must be met, and provided further that accessory
buildings may be located on the lot line if physically joined to each other
with a common wall located on the property line.
G. Unit location on individual lots. Mobile homes placed on individual lots
are encouraged to utilize the minimum setbacks specified in Subsection
F above and to be placed off-center on the lots so as to provide a large
usuable open yard space and outdoor living area in one section of the
lot.
H. Distance between structures and mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be
separated from each other and from other buildings and their
structures, other than accessory structures, at their closest points by a
minimum of 20 feet.
I. Setback from front and rear lot lines. Where any two mobile homes are
situate with their longer sides parallel or essentially parallel to each
other for more than 25% of the length of either, there shall be a distance
between the rear of each such mobile home and the rear lot line of the
lot on which it is situate of not less than 10 feet and a distance from the
front of each such mobile home to the front lot line of the lot on which it
is situate of not less than 16 feet, excluding roofed structures or areas
attached thereto and accessory structures.
J. Lot coverage. The maximum coverage of any individual mobile home lot
by all primary and accessory buildings and structures, including
covered patios or decks, shall be no greater than 35%.
K. Height. No structure built in a Mobile Home Park District shall exceed a
height of three stories or a maximum of 35 feet.
L. Design alternative. In order to allow clustering of lots designed to
encourage flexibility in site design and preservation of natural features
and to maximize creation of accessibility of recreation areas, the
distance between structures, minimum lot width and minimum lot size
may be reduced up to a maximum of 10% upon approval of the
governing body, provided that at least 50% of all lots so reduced shall
directly abut a part of the common open space for a distance of at least
20 feet. An area equal to that by which each lot is reduced shall be
added to the minimum common open space specified in § 230-61. All
other regulations remain as stated herein.
§ 230-60 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-62
1:796
§ 230-62. Other provisions. [Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
See Article XXI of this Zoning Ordinance for general provisions that may
also relate to this District.
§ 230-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-62
1:797

ARTICLE XI
R-5 Residential District
§ 230-63. Applicability.
In the R-5 Residential District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 230-64. Uses and regulations.
§ 230-65. Height regulations.
The regulations of § 230-27 of Article V herein shall apply.
§ 230-66. Basic area, width and yard requirements.
A. Uses by right. In any R-5 Residential District, land, buildings or
premises may be used for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) One single-family detached dwelling. [Amended 2-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 04-190Z]
(2) Passenger shelters for local stops of public transportation.
[Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 04-190Z]
(3) Accessory use on the same lot which is customarily incidental to
any of the forgoing uses.
(4) Family day-care home, subject to the provisions of Article XXI,
§ 230-156.1, herein. [Added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063]
(5) Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of
facility, in compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999
by Ord. No. 98-97Z]
(6) Municipal uses, including Township fire stations and Township
ambulance service buildings, excluding dump. [Added 6-14-2004
by Ord. No. 179Z]
B. Any of the following purposes when authorized as a special exception.
[Amended 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063; 2-28-2005 by Ord. No.
04-190Z]
(1) Noncommercial recreation facilities as a primary use of a tract and
subject to § 230-154 of this chapter.
(2) Group day-care home, subject to the provisions of Article XXI, §
230-156.1, herein.
A. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot size permitted shall be 15,000
square feet.
§ 230-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-66
1:799
B. Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building line shall be
80 feet. The minimum lot width at the street line shall be 50 feet.
C. Minimum yard setbacks. The minimum lot setbacks shall be:
(1) Front yard: 45 feet.
(2) Side yard:
(a) Interior lots: There shall be two side yards having an aggregate
width of not less than 25 feet, each side yard having a width of
not less than 10 feet.
(b) Corner lots: There shall be two side yards, the side yard
abutting the street having a width of not less than 30 feet and
the side yard not abutting the street having a width of not less
than 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 40 feet.
D. Building coverage. The maximum building coverage of any lot shall not
exceed 20% of the total lot area.
E. (Reserved)231
F. Public water and sewer regulations. No building may be erected and no
lot may be used or occupied within an R-5 Residential District unless
and until the building and lot are served by both public water and public
sewer.
G. Public or private utilities. All public or private utility lines shall be
placed underground.
H. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Montgomery
Township Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI.
[Added 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033]
I. For municipal uses, including Township fire stations and Township
ambulance service buildings, excluding dump, the height, basic width
and yard requirements of this District shall apply with the exception of
the following requirements applicable to this use category. [Added
6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 179Z]
(1) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage of any lot shall
not exceed 25% of the total lot area.
(2) Site area. The minimum site area shall be the same as the minimum
lot area for this district.
231. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, pertaining to site area, was repealed 2-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 04-190Z.
§ 230-66 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-66
1:800
§ 230-67. Optional area, width and yard regulations.
In order to promote added flexibility of design and to encourage
conveyances with only consideration of useful land for general use as
parklands by the citizens of the Township, a developer of 40 or more acres
may, at his option, develop the land under the regulations of this optional
section.
(3) Parking. One parking space per 450 square feet of total floor area.
All other off-street parking and loading requirements of this
chapter shall apply.
(4) Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious material coverage,
including building and parking area, shall not exceed 75% of the
total lot area.
J. Impervious surface ratio. [Added 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
(1) The maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on a lot used for
a single-family detached dwelling or agriculture shall be 40%.
A. As a requirement of using these standards, a developer shall dedicate a
minimum of 10% of the gross acreage of the tract to the municipality.
The actual location of the donated land shall be negotiated to
coordinate with the existing Township lands and with other potential
lands so that an integrated and cohesive system of park lands may be
evolved.
(1) Criteria for land to be dedicated. The Board of Supervisors, upon
the recommendation of the Park and Recreation Board, shall
determine if the land is acceptable for dedication based on the
following and any other relevant criteria.
(a) Access. The dedicated land must be readily accessible to all
residents. This should be by virtue of at least one side of the
site abutting a public street for a minimum distance of 50 feet.
If public easements are the sole access, they shall be wide
enough to accommodate two-way traffic of maintenance
equipment.
(b) Location. The dedicated land shall be located, to the extent
possible, so that it equally serves all residents of the
development.
(c) Shape. The shape shall be suitable to accommodate those park
and open-space activities appropriate to the location and needs
of the residents. The exact shape is variable. An example of an
unacceptable piece of land is one that is 30 feet wide and 1,500
feet long, unless it is to be developed as a bike route or as a
connecting trail to other facilities.
§ 230-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-67
1:801
(d) Soils. Soils should be suitable for the intended park and open
space uses.
(e) Unity. It is desirable for the dedicated land to be in well placed,
adequately sized areas so that it can accommodate anticipated
uses, rather than to have numerous useless smaller pieces.
(f) Utilities. The major piece(s) of dedicated land are to be
accessible to, but none crossed on or above the surface of, a
public street(s), telephone, power, fuel, water and sewer lines,
etc. If any of these facilities are placed underground, no part of
them or their supportive equipment shall protrude above
ground level.
(g) Slopes and floodplains. Steep slopes and floodplains shall not
make up more than 40% of the dedicated land. A minimum of
60% of the land must be relatively flat dry ground, not
exceeding the average percent of slope of the tract and
suitable to the intended purposes. Yards, setbacks, retention
basins and detention basins and other open stormwater
facilities and other open areas required by zoning and other
regulations are not to be included as part of the acreage to be
dedicated.
B. In the event that the Board of Supervisors accepts the gift to dedicate
10% of the gross acreage, then the following regulations shall apply in
lieu of the regulations set forth under Article XI, § 230-66A through G,
inclusive.
(1) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot size permitted shall be 12,000
square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building line
shall be 70 feet. The minimum lot width at the street line shall be
50 feet.
(3) Minimum yard setbacks. The minimum yard setback shall be:
(a) Front yard: 40 feet
(b) Side yard:
[1] Interior yards: There shall be two side yards having an
aggregate width of not less than 25 feet, each side yard
having a width of not less than 10 feet.
[2] Corner lots: There shall be two side yards, the side yard
abutting the street having a width of not less than 30 feet
and the side yard not abutting the street having a width of
not less than 10 feet.
(c) Rear yards: 40 feet.
§ 230-67 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-67
1:802
§ 230-68. Other provisions. [Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
See Article XXI of this Zoning Ordinance for general provisions that may
also relate to this District.
(4) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage of any lot shall
not exceed 20% of the total lot area.
(5) Lot averaging. A maximum of 25% of the lots in the development
may be reduced in size to no less than 10,000 square feet with
other lots being of sufficiently larger size so that the final result
shall be that the lot size shall be no less than 12,000 square feet.
(6) Front yard averaging. A maximum of 25% of the lots in the
development may have the front yards reduced in depth to no less
than 35 feet with the front yards in other lots being of sufficiently
larger depth so that the final result shall be that the average front
yard of all lots in the development shall be no less than 40 feet in
depth.
(7) Public water and sewerage. Each lot must be served by public
water supply and public sewerage.
(8) Public and private utilities. All utility lines shall be placed
underground.
(9) Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and
buffering shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the
Montgomery Township Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, Chapter
205, Article VI. [Added 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033]
§ 230-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-68
1:803

ARTICLE XII
R-6 Golf Course Residential District
[Added 4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 17-041]
§ 230-69. Community development objectives.
The District established by this article is in accordance with the land
use policies and objectives established by the Montgomery Township
Comprehensive Plan. It is intended to achieve the following:
§ 230-70. Use regulations.
A. To permit construction of a golf course residential community with
clubhouse, dining, banquet and golf course facilities.
B. To preserve and support the character of existing recreational and
residential uses in the Township.
C. To assure light, air and privacy, as far as possible, by controlling the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
D. To protect residential areas against hazards of fire, offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, glare or other objectionable influences.
E. To prevent congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density of
population and the bulk of buildings and by providing for sufficient offstreet
parking.
F. To protect residential neighborhoods, as much as possible, from heavy
or through traffic.
A. Uses by right. In any R-6 Golf Course Residential District, land, building
or premises shall be used by right for any of the following purposes and
no other:
(1) Residential dwellings and uses as an integral part of a golf course
to include:
(a) Single-family attached dwellings, subject to the area, height
and bulk regulations set forth in § 230-71A. [Amended
1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z]
(b) Single-family detached dwellings subject to the area, height
and bulk regulations set forth in § 230-71C.
(2) Public golf course with clubhouse, pro shop, dining and/or banquet
facilities. (A “public golf course” shall be defined as a golf course
which does not prohibit or prevent access by the general public
through the sale of exclusive memberships.) Regulations for the
clubhouse, banquet facilities and golf course shall be: [Amended
1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z]
(a) Seating capacity: 500 maximum.
§ 230-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-70
1:805
§ 230-71. Height, area, width and yard requirements.
(b) Building height: 35 feet maximum.
(c) Setback from property lines: 500 feet minimum.
(d) Setback from dwellings within the site: 100 feet minimum.
(e) Building coverage: 20,000 square feet maximum.
(f) A golf course shall comply with Article II, Definitions.
(3) Any use permitted in R-1 Residential Districts. If the property is
developed entirely in accordance with the R-1 zoning regulations,
no golf course is required.
(4) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the foregoing uses, including private or semi-private
recreation facilities and signs permitted under § 230-72S of this
chapter. [Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
(5) Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of
facility, in compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999
by Ord. No. 98-97Z]
B. Density. A maximum of 2.2 dwelling units per gross acre may be
constructed in an R-6 Golf Course Residential District.
C. Dwelling unit mix. The dwelling units in the R-6 Golf Course Residential
District shall consist of a minimum of 12.5% single-family detached
dwelling units. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z]
D. Overall district requirements. In the R-6 Golf Course Residential
District, the following requirements shall be met with regard to the
entire tract or tracts of land which comprise the residential golf course
community:
Requirement Value
Size (minimum acres) 150
Buffer, front* (minimum feet from curbline of
adjoining street or from boundary of tract)
75
Buffer, side* (minimum feet from boundary of
tract)
50
Buffer, rear* (minimum feet from boundary of
tract)
50
Open space (minimum percentage of total
tract)
50
*NOTE: Such buffers may include the golf course. Buffers are
included in open space.
§ 230-70 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-71
1:806
A. In R-6 Golf Course Residential Districts, the following area, height and
bulk regulations shall apply to single-family attached dwellings:
[Amended 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
Requirement
Single-
Family
Attached Multifamily
Patio
Homes
Lot size (minimum square feet
per dwelling unit)
N/A -- --
Building coverage (maximum
percentage of lot area)
N/A -- --
Maximum impervious surface
ratio
70% 70% 80%
Outdoor living space
(minimum square feet per
dwelling unit)
1,000 -- --
Height (maximum feet) 30 -- --
Setback from: -- --
Right-of-way (minimum
feet)
23 -- --
Common parking area
(minimum feet)
15 -- --
Other building (minimum
feet)
-- --
Front to front 60 -- --
Front to back 60 -- --
Back to back 60 -- --
Side to front/back 40 -- --
Side to side 25 -- --
Maximum number of units per
building
6 -- --
B. (Reserved)232
C. In the R-6 Golf Course Residential District, the following area, height
and bulk regulations shall apply to single-family detached dwellings.
[Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z]
(1) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot size permitted shall be 9,400
square feet.
232. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to requirements for patio homes, was
repealed 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z.
§ 230-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-71
1:807
(2) Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building line
shall be 90 feet. The minimum lot width at the street line shall be
50 feet.
(3) Minimum setbacks. The minimum setbacks shall be:
(a) Front yard: 23 feet from right-of-way.
(b) Side yard:
[1] Interior lots: There shall be two side yards having an
aggregate width of not less than 25 feet, each side yard
having a width of not less than 10 feet.
[2] Corner lots: There shall be two front yards and two rear
yards. The minimum lot size shall be 14,000 square feet.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
(4) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage of any lot shall
be 30% of the total lot area.
(5) The maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 50% for each lot.
(NOTE: This provision regulates single-family detached dwellings.)
[Added 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
D. Residential parking requirements. [Amended 1-24-2005 by Ord. No.
04-191Z]
(1) Single-family attached dwellings shall provide 2.5 off-street
parking spaces per dwelling unit for units with garages, and each
garage shall count as one parking space. Units without garages
shall provide two off-street parking spaces. Each driveway shall
count as one parking space unless it is either a minimum of 20 feet
wide or a minimum of 35 feet long (not including that portion which
is in the right-of-way), in which case it will be considered as two
parking spaces. The developer shall prohibit street parking by deed
restriction.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Single-family detached dwellings shall provide two off-street
parking spaces per dwelling unit, not including garages. A
driveway sufficiently wide to allow two cars to park side by side
(minimum width of 20 feet) shall be considered as two spaces.
E. Distance from fairway. Dwelling units must be located a minimum of
150 feet from the actual golf hole located on the green. Dwelling units
must also be located a minimum distance of 75 feet from any golf tee.
The minimum setback distance from the center line of the fairway
increases gradually from 75 feet at the tee to 150 feet at a point 400
feet away from the tee. The minimum setback distance then remains at
150 feet for the remainder of the fairway. These standards may be
§ 230-71 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-71
1:808
§ 230-72. General requirements.
In an R-6 Golf Course Residential District, the following requirements shall
apply:
adjusted with protective screening and landscape plantings in the
actual golf course layout when prepared by a certified golf course
architect, subject to review by the Township.
A. The development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall
plan which shall include a landscaping plan.
B. Provision shall be made for ownership and maintenance responsibility
of all property contained in the development which is not contained in
an individual lot for a dwelling.
C. All paved areas for vehicular use, all pedestrian walks and other paved
areas shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable Township regulations, including those of the Subdivision
Ordinance.233
D. Fire lanes, as required by the Fire Marshal, and areas for loading and
unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing of
refuse collection, fuel and other services shall be provided and shall be
adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blockage or interference with the use of accessways or automobile
parking facilities.
E. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and
from public streets and highways serving the development site without
undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow.
F. All utility lines servicing the development shall be placed underground.
G. All buildings shall be served by a public sanitary sewage disposal
system and public water supply, including fire hydrants.
H. Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable
direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities
shall be required where deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors
for the safety and convenience of the residents and patrons of golf
course club facilities.
I. Landscaping and screening. All front yards, side yards and rear yards
shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscaping and screening
plan as provided in Article VI of Chapter 205, the Montgomery
Township Subdivision Ordinance, with the following exceptions:
[Amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
(1) Street trees.
233. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-72
1:809
(a) There are no street tree requirements along proposed or
existing sidewalks, pedestrian ways, cart paths or trails within
the development.
(b) Street trees may be placed within the street right-of-way.
(2) Buffer plantings.
(a) Buffer plantings are not required in areas where golf holes are
provided as buffers.
(b) Buffer areas may be used for the golf course.
(c) The slope restrictions in § 205-52A(4) of Chapter 205 shall not
apply when a golf hole is used as a buffer.
(3) Screen buffer. No screen buffer is required where a golf hole is
used as a buffer.
(4) Detention basin landscaping. There is no tree planting requirement
for detention basins which are designed as an integral part of the
golf course.
(5) Individual lot landscaping. In order to preserve views of the golf
course, only one shade tree per lot will be required.
J. The developer shall preserve or incorporate natural features such as
woods, streams, floodplains and open space areas which add to the
overall cohesive development of the Golf Course Residential District
and adjacent districts.
K. The developer shall give consideration to the provisions of community
areas, laundry facilities, playgrounds, open space and other services
necessary for the comfort and convenience of the residents.
L. Clubhouse and banquet facilities shall be provided with trash
receptacles convenient to service entrances and screened or enclosed
as a part of the architectural treatment of the building. Incinerators are
not permitted in the buildings. If townhouses do not have garages,
townhouses must be provided with trash receptacles. [Amended
1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 04-191Z]
M. All mechanical equipment shall be installed and maintained so that no
noise therefrom can be heard at the property line.
N. Where elevators are provided, the developer shall submit detailed
information of the size and rate of elevators and their adequacy to serve
the proposed building. In order to provide adequate room in elevators
for ambulance stretchers and emergency equipment, at least one
elevator must have one horizontal dimension which is at least eight feet
(inside cab).
O. Snow shall be removed from all private roadways, sidewalks and
parking areas within 24 hours after snow has ceased to fall. The
§ 230-72 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-72
1:810
application for a building permit shall indicate the method of removing
snow, including storage areas for such snow located so that they will
not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement or visibility.
P. All buildings shall be designed to meet all requirements of Building
Regulations for Protection from Fire and Panic, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry. No building permits
are to be issued until evidence of submittal and approval by the above
agency is furnished to the Township. No buildings or dwelling units are
to be occupied until copies of the Department of Labor and Industry
occupancy permit are furnished to the Township, showing evidence that
buildings have been inspected and comply with the approved drawings
and all other requirements of the Department of Labor and Industry.
Q. All surface water drainage shall be collected and conveyed in
accordance with proper engineering practices and design as approved
by the Township Engineer.
R. Attached buildings shall have breaks in both the roofline and the front
and rear building walls as specified below. Breaks shall be utilized so as
to minimize earthmoving and removal or impacting, due to cut or fill, on
adjacent existing vegetation.
(1) Vertical breaks. A total break footage of four vertical feet in
minimum increments of 18 inches shall be included in every 160
horizontal building feet.
(2) Horizontal breaks. A total break footage of eight horizontal feet in
minimum increments of three feet shall be included in every 160
horizontal building feet. In addition, angles in the building wall of
22º or more shall be considered equivalent to a five-foot break.
Breaks in walls shall be varied by change in building texture,
provided that a common architectural theme is carried out by
means of consistent exterior detailing, materials and colors.
S. In the R-6 Golf Course Residential Districts, signs shall be permitted in
accordance with the Montgomery Township Sign Ordinance,234 with the
following exceptions:
(1) A sign for the golf course and its related activities, including
clubhouse, pro shop, dining and/or banquet facilities, indicating the
name of the institution and its activities or services, will be allowed,
provided that the area of any one side of such sign shall not exceed
35 square feet.
(2) There shall be permitted one freestanding sign indicating the name
and address of the development located at each permanent
vehicular entrance to the community. Each sign shall not exceed 20
square feet of area on one side.
234. Editor's Note: See Article XVIII, Signs, of this chapter.
§ 230-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-73
1:811
§ 230-73. Procedural requirements.
A. Any application for a building permit for erection or alteration of or
addition to any building or structure or portion thereof shall be
accompanied by a development plan, as required by this section.
B. Any development plan shall be deemed a land development or
subdivision plan within the meaning of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code235 and shall be subject to the requirements of said state
law and to the requirements of the Montgomery Township Subdivision
Ordinance and regulations.236
C. Any development plan where the dwelling units and lot are intended to
be sold in fee simple to individual owners shall show courses and
distances for such lots.
D. Any development plan shall include the following items without
limitation:
(1) All property lines and names of adjoining owners.
(2) Existing contours at two-foot intervals.
(3) Finished contours after grading.
(4) Existing utility poles.
(5) Existing major trees (having a diameter of eight inches or more at a
point measured three feet from ground) and outline of significant
tree groups.
(6) Outline of proposed buildings, including main floor elevation and
estimate of floor area.
(7) Location and slopes of all roads and parking lots.
(8) Outline of all existing structures and an indication of what
structures are going to be demolished.
(9) Road rights-of-way, including ultimate rights-of-way.
(10) Existing watercourses and floodplain.
(11) Existing and proposed drainage structures.
(12) Outline and description of any proposed recreational facilities,
including information on hours of operation, use or membership
restrictions, illumination, fencing and screening and all other
information required under § 230-154 of this chapter.
(13) Plans for control of erosion and sedimentation during construction.
Said plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Montgomery
235. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-73 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-73
1:812
County Soil and Water Conservation District prior to the issuance
of any building permit.
(14) Landscaping and screening plans as required by § 230-72I.
(15) Condominium ownership agreements or homeowners' association
agreements or similar documents of covenants and agreements
providing for the maintenance and ownership of all areas and
facilities proposed for common use. Such agreements shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township Solicitor as being in
accordance with applicable law.
(16) Plans showing evidence of available public sewer and water
service.
§ 230-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-73
1:813

ARTICLE XIII
C Commercial District
§ 230-74. Applicability.
In the C Commercial Districts, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 230-75. Use regulations.
§ 230-76. Height regulations.
A. A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any of the following purposes and no other: [Amended
6-5-2000 by Ord. No. 00-126Z; 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
(1) Any use permitted as indicated in Appendix Table 230-A, Table of
Permitted Uses.237
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XVIII.
(3) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any permitted use.
B. The following uses shall not be permitted in this zoning district: [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 99-107Z]
(1) Adult-oriented establishment, which includes, without limitation,
the following establishments when operated for profit, whether
direct or indirect:
(a) Adult bookstores.
(b) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(c) Adult mini motion-picture theaters.
(d) Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are
invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to
provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or
stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the
purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or where an
entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the
public, a patron or a member.
(e) An adult entertainment studio or any premises that is
physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or
represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio,
exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
237. Editor's Note: Appendix Table 230-A, Table of Permitted Uses, is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 230-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-76
1:815
§ 230-77. Area, width and yard regulations.
A. The maximum height of any building erected or used in this District
shall be 35 feet, except that the height of any nonresidential building
may be increased to a maximum of 65 feet, provided that for every foot
of height in excess of 35 feet, there shall be added to each required yard
one corresponding foot of width or depth.
B. When the side line of a street or highway, or side or rear boundary lines,
shall be adjacent to or opposite from a residential district, the setback
of a building or structure shall be no less than four feet horizontal yard
distance for each one foot in vertical height. [Added 6-5-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-126Z]
A. Minimum lot area and width.
(1) For any single-family detached dwelling use, there shall be a
minimum lot area and width as prescribed for the residential
district designated in accordance with § 230-33 above.
(2) For any commercial use permitted in this District, there shall be a
minimum lot area of 25,000 square feet.
(3) For any commercial use, there shall be a minimum lot width at the
building line of not less than 75 feet, except that where buildings
are constructed with a common party wall or two or more lots to be
held in single and separate ownership, the minimum width may be
reduced when authorized as a special exception.
B. Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall be not
less than 60 feet.
C. Side yards.
(1) On a lot for any permitted single-family dwelling use, there shall be
minimum side yards as prescribed for the residential district
designated in accordance with § 230-33. [Amended 6-22-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1]
(2) For any commercial use on a lot abutting any residential district or
existing dwelling, there shall be a side yard abutting such district
or dwelling having a width of not less than 10 feet.
(3) For any commercial use on a corner lot, there shall be a side yard
abutting the street having a width of not less than 35 feet.
(4) For any commercial use other than situations described in
Subsection C(1), (2) and (3) above, there shall be a minimum side
yard having a width of not less than 10 feet. [Added 8-22-1988 by
Ord. No. 17-046]
D. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot, the depth of which
shall be not less than 40 feet.
§ 230-76 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-77
1:816
§ 230-78. Development standards and regulations.
The erection and continued maintenance of a building and site within a C
Commercial District shall require compliance with the following standards:
E. Building coverage. The building coverage on any lot shall not exceed
20%.
F. Impervious material coverage. The maximum impervious material
coverage, including building and parking area, shall not exceed 75% of
the total lot area. [Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 17-028]
G. Green area coverage. The minimum land area devoted to green
vegetative cover shall not be less than 25% of the total lot area. [Added
6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
A. Landscaping and screening. A planting area no less than 25 feet in
width of grass, lawn, shrubbery, evergreens and trees shall be planted
in accordance with a landscaping and screening plan as provided in
Article VI of Chapter 205, the Montgomery Township Subdivision
Ordinance, No. 18, and continuously maintained in a proper and
attractive manner along all street frontages of property, exclusive of
driveway and access areas, and along all side and rear boundary lines.
[Amended 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033; 6-25-2018 by Ord. No.
18-306Z]
B. Entrance- and accessways. All entrance- and accessways shall be of
sufficient width, with widened radii where they meet the sides of roads
and highways, to conveniently and safely accommodate the flow of
traffic. The locations of entranceways shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors. The entrance- and accessways shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient
ingress and egress for traffic without undue congestion or interference
with the normal traffic flow on the abutting streets and highways.
C. If deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when required, the
developer shall be required to widen the paved road frontage abutting
the commercial site, install curbing along the same, and/or build
acceleration and deceleration lanes to provide for the safe and efficient
ingress and egress of motor vehicles. [Amended 7-28-1986 by Ord.
No. 17-037]
D. Safe and efficient ingress and egress is to be provided to and from
public streets serving the site without undue congestion to or
interference with traffic flow within the Township.
E. Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage or display of merchandise,
materials, equipment, products, parts or commodities shall be
permitted outside of the main or accessory building or structure, except
as noted below. [Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 17-028; amended
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5Z]
§ 230-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-78
1:817
§ 230-78.1. Satellite uses. [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
Uses located in separate detached building(s) having less than 7,500 square
feet but on the same site as a shopping center may be permitted upon
authorization of a conditional use subject to the following:
(1) Because of the fire hazard presented by indoor sales of live-cut
Christmas trees, outdoor sale of live-cut Christmas trees and
cuttings is permitted between November 23 and December 31,
provided that a permit is received from the Zoning Officer. Sales
shall be prohibited unless enough parking is available to satisfy the
requirements of the C Zone and safe access is available.
F. Waste disposal. [Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 17-028]
(1) No waste, rubbish and discarded materials shall be stored outside
of the building unless it is placed within a completely fenced-in
area so as to conceal the materials.
(2) No materials or wastes should be deposited upon a lot in such form
or manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces.
(3) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
closed containers.
G. Adequate off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIX here. [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No.
01-140Z]
A. No more than 10% of the total allowable building coverage shall be
devoted to satellite uses.
B. In addition to the parking provisions contained in Article XIX herein,
the following parking and circulation requirements shall pertain to
satellite uses:
(1) Access to parking intended for satellite uses shall be taken from the
parking area or internal access drive intended for the primary use;
in no case shall access to parking for satellite uses be taken directly
from an abutting street.
(2) Parking intended for satellite uses shall be separated from the
primary parking area by landscaped planting islands to allow for
proper traffic flow channelization.
(3) Should any satellite use(s) be added to a shopping center
development at any time after initial development is completed,
adjustments to the parking area shall be made to comply with the
requirements of this section and current requirements of the
§ 230-78 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-78.1
1:818
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance238 for parking and landscaping.
C. Pedestrian access. Within all parking areas, signing and pavement
markings or pavement differentiation shall be provided indicating paths
of heavy pedestrian traffic. Whenever such paths cross landscaped
islands, a break in the landscaping shall be provided. Curb cuts shall
also be provided as necessary to allow access by elderly and the
physically handicapped.
238. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-78.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-78.1
1:819

ARTICLE XIV
BP Business Office and Professional District
§ 230-79. Intent.
The zoning intent of this district is to provide for the highway impact
upon adjacent properties, the irregular configuration of property lines of
residential subdivisions, highway adjacent property and street intersections
and to provide for low-density and low-intensity commercial services and
office uses.
§ 230-80. Use regulations. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No.
01-140Z]
§ 230-81. Height regulations. [Amended 3-28-2016 by Ord. No.
15-293Z]
The maximum height of any building or structure shall be 35 feet, except a
building or structure used for the congregate care/independent senior living
use, which building or structure shall have a maximum height of 40 feet and
shall not exceed three stories.
§ 230-82. Area, width and yard regulations.
Area, width and yard requirements for residential uses shall comply with
the requirements of § 230-33 of this chapter. Commercial uses or residential
dwelling units combined with commercial uses shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. Any use permitted as indicated in Table 230-A, Table of Permitted
Uses.239
(1) Principal residential use shall be limited to one single-family
detached dwelling on an individual lot which shall comply with all
standards and regulations in Article VI, R-2 Residential District,
herein. [Added 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-222Z]
B. A dwelling unit combined with a business or professional office.
personal service shop, including tailor, barber, beauty salon, shoe
repair or dressmaking shop, but excluding retail or wholesale sales of
merchandise and when combined as an integral part of the same
structure.
C. (Reserved)240
D. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
permitted use.
239. Editor's Note: Appendix Table 230-A, Table of Permitted Uses, is included at the end of
this chapter.
240. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning a business sign accessory to the lot use,
was repealed 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 08-230Z.
§ 230-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-82
1:821
§ 230-83. Special regulations.
The following special regulations shall apply as a condition of use:
A. Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size permitted shall be 20,000
square feet.
B. Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building line shall be
60 feet. The minimum lot width at the street line shall be 60 feet.
C. Building coverage. The maximum building coverage of any lot shall not
exceed 15% of the total lot area. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
maximum building coverage of any congregate care/independent senior
living use shall not exceed 25% of the total lot area. [Amended
3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 15-293Z]
D. Minimum yard setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks shall be:
(1) Front yard: 60 feet.
(2) Side yard:
(a) Interior lots: two side yards each not less than 20 feet.
(b) Corner lots: shall have two side yards, the street side setback
not less than 40 feet and the adjoining lot side not less than 20
feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where any congregate
care/independent senior living use is located on a corner lot
the front yard setback shall be permitted to be reduced to not
less than 35 feet. [Amended 3-28-2016 by Ord. No.
15-293Z]
(3) Rear yard: 20 feet.
E. Impervious material coverage. The maximum impervious material
coverage, including building and parking area, shall not exceed 75% of
the total lot area. [Added 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
F. Green area coverage. The minimum land area devoted to green
vegetative cover shall not be less than 25% of the total lot area. [Added
6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
G. Congregate care/independent senior living density. A congregate care/
independent senior living use shall be limited to no more than 20 suites
per gross acre (and may be proportioned for partial acres), plus two
manager dwelling units. [Added 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 15-293Z]
A. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the Montgomery
Township Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI. Lots
within this District used for residential dwellings only are excluded
from these provisions but will be subject to the provisions of the R-2
§ 230-82 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-83
1:822
Residential District landscaping and screening requirements.
[Amended 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033]
B. Parking regulations. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z;
3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 15-293Z]
(1) No parking to serve lots for business office or professional use shall
be permitted within the area between the street line and any
building or in the front yard, including extension of a line from the
building to the full width of the lot, nor within 15 feet of the side or
rear boundary lines of any property lot, except for a congregate
care/independent senior living use, which shall be permitted to
have parking: (i) in the front yard, provided that such parking is set
back from the street line by no less than 15 feet; (ii) within an area
between the building and 15 feet from the street line in a side yard
on a corner lot; and/or (iii) at least 15 feet from any side or rear
boundary lines. In the event that there is not adequate space for a
business office or professional use in the rear of the lot and on
either side of the lot to provide all the parking required for the use
to occur on the property, then to the extent that there is not
adequate space in the rear and side yards, supplemental parking
may be allowed in the front yard (no less than 20 feet from the
street line), if authorized by special exception granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, after hearing.
(2) The minimum number of parking spaces shall be equal to one space
for each 200 square feet of service area or part thereof or for each
patron seat. For medical, dental or similar practitioners or in case
of principal or branch offices of insurance companies, the minimum
number of parking spaces shall be one space for each 100 square
feet of service area. But in all cases, except for a congregate care/
independent senior living use, the minimum required parking shall
not be less than one parking space for every 200 square feet of total
floor area. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the minimum number of
parking spaces for a congregate care/independent senior living use
shall be no less than 0.6 parking spaces per suite.
C. Architecture style and facade treatment. Architectural style and facade
treatment of any building shall be residential in character and shall be
designed and constructed to be consistent and complementary to
buildings in the surrounding vicinity. [Amended 5-27-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-230Z]
D. Hours of operation. Permitted uses involving patron, patient or client
visitation shall limit said visitations to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
E. Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be of low intensity from a
source no higher than 10 feet from ground level and shielded from
surrounding residential property. The exception to this requirement is
for outdoor lighting for a congregate care/independent senior living
§ 230-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-83
1:823
use, wherein such lighting shall be of a low intensity from a source no
higher than 14 feet from ground level and shielded from surrounding
residential property. [Amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 16-296Z]
F. Entrance- and accessways. All entrance- and accessways shall be of
sufficient width, with widened radii where they meet the sides of the
roads and highways, to conveniently and safely accommodate the flow
of traffic. The locations of entranceways shall be subject to the approval
of the Board of Supervisors. The entrance- and accessways shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient
ingress and egress for traffic without undue congestion or interference
with the normal traffic flow on the abutting streets and highways.
[Added 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 17-015]
G. If deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when required, the
developer shall be required to widen paved road frontage abutting the
site, install curbing along the same and/or build acceleration and
deceleration lanes to provide for the safe and efficient ingress and
egress of motor vehicles. [Added 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 17-015]
H. Safe and efficient ingress and egress is to be provided to and from
public streets serving the site without undue congestion or interference
with traffic flow within the Township. [Added 7-27-1981 by Ord. No.
17-015]
I. Outdoor storage. No outside storage or display of merchandise,
materials, equipment, products, parts or commodities shall be
permitted outside of the main or accessory building or structure.
[Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 17-028]
J. Waste disposal. [Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 17-028]
(1) No waste, rubbish and discarded materials shall be stored outside
of the building unless it is placed within a completely fenced-in
area so as to conceal the materials.
(2) No materials or wastes should be deposited upon a lot in such form
or manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces.
(3) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
closed containers.
K. Special regulations where a BP District property shall abut a residential
zoning district. In addition to the regulations of this article, the
following regulations shall also apply to all properties within the BP
District. However, where the proposed BP District use is a congregate
care/independent senior living facility, and the adjoining residential
land is utilized for a golf course or open space, any conflict between the
§ 230-83 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-83
1:824
regulations of this subsection and the regulations governing
congregate care/independent senior living use facilities, the regulations
governing congregate care/independent senior living facilities shall
control. Additionally, Subsection K(1), (2), (3), (4), (7), (8), and (10) of
this subsection shall not apply to congregate care/independent senior
living facilities that adjoin residential land utilized for a golf course or
open space. [Added 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 07-222Z; amended
5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 08-230Z; 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 15-293Z]
(1) No building shall exceed a height of two stories.
(2) No building shall exceed a single floor area of 5,000 square feet nor
exceed a total floor area of 7,500 square feet. For the purposes of
this section, basements limited to the use of storage or accessory
heating, ventilating and air-conditioning equipment shall not be
counted as a part of the floor area limitation.
(3) In the case of more than one building on a single lot, no two
buildings shall be separated by a distance less than the height of
the taller building.
(4) The minimum required front yard shall be no less than 40 feet.
(5) Buildings used for nonresidential purposes situated less than 150
feet from an abutting residential zoning district boundary shall be
limited to one story and a building height of not greater than 20
feet. This requirement shall not apply when the common boundary
between a residential zoning district and a BP District is at or
within the ultimate right-of-way of a public street.
(6) Commercial satellite dish antennas, wireless telephone antennas,
broadcast radio and/or broadcast television antennas shall be
prohibited.
(7) There shall be a permanent landscape buffer area along a
residential zoning district boundary of not less than 50 feet. No
buildings, parking or driveways, lights, signs or other aboveground
structures shall be permitted within the buffer area with the
exception of unpaved trails.
(8) A screen buffer in accordance with § 205-52C of the Montgomery
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be
provided at a minimum width of 20 feet where the BP District shall
abut a residential district.
(9) Section 230-83C, "Architectural style and facade treatment," shall
apply to all facades of a building.
(10) Areas of off-street parking may be located between the building
and the adjacent public street(s) but in no event shall be located
within the minimum required front yard.
§ 230-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-83
1:825
§ 230-84. Site plan review.
Development of a BP Business Office and Professional District for other
than residential uses shall require the submission and approval by the
Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors of a site development plan.
No permit shall be issued and no use begun unless approved by Board of
Supervisors after it has determined compliance with all requirements of this
article XIV.
(11) Notwithstanding Article XVIII, Signs, the only business signs
permitted shall be as follows:
(a) Only freestanding monument signs shall be permitted which
shall not exceed a maximum sign height of six feet above the
mean grade at the base of the sign on which the sign is placed.
(b) A maximum of one sign shall be permitted at each access drive
from an adjoining street which shall be positioned at least five
feet behind the ultimate right-of-way line.
(c) The maximum sign area of each sign shall not exceed 24
square feet for a single business or use or a maximum of 30
square feet for multiple businesses or uses, including those
signs which shall serve two or more lots or buildings.
(d) Changeable copy signs shall be prohibited.
§ 230-83 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-84
1:826
ARTICLE XV
S Shopping Center District
§ 230-85. Applicability.
In the S Shopping Center Districts, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 230-86. Use regulations. [Amended 6-5-2000 by Ord. No. 00-126Z;
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 230-87. Height regulations.
The maximum height of any building or other structure erected or used in
this District shall be 35 feet.
§ 230-88. Area, width, yards and building coverage.
§ 230-89. Development plan.
With any application for an amendment of zoning to permit shopping center
use, a development plan shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors,
such plan to include specific evidence and facts showing that it has
considered and made provision for the following essential conditions:
A. Any use permitted as indicated in Table 230-A, Table of Permitted
Uses.241
B. Signs, subject to the provisions of Article XVIII.
C. Educational and/or religious use when authorized as a special
exception. [Added 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z]
A. Minimum lot area and width. A lot area of not less than five acres and a
lot width of not less than 300 feet at the building line shall be provided.
B. Yard widths and depths shall be as shown on the development plan, but
in no case shall a building or other structure be erected, altered or used
nearer to any lot line than 50 feet.
C. Not more than 15% of the area of any lot shall be occupied by buildings.
D. Impervious material coverage. The maximum impervious material
coverage, including building and parking area, shall not exceed 75% of
the total lot area. [Added 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 17-028]
E. Green area coverage. The minimum land area devoted to green
vegetative cover shall not be less than 25% of the total lot area. [Added
6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
241. Editor's Note: Table 230-A, Table of Permitted Uses, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 230-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-89
1:827
A. That the plan is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the orderly
development of the Township and with the purpose of this chapter to
promote the health, safety, morals, convenience and general welfare.
B. That the appropriate use of property adjacent to the area included in
the development plan will be safeguarded.
C. That the development will consist of a harmonious grouping of
buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open spaces,
planned as a single unit, in such manner as to constitute a safe, efficient
and convenient retail shopping center.
D. That adequate provision is made for safe and efficient pedestrian and
vehicular circulation within the boundaries of the site.
E. Entrance- and accessways. [Amended 7-28-1986 by Ord. No.
17-037]
(1) All entrance- and accessways shall be of sufficient width, with
widened radii where they meet the sides of roads and highways, to
conveniently and safely accommodate the flow of traffic. The
locations of entranceways shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors. The entrance- and accessways shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient
ingress and egress for traffic without undue congestion or
interference with the normal traffic flow on the abutting streets
and highways.
(2) If deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors and approved
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when required,
the developer shall be required to widen the paved road frontage
abutting the site, install curbing along the same and/or build
acceleration and deceleration lanes to provide for the safe and
efficient ingress and egress of motor vehicles.
(3) Safe and efficient ingress and egress is to be provided to and from
public streets serving the site without undue congestion to or
interference with traffic flow within the Township.
F. That points of ingress and egress are directly opposite or not closer
than 200 feet from the center line of an existing street intersection, and
not more than two points of ingress and egress shall be permitted for
any one street frontage.
G. That adequate off-street parking and loading space is provided in
accordance with Article XIX herein. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 01-140Z]
H. That all buildings within the development are served by approved
central on-site sewage disposal or public sanitary sewerage and public
water supply.
§ 230-89 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-89
1:828
§ 230-90. Planning Commission referral.
The development plan shall be submitted and processed in the manner
required by law for the approval of subdivisions, and the Planning
Commission may require such additional exhibits as may be essential to the
formation of a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 230-91. Outdoor storage and waste disposal. [Added 11-18-1985
by Ord. No. 17-028]
I. Landscaping and screening. A planting area no less than 25 feet in
width of grass, lawn, shrubbery, evergreens and trees shall be planted
in accordance with a landscaping and screening plan as provided in
Article VI of Chapter 205, the Montgomery Township Subdivision
Ordinance, No. 18, and continuously maintained in a proper and
attractive manner along all street frontages of property, exclusive of
driveway and access areas, and along all side and rear boundary lines.
[Amended 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033; 6-25-2018 by Ord. No.
18-306Z]
J. That if the development is to be carried out in progressive stages, each
stage is so planned that the foregoing requirements and intent of this
chapter shall be fully complied with by the development at the
completion of any stage.
A. Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage or display of merchandise,
materials, equipment, products, parts or commodities shall be
permitted outside of the main or accessory building or structure, except
as noted below. [Amended 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5Z]
(1) Because of the fire hazard presented by indoor sales of live-cut
Christmas trees, outdoor sale of live-cut Christmas trees and
cuttings is permitted between November 23 and December 31,
provided that a permit is received from the Zoning Officer. Sales
shall be prohibited unless enough parking is available to satisfy the
requirements of the S Zone and safe access is available.
B. Waste disposal.
(1) No waste, rubbish and discarded materials shall be stored outside
of the building unless it is placed within a completely fenced-in
area so as to conceal the materials.
(2) No materials or wastes should be deposited upon a lot in such form
or manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces.
(3) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
closed containers.
§ 230-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-91.1
1:829
§ 230-91.1. Satellite uses. [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
Uses located in separate detached building(s) having less than 7,500 square
feet but on the same site as a shopping center may be permitted upon
authorization of a conditional use subject to the following:
A. No more than 10% of the total allowable building coverage shall be
devoted to satellite uses.
B. In addition to the parking provisions contained in Article XIX herein,
the following parking and circulation requirements shall pertain to
satellite uses:
(1) Access to parking intended for satellite uses shall be taken from the
parking area or internal access drive intended for the primary use;
in no case shall access to parking for satellite uses be taken directly
from an abutting street.
(2) Parking intended for satellite uses shall be separated from the
primary parking area by landscaped planting islands to allow for
proper traffic flow channelization.
(3) Should any satellite use(s) be added to a shopping center
development at any time after initial development is completed,
adjustments to the parking area shall be made to comply with the
requirements of this section and current requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance242 for parking and landscaping.
C. Pedestrian access. Within all parking areas, signing and pavement
markings or pavement differentiation shall be provided indicating paths
of heavy pedestrian traffic. Whenever such paths cross-landscaped
islands, a break in the landscaping shall be provided. Curb cuts shall
also be provided as necessary to allow access by elderly and the
physically handicapped.
242. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-91.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-91.1
1:830
ARTICLE XVI
RS Regional Shopping Center District
§ 230-92. Applicability.
In the RS Regional Shopping Center District, the following regulations shall
apply.
§ 230-93. Intent.
In expansion of the purposes contained in Article I, § 230-2, of this chapter,
it is hereby declared to be the intent of this article that the RS Regional
Shopping Center District shall be designed to encourage the establishment
of a modern well-planned regional shopping center. The regional shopping
center regulations require buildings comprising an integrated regional
shopping center separated from roads and other adjoining properties by
landscaped buffer areas. A comprehensive set of design requirements is
provided to assure that a regional shopping center will be in harmony with
the Comprehensive Plan of the Township of Montgomery and will promote
the health, safety, morals and welfare of the Township.
§ 230-94. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063;
1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 98-97Z; 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
A building or group of buildings may be erected, altered or used and a
lot may be used or occupied as a regional shopping center for any of the
following purposes and no other:
§ 230-95. Development standards.
The erection and continued maintenance of the buildings and site
improvements within the RS Regional Shopping Center District shall
comply with the following standards:
A. Any use permitted as indicated in Appendix Table 230-A, Table of
Permitted Uses.243
B. Any use of the same general character as any of the permitted uses
when granted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. A regional shopping center shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with an overall plan, planned as a single unit,
in a manner so as to constitute a safe, efficient, attractive and
convenient regional shopping center.
B. Landscaping and screening. A planting area no less than 25 feet in
width of grass, lawn, shrubbery, evergreens and trees shall be planted
in accordance with a landscaping and screening plan as provided in
Article VI of Chapter 205, the Montgomery Township Subdivision
243. Editor's Note: Appendix Table 230-A, Table of Permitted Uses, is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 230-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-95
1:831
Ordinance, No. 18, and continuously maintained in a proper and
attractive manner along all street frontages of property, exclusive of
driveway and access areas, and along all side and rear boundary lines.
[Amended 8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-033; 6-25-2018 by Ord. No.
18-306Z]
C. Lot area and building coverage. The minimum size for a Regional
Shopping Center District shall be 50 acres. No more than 18% of the
area of any lot shall be occupied by buildings or structures. [Amended
6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029; 6-5-2000 by Ord. No. 00-126Z;
6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-259Z]
D. Yard distances. No building or other structure, including canopies or
other accessory portions of buildings, shall be placed closer than 75
feet to the side line of any street or highway or from any side or rear
boundary lines. A side line of any street or highway shall be the ultimate
right-of-way line as delineated in any applicable Comprehensive Plan or
Official Map or as delineated by the Township Planning Commission.
(1) Building or structures in excess of 37.5 feet in height to the highest
elevation of the building or structure shall be set back not less than
two feet in horizontal yard distance for each one vertical foot in
height. In no event shall the height exceed 75 feet. [Added
6-5-2000 by Ord. No. 00-126Z]
(2) When the side line of a street or highway, or side or rear boundary
lines, shall be adjacent to or opposite from a residential district, the
setback of a building or structure shall be no less than four feet
horizontal yard distance for each one foot in vertical height. In no
event shall the height exceed 75 feet. [Added 6-5-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-125Z]
E. Height of buildings. The maximum height of any building or structure
shall be 75 feet.
F. Parking access and loading and unloading requirements. Adequate offstreet
parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with
XIX herein. A "parking space" shall be defined as an area of at least nine
by 18 feet in size, and each parking space in the regional center shall be
marked with all-weather paint to the size required by this chapter.
[Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z; 6-25-2012 by Ord. No.
12-259Z]
G. Entrance- and accessways. All entrance- and accessways shall be of
sufficient width, with widened radii where they meet the sides of roads
and highways, to conveniently and safely accommodate the flow of
traffic. The locations of entranceways shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors. The entrance- and accessways shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient
ingress and egress for traffic without undue congestion or interference
with the normal traffic flow on the abutting streets and highways.
§ 230-95 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-95
1:832
H. If deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when required, the
developer shall be required to widen the paved road frontage abutting
the site, install curbing along the same and/or build acceleration and
deceleration lanes to provide for the safe and efficient ingress and
egress of motor vehicles. Safe and efficient ingress and egress is to be
provided to and from public streets serving the site without undue
congestion to or interference with traffic flow within the Township.
[Amended 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
I. A regional shopping center shall be provided and served with public
water and public sewer facilities, and all utility services in the center
shall be underground.
J. Mechanical and site utility equipment projecting from the tops of
buildings shall be screened from public view.
K. Drainage. A regional shopping center shall design, build and maintain
an adequate surface water drainage system, including underground
pipes, inlets, catch basins and other facilities, to handle in adequate
fashion the flow of surface waters in a manner so that an undue burden
of surface water drainage is not imposed upon abutting streets and
highways and abutting properties.
L. Signs. The requirements for signs in the RS Regional Shopping Center
District are found in § 230-128 of this chapter. [Amended 4-27-2009
by Ord. No. 09-236Z]
M. Lighting. All outside lighting on the premises, including sign lighting,
shall be arranged, designed and shielded or directed so as to protect
the abutting streets and highways and adjoining property from the
glare of lights, and lighting shall be so shielded that the source of the
light shall not be visible off of the premises. No flashing or intermittent
or moving lights, including lights on signs, shall be permitted.
N. Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage or display of merchandise,
materials, equipment, products, parts or commodities shall be
permitted outside of the main or accessory building or structure, except
as noted below. [Amended 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 17-028;
11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5Z]
(1) Because of the fire hazard presented by indoor sales of live-cut
Christmas trees, outdoor sale of live-cut Christmas trees and
cuttings is permitted between November 23 and December 31,
provided that a permit is received from the Zoning Officer. Sales
shall be prohibited unless enough parking is available to satisfy the
requirements of the RS Zone and safe access is available.
O. There shall be no storage of trash, rubbish and other refuse outside of
buildings unless said areas are screened with appropriate fencing or
other form of screening, and said areas shall be maintained in a manner
so as not to cause any smoke, odor or litter.
§ 230-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-95
1:833
§ 230-96. Stage development.
If the development of a regional shopping center is to be carried out in
progressive stages, each stage shall be so planned that the requirements
of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the
Township of Montgomery shall be fully complied with at the completion of
any stage. The proposed stage development shall be subject to the approval
of the Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 230-97. Submission and processing of development plan.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit or permit to do any work
and development on a regional shopping center site, a development plan
shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors. The plan shall include
the following information and shall be prepared in accordance with the
following requirements. If the Board of Supervisors deems it appropriate,
any of the following requirements need not be carried out until after a
building permit has been issued and construction has been begun or
completed. However, any such requirements shall be carried out prior to
occupancy and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
P. Keeping premises clean. The entire regional shopping center premises
shall be continuously maintained in a clean, orderly and attractive
manner, free of refuse and trash, and a sufficient number of refuse and
trash containers for the use of the public shall be placed on the
premises and emptied at regular intervals.
Q. Impervious material coverage. The maximum impervious material
coverage, including building and parking area, shall not exceed 65% of
the total lot area. [Added 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
R. Green area coverage. The minimum land area devoted to green
vegetative cover shall not be less than 35% of the total lot area. [Added
6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
A. There shall be submitted a legal description of the area to be devoted to
the regional shopping center site, and there shall be submitted a survey
of the site giving the metes and bounds description, drawn to scale and
prepared by a registered professional engineer or surveyor licensed in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. There shall be submitted a plot plan or site plan showing the location
and dimensions of all present or proposed buildings, sidewalks and
other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use, drives, accessways,
parking areas, including individual parking spaces, loading and
unloading areas and other constructional features on the lot.
C. The site or lot plan shall show all buildings, streets, highways,
structures and streams within an area of 300 feet beyond any boundary
line or street or highway line, and the names of all property owners
abutting any boundary or street lines.
§ 230-95 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-97
1:834
§ 230-98. Other submissions; recommendations of county.
The development plan and all other plans submitted to the Board of
Supervisors under § 230-97 above shall be submitted to and processed by
the Township Planning Commission, and the Planning Commission may
require such additional exhibits as may be essential to the formation of
a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
shall submit the development plan to the County Planning Commission for
its recommendations.
§ 230-99. Compliance required.
No development plan and accompanying plans and surveys shall be
approved by the Board of Supervisors until there is compliance with all of
the requirements of this chapter and compliance with any other applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Township of Montgomery.
§ 230-100. Expiration of approval.
When a development plan, including the accompanying plans and surveys,
is approved by the Board of Supervisors, said approval shall constitute
an agreement by the applicant, developer or their heirs, successors or
assigns that such development plan, including the erection of all buildings,
structures and improvements, shall be completed and maintained as shown
on the plan or plans submitted to the Township of Montgomery. If within
three years of date of the approval of a development plan by the Board
of Supervisors substantial construction of the proposed regional shopping
center development is not undertaken by the applicant or developer in
accordance with the approved plans, a new approval of the plan and the
D. The scale of survey and of the plot or site plan submitted shall be not
less than one inch to 100 feet, with contours shown at not less than fivefoot
vertical intervals.
E. There shall be presented as part of the development plan conceptual
architectural plans for any proposed buildings including elevations.
F. There shall be submitted with the development plan a description of the
types of uses and stores proposed in the shopping center.
G. There shall be submitted detailed plans showing compliance with all of
the requirements of § 230-95 hereof, including but not limited to a
detailed planting plan showing the types of trees and shrubbery to be
planted and maintained, detailed sign plans showing all signs attached
to the buildings and all freestanding signs at the entrances, outdoor
lighting size and type, detailed drainage plans and plans for the
underground utilities, public water supply and public sewer connection
and extension. These plans and studies may be on separate plans or any
of these features can be included in the basic plot or site plan. These
plans and studies shall include any necessary engineering and
architectural plans and certifications.
§ 230-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-100
1:835
issuance of a new building permit or permits shall be required and obtained
prior to the undertaking of any construction.
§ 230-100.1. Satellite uses. [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
Uses located in separate detached building(s) having less than 7,500 square
feet but on the same site as a shopping center may be permitted upon
authorization of a conditional use subject to the following:
A. No more than 10% of the total allowable building coverage shall be
devoted to satellite uses.
B. In addition to the parking provisions contained in Article XIX herein,
the following parking and circulation requirements shall pertain to
satellite uses:
(1) Access to parking intended for satellite uses shall be taken from the
parking area or internal access drive intended for the primary use;
in no case shall access to parking for satellite uses be taken directly
from an abutting street.
(2) Parking intended for satellite uses shall be separated from the
primary parking area by landscaped planting islands to allow for
proper traffic flow channelization.
(3) Should any satellite use(s) be added to a shopping center
development at any time after initial development is completed
adjustments to the parking area shall be made to comply with the
requirements of this section and current requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance244 for parking and landscaping.
C. Pedestrian access. Within all parking areas, signing and pavement
markings or pavement differentiation shall be provided indicating paths
of heavy pedestrian traffic. Whenever such paths cross-landscaped
islands, a break in the landscaping shall be provided. Curb cuts shall
also be provided as necessary to allow access by elderly and the
physically handicapped.
244. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-100 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-100.1
1:836
ARTICLE XVII
LI Limited Industrial District
§ 230-101. Intent.
§ 230-102. Applicability.
In an LI Limited Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 230-103. Use regulations.
A. In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent contained in Article
I, § 230-2, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this
article, with respect to limited industrial zones, to establish regulations
concerning permitted uses and reasonable standards for the height and
size of buildings, the areas and dimensions of yards and open spaces
and the provision of facilities and operation of industries to minimize
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, and fire
and safety hazards in industrial districts.
B. In addition to allowing industrial uses, this district is intended to allow
nonindustrial uses that are compatible with industrial uses and do not
change the character of industrial areas. [Amended 5-17-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-15Z]
A. The specific uses permitted in this district shall be the erection,
construction, alteration or use of buildings, premises or land for the
following uses and no other:
(1) Any limited industrial use, including and restricted to scientific
research laboratory, engineering center, administration (office
building), manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, processing,
warehousing and storage. No limited industrial use prohibited in
Subsection B below shall be permitted. Any permitted limited
industrial use must comply with the provisions of §§ 230-104
through 230-113, inclusive.
(2) Agriculture II uses. Any building or area used for the keeping or
raising of livestock or poultry shall be situated not less than 100
feet from any property line or the ultimate right-of-way of any
street. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-226Z]
(3) Dwelling quarters for watchman and caretaker employed on the
premises, permitted in connection with any industrial
establishments.
(4) Trade or professional school. [Added 4-26-1993 by Ord. No.
93-13Z; amended 5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15Z]
(5) Such wireless telecommunications facilities as permitted by right,
special exception or conditional use, depending on the type of
§ 230-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-103
1:837
facility, in compliance with Article XXX herein. [Added 1-11-1999
by Ord. No. 98-97Z]
B. The following uses shall not be permitted:
Abattoirs
Acetylene gas manufacture
Acid manufacture
Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture
Arsenal
Asphalt manufacture or refining
Automobile junk or dismantling yards, including wrecking and storage
yards
Blast or reverberatory or foundry
Breweries
Celluloid manufacture
Cement, including cement mixing plant, concrete mixing plant, lime,
gypsum, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture
Coke ovens
Cork manufacture
Creosote treatment or manufacture
Dead animal and offal reduction
Disinfectants manufacture
Distillation of bones, coal, grain or wood
Drop hammer
Dyestuff manufacture
Exterminator and insect poison manufacture
Emery cloth and sand paper manufacture
Fat rendering; manufacturing of vegetable, animal or mineral fats and
oils
Fertilizer manufacture
Fireworks or explosive manufacture or storage
Fish smoking and curing
Flour mill
Foundry; forge plant
Glue, size or gelatine manufacture
Hog farm
Incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughterhouse refuse,
rancid fats, garbage, dead animals or offal
§ 230-103 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-103
1:838
Lime kiln
Match manufacture
Meat packing
Mining
Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture
Oiled or rubbed goods manufacture
Ore reduction
Paint; shellac; varnish; lacquer
Plating works
Potash works
Power forge (riveting, hammering, punching, chipping, drawing,
rolling or tumbling of iron, steel, brass or copper, except as a
necessary incident to manufacture of which those processes form a
minor part and which are carried on without objectionable noise
outside the plant and permitted as a special exception)
Pyroxylin manufacture
Quarrying or removal of soil or mineral deposits in any form,
including blasting operations
Rubber, caoutchouc or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment, tire
recapping and vulcanizing
Sauerkraut manufacture
Shoeblacking manufacture
Smelters
Soap and detergent manufacture
Soda and compound manufacture
Steel furnace; blooming or rolling mill
Stockyards
Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining
Tanning, curing or storage of leather, rawhides or skins
Tar distillation or manufacture
Vinegar manufacture
Wool pulling or scouring
Any other use which is or may be noxious or offensive by reason of
odor, dust, fumes, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination or noise or
harmful radiation or which is or may be dangerous to the public
health, welfare or safety or which constitutes or may constitute a
public hazard, whether by fire, explosion or otherwise
C. The following uses are permitted when authorized as a conditional use:
[Added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No. 17-063]
§ 230-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-103
1:839
(1) Family day-care home, group day-care home and day-care center,
subject to the provisions of Article XXI, § 230-156.1, herein.
(2) Indoor athletic facilities, including but not limited to courts, fitness
centers, batting cages, golf driving ranges, bowling alleys, tracks,
skating rinks, swimming pools and health clubs. Entertainment
facilities, such as movie theaters, are not permitted. Indoor athletic
facilities shall be located in a building that has at least 20,000
square feet of gross floor area, although the indoor athletic facility
does not need to use the whole building. Indoor athletic facilities
may include accessory retail sales and accessory video arcades/
game rooms, provided that retail sales areas and video arcades/
game rooms do not comprise more than 15% of the gross floor area
of the athletic facility or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less.
[Added 5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15Z]
(3) Outdoor recreation and athletic facilities, including courts, playing
fields, swimming pools, golf courses, batting cages, running tracks
and similar uses, provided that: [Added 5-17-1993 by Ord. No.
93-15Z]
(a) The use is located on a lot 10 acres or larger in size.
(b) Accessory retail building use is limited to a maximum of 0.5%
( 1/2 of 1%) of the total tract acreage devoted to the outdoor
recreation facility. Additional accessory retail space may be
permitted as a conditional use, so long as the total accessory
retail space permitted does not exceed 1% of the total tract
acreage devoted to the outdoor recreational facility. In
addition, the accessory retail use shall be conducted by the
same ownership as the outdoor recreation facility and shall be
located within a building.
(c) If the outdoor recreational use, or any portion thereof, changes
to a nonrecreational use, the accessory retail use permitted in
Subsection C(3)(b) above must be discontinued or reduced
proportionately.
(d) The lot upon which the outdoor recreational use is located
cannot be further subdivided unless the accessory retail use is
discontinued or reduced in proportion to the size of the
remaining lot devoted to the outdoor recreational use in
accordance with Subsection C(3)(b) above. Any conditional use
approved by the Board of Supervisors under Subsection
C(3)(b) above shall be discontinued if the lot upon which the
conditional use is located is further subdivided.
(e) Street or driveway access to the tract of land is limited to one
access point per street frontage, with multiple use sharing this
access.
§ 230-103 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-103
1:840
§ 230-104. Smoke.
§ 230-105. Dust and gases.
(f) The hours of operation shall follow limitations set by the Board
of Supervisors, which shall consider the proposed use and its
impact on abutting residences when setting these hours.
(g) The proposed use complies with all of the parking, lighting,
signing, landscaping, and fencing requirements of this chapter
and Chapter 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
D. Limited retail sales are permitted as accessory uses within
manufacturing, fabricating, processing and wholesale warehouse
buildings, provided that they meet the following requirements: [Added
5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15Z]
(1) Retail sales are limited to those items manufactured, fabricated or
processed on site or distributed on a wholesale basis from the site.
(2) Retail sales will only be permitted in a physically separate and
segregated sales area in the same building as the primary use and
shall have a maximum allowable area of either 10% of the gross
floor area or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(3) Retail sales customers shall shop only in the retail sales area.
(4) There must be a separate entrance for retail sales from the
building's primary entrance.
(5) Retail sales shall only be conducted by the same ownership and
under the same lease as the primary use.
(6) Retail sales areas must provide parking in accordance with the
retail store or shop standards in Article XIX of this chapter. All
required parking must be reserved exclusively for use of retail
customers and employees and located adjacent to the entrance for
the retail sales area.
A. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source of a visible
gray greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published
by the United States Bureau of Mines.
B. Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any 30 minutes.
C. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to
visible smoke of a different color but with an equivalent apparent
opacity.
A. No emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors and gases shall be made
which can cause any damage to health, animals or vegetation or other
§ 230-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-105
1:841
§ 230-106. Noise.
At no point on any lot boundary line shall the sound pressure level of any
operation exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown
below for the districts indicated.
Maximum Permitted Sound
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Along Agricultural
or Residential District
Boundaries
(decibels)
At Any Other Point
on the Lot
Boundaries
(decibels)
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,200 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
Above to 4,800 32 39
§ 230-107. Odors.
There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in
such quantities as to be offensive at any lot boundary line. Any process
which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided
with a secondary safeguard system so that control will be maintained if
the primary safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as
a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors Table III (Odor
Thresholds) in Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual, copyright
1951, by Manufacturing Chemists' Assoc., Inc., Washington, D.C.
§ 230-108. Glare and heat.
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within
an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be
completely imperceptible from any point along the lot lines.
forms of property or which can cause any noticeable soiling at any
point.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or otherwise
shall exceed 0.3 grain per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point.
C. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500º F. and 50% excess air.
§ 230-105 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-109
1:842
§ 230-109. Vibration.
No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling shall be
perceptible without instruments at any point on the lot boundary lines.
§ 230-110. Radioactivity and electrical disturbance.
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point.
There shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation
at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
§ 230-111. Uses to be conducted indoors.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all permitted uses shall be
conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building or in a court
enclosed on all sides by buildings.
§ 230-112. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
A. No outside storage of materials, equipment, finished products, parts,
commodities, waste, rubbish or discarded material shall be permitted in
the area of the front yard nor in front of the building nor within 25 feet
of the side and rear boundary lines in said side and rear yard areas.
B. Any outside storage of materials, equipment, finished products, parts or
commodities within the permitted areas of any side and rear yards shall
be completely enclosed by fencing of a type and design approved by the
Board of Supervisors which is adequate to conceal the stored items
from adjacent properties and from the street or highway.
C. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel
directly connected with energy devices, heating devices or appliances
located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from
this provision.
D. No waste, rubbish and discarded materials shall be stored outside of
the building unless it is placed within a completely fenced-in area so as
to conceal the materials.
E. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
F. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed
containers.
§ 230-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-113
1:843
§ 230-113. Electric, diesel, gas or other power.
Every use requiring power shall be so operated that the service lines,
substation, etc., shall conform to the highest safety requirements known,
shall be designed, constructed and installed as an integral part of the
architectural features of the plant and, if visible from abutting residential
properties, shall be concealed by coniferous planting.
§ 230-114. Industrial waste or sewage.
No limited industrial use shall discharge any treated or untreated sewage
or industrial waste into any reservoir or lake or discharge any untreated
sewage or industrial waste into any stream. All methods of sewage and
industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by the Township
Board of Supervisors and the Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer
Authority.
§ 230-115. Height regulations.
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged
in this District measured at the line of all required yards shall be 30 feet, but
any portion of a building erected above such height limit shall be erected
within a recession plane beginning at the height limit as fixed herein and
receding at the rate of one foot of recession for each one foot of additional
height, provided that a height of 40 feet or more shall require a special
exception, with no structure to be erected over 65 feet.
§ 230-116. Area, width and yard regulations.
A. Site area requirements.
(1) Minimum site area. An LI Limited Industrial District development
site shall contain at least 10 acres.
(2) Building coverage. Maximum building coverage shall not exceed
40% of the total site area.
(3) Impervious material coverage. Maximum impervious material
coverage shall not exceed 30% of the total site area.
B. Building lot requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area. The minimum building lot size permitted in an LI
Limited Industrial District shall be one acre, except that no more
than 50% of the total site area may be used for building lots of less
than two acres.
(2) Lot width and yard requirements. Building lots shall meet the
following requirements:
§ 230-113 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-116
1:844
§ 230-117. On-site parking and loading.
For any limited industrial use, there shall be at least one off-street parking
space for every three employees. No parking or loading shall be permitted
within the front yard area nor in front of the building nor within 10 feet of
the side and rear boundary lines of any property or lot. The adequacy of offstreet
parking facilities shall be subject to the continuing jurisdiction of the
Board of Supervisors, which shall have authority to require such additional
parking, ingress and egress facilities as it deems necessary.
§ 230-118. Application and approval procedure.
Value for Lots of
Minimum Area
Requirement
2
or More
Acres
(feet)
1.5 to 2
Acres
(feet)
1 to 1.5
Acres
(feet)
Lot width at building line 150 120 100
Lot width at street line 50 50 50
Front yard 100 80 60
Side yard
Aggregate 100 80 60
1 side minimum 25 20 15
Any yard abutting street
or residential district
(minimum setback)-
100 100 100
Rear yard 50 40 30
(3) Building coverage. Maximum building coverage shall not exceed
40% of the total lot area.
(4) Impervious material coverage. Maximum impervious material
coverage, including building coverage, shall not exceed 65% of the
total lot area.
(5) Green area coverage. The minimum land area devoted to green
vegetative cover shall not be less than 35% of the total lot area.
[Added 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-029]
A. Plans for a limited industrial use shall be submitted to the Board of
Supervisors prior to the issuance of any zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy as provided in Article XXII and such plans shall include,
among other things, the following:
(1) An accurate plot plan, drawn to scale, of the lot, showing the
location of all present and proposed buildings, driveways, parking
§ 230-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-118
1:845
§ 230-119. Landscaping and screening. [Amended 8-3-1987 by Ord.
No. 17-033]
All landscaping, screening and buffering shall be installed in accordance
with the provisions of the Montgomery Township Subdivision Ordinance,
No. 18, Chapter 205, Article VI.
§ 230-120. Entrance- and accessways. [Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No.
17-037]
areas, abutting streets, alleys, highways, grass areas and areas of
plantings, disposal fields and other constructional features on the
lot and streams and other topographical features of the lot.
(2) Architectural plans for any proposed buildings.
(3) A description of the industrial operations proposed in sufficient
detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, vibrations, radiation, electrical interference,
glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards.
(4) Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and disposal
of sewage and industrial waste.
(5) Engineering and architectural plans for the handling of any excess
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire
hazards or safety hazards.
(6) Designation of the fuel proposed to be used and any necessary
architectural and engineering plans for controlling smoke.
(7) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift.
(8) Any other data or evidence that the Board of Supervisors may
require.
B. Upon receipt of plans for any limited industrial use and
recommendations thereon by the Board of Supervisors, the Board shall
have the power of approval or disapproval of these plans. The Secretary
of the Board of Supervisors shall notify, in writing, the Zoning Officer of
its final decision and any special conditions agreed upon regarding any
limited industrial use.
A. All entrance- and accessways shall be of sufficient width, with widened
radii where they meet the sides of roads and highways, to conveniently
and safely accommodate the flow of traffic. The locations of
entranceways shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors. The entrance- and accessways shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient ingress and
egress for traffic without undue congestion or interference with the
normal traffic flow on the abutting streets and highways.
§ 230-118 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-120
1:846
B. If deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when required, the
developer shall be required to widen the paved road frontage abutting
the site, install curbing along the same and/or build acceleration and
deceleration lanes to provide for the safe and efficient ingress and
egress of motor vehicles.
C. Safe and efficient ingress and egress is to be provided to and from
public streets serving the site without undue congestion or interference
with traffic flow within the Township.
§ 230-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-120
1:847

ARTICLE XVIII
Signs
[Amended 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 17-045; 11-7-1988 by Ord. No.
17-050; 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; 11-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-39]
§ 230-121. Purpose.
It is recognized that signs perform an important function in identifying
residences and business. It is hereby found and declared, however, that
control of signs is necessary to promote the health, safety and general
welfare by:
§ 230-122. Scope; applicability.
In all zoning districts within the Township of Montgomery, after the effective
date of this chapter, signs may be erected, altered, maintained, used or
moved, but only when in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 230-123. Definitions.
A. Lessening hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
B. Preserving property values.
C. Preventing unsightly and detrimental development which has a
blighting influence upon residential, business and industrial areas.
D. Preventing signs from reaching such excessive size that they obscure
one another to the detriment of all concerned.
E. Securing certain fundamentals of design for the Township.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AWNING — A roof-like cover, as of canvas, that projects from the wall
of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the
elements.
BACKGROUND AREA OF A SIGN — The entire background area of a
sign upon which copy could be placed. In computing the area of a sign
background, only that face or faces which can be seen from any one
direction at one time shall be counted.
BEACON LIGHT — Any light with one or more beams, capable of being
directed in any direction or directions or capable of being revolved
automatically.
BUILDING FACADES — A portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the
entire width of the building elevation. A parapet wall shall not extend
more than six feet above the height of the building roofline at the
building wall corresponding with that side.
§ 230-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-123
1:849
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS — On-premises incidental signs designed to
guide or direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic. Such signs shall be no
greater than six square feet in area.
ILLUMINATED SIGNS — A sign in which a source of light is used
in order to make the message readable. This definition shall include
internally and externally lighted signs.
MARQUEE — A permanent roof or building structure attached to and
supported by the roof or building and may project over public property.
ROOFLINE — The juncture of the roof and the perimeter wall of the
structure.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, on a
structure or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word,
insignia, flag or representation used as or which is in the nature of
an advertisement, announcement, visual communication or direction or
which is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention
of the public. This is not to include striping or architectural detail,
provided that the same do not include lettering, wording, designs or
symbols.
DIRECT SIGN ILLUMINATION — A sign designed to give forth
artificial light directly or through transparent or translucent
material from a source of light within such sign, including but not
limited to neon and exposed lamp signs.
(1)
FESTOON LIGHTING — A directly illuminated sign comprised of
either:
A group of incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead
or on a building or structures; or
(a)
Light bulbs not shaded or hooded or otherwise screened to
prevent direct rays of light from shining on adjacent properties
or rights-of-way.
(b)
(2)
FLASHING SIGN — An illuminated sign on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and/or color
at all times when in use.
(3)
INDIRECT SIGN ILLUMINATION — A sign illuminated with a light
so shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on
the lot where said illumination occurs. If such shielding device is
defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated
sign.
(4)
NONILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign which is not illuminated, either
directly or indirectly.
(5)
§ 230-123 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-123
1:850
SIGN AREA —
SIGN HEIGHT — The distance from the highest portion of the sign to
the mean grade at the base of the sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure which supports or is capable of
supporting any sign as defined in this article. A sign structure may or
may not be an integral part of the building.
TYPES OF SIGNS —
The area of all lettering, wording and accompanying designs and
symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed
(whether such background is open or enclosed), but excluding any
supporting framework and bracing which are solely incidental to
the display itself, provided that the same do not contain any such
lettering, wording, designs or symbols.
(1)
Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs or symbols
attached to a building, awning, wall or window, the area shall be
that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters,
designs and symbols.
(2)
In the case of a freestanding sign, the area of each section shall be
calculated separately.
(3)
Where a sign consists of a double face, only one side shall be
considered for the purpose of calculating such area, provided that
both faces are identical, but if the interior angle formed by two
faces of a double-faced sign is greater than 45º, then both sides of
the sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
(4)
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action of motion, flashing, color
changes requiring electrical energy or electronic-manufactured
sources of supply, but not including wind-actuated elements such
as flags, banners or specialty items.
(1)
BANNER SIGN — Any sign intended to be hung either with or
without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or
ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. A
single United States national flag shall not be considered a banner
for the purpose of this article unless its use or purpose is that of
advertising the location or business at which it is flown.
(2)
BENCH SIGN — A sign located on any part of the surface of a
bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
(3)
BILLBOARD SIGN — A non-point-of-sale sign which advertises a
business, organization, event, person, place or thing, unless such a
sign is more specifically defined herein.
(4)
BUILDING ENTRANCE SIGN — A wall sign or fascia sign located
at the common public entrance to a building. [Added 4-27-2009
by Ord. No. 09-236Z245]
(5)
§ 230-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-123
1:851
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign which advertises or
otherwise directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
industry or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted, other
than incidentally, on the premises upon which the sign is located or
to which it is affixed.
(6)
CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN — A sign that is designed so that
characters, letters, panels or illustrations can be changed or
rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 11-251Z]
(7)
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any sign giving the name or names
of principal contractors, architects and lending institutions
responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed,
together with other information included thereon.
(8)
(9) DIRECTIONAL SIGN — See definition of "directional signs" above.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign on which the names and locations of
occupants or the use of a building is given. This shall include office
buildings and church directories.
(10)
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign resting on or
supported by means of poles or standards, either on the ground or
on the roof of a building.
(11)
GROUND SIGN — A freestanding sign which rests at or near the
ground or curb level.
(12)
(13) ILLUMINATED SIGN — See definition of "illuminated signs" above.
INFLATABLE SPECIALTY SIGN — Any sign that is inflated,
otherwise known as a "balloon sign."
(14)
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to or constructed in a
marquee.
(15)
MULTIPLE COPY SIGN — A sign which advertises other than the
name of the business and the principal product or service.
(16)
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which does not conform to
the regulations of this article.
(17)
NONSTATIONARY SIGN — A sign which, by means of some
mechanical device, changes its position constantly or at regular
intervals by rotating around an axis or shifting in horizontal or
vertical alignment.
(18)
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which advertises or otherwise
directs attention to an activity not on the same lot.
(19)
245. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of Subsections (5)
through (36) of this definition as Subsections (6) through (37).
§ 230-123 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-123
1:852
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which advertises or otherwise
directs attention to an activity on the same lot.
(20)
PARALLEL SIGN — A sign mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical building surface. A parallel sign shall not extend beyond
the edge of any wall, parapet or other surface to which it is
mounted and shall not project more than 10 inches from its surface.
(21)
POINT-OF-SALE SIGN — Any sign which carries only the name
of the firm, major enterprises or products offered for sale on the
premises, or a combination of these things.
(22)
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign mounted to a wall or other vertical
building surface other than a parallel sign. Projecting signs shall
not project more than four feet from the surface to which they are
attached and shall not project above the wall or surface to which
they are mounted or in any way interfere with normal pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
(23)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any sign which is used to offer for sale,
lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed.
(24)
(25)REVOLVING SIGN — A sign which revolves 360º.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet
wall of a building and which is wholly or partly supported by said
building.
(26)
SNIPE SIGN — Sign of any material whatsoever that is attached
in any way to a utility pole, tree or any similar object located or
situated on public or private property.
(27)
STREET BANNER SIGN — Any banner sign which is stretched
across and hung over a public right-of-way.
(28)
TEMPORARY SIGN — An on-premises sign which is intended to
advertise community or civic projects or other special events on a
temporary basis. Temporary signs on any lot shall not be permitted
for more than seven consecutive days and shall be limited to 14
times per calendar year. [Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
07-220Z]
(29)
TIME-AND-TEMPERATURE SIGN — A display containing
illuminated numerals flashing alternately to show the temperature
and time.
(30)
TRAILER SIGN — Any sign which is erected upon a structure
having wheels, rollers or similar devices facilitating movement and
which is capable of being moved from one location to another.
(31)
UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN — A lighted or unlighted display attached
to the underside of a marquee protruding over a public or private
sidewalk or right-of-way.
(32)
§ 230-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-123
1:853
§ 230-124. Design standards.
UNIFORM BUILDING CODE (BOCA BUILDING CODE) — The current
edition of the Uniform Building Code (currently the BOCA Code), as
adopted by Montgomery Township, utilized as related to those
guidelines with respect to construction standards, approved materials
and projection standards, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
VEHICULAR SIGNS — Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in
such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs no longer is
incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose, but becomes a primary
purpose in itself, shall be considered a freestanding sign and, as
such, shall be subject to the provisions regarding freestanding
signs in the district in which the vehicle is located.
(33)
WALL OR FASCIA SIGNS — Any parallel sign which in any manner
is affixed to any exterior wall of the building or structure and
which does not project more than 10 inches from the building or
structure. No such sign shall exceed the height of the parapet.
(34)
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is fastened to or placed in the area
of a window or a display window which advertises or otherwise
directs attention to an activity conducted on the same lot or
premises.
(35)
MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS — Any sign or type of sign not previously
defined in this article and which has been approved as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board of Montgomery Township.
(36)
AWNING SIGN — A sign that is mounted or painted on or attached
to an awning.
(37)
A. Only materials as permitted by the sign regulations of the International
Building Code or Pennsylvania Act 45, as amended,246 shall be used in
the manufacture of signs. The design and construction of electrical
signs shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in the
National Electrical Code, as last revised.247 [Amended 6-22-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1; 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 09-236Z]
B. Signs and structures will be designed and constructed to resist wind
forces as specified in accordance with the International Building Code,
Appendix H, or Pennsylvania Act 45, as amended. [Amended
4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 09-236Z]
C. All electrical wiring shall be contained in rigid conduit or enclosed in
poles or raceways. All electrical sign components connection and
insulators shall conform to the specifications of the National Electric
Code and Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Every electrical sign must
bear the seal of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., prior to
246. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
247. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 230-123 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-124
1:854
§ 230-125. General regulations.
installation before the issuance of a permit by the Building Inspector,
and the number of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., label assigned
to the subject sign must be provided by the contractor or constructor of
the sign to the Building Inspector so that the number may be affixed to
the sign permit. It shall be illegal to install any electrical sign without
the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., label prominently affixed thereon.
D. Detailed plans showing supporting structural members and foundations
must be submitted to the Building Inspector's office for approval before
the issuance of a permit. In the case of freestanding signs in excess of
50 square feet on one side and over 10 feet in height above the existing
grade, a seal of a registered professional engineer, approved by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be required on all such plans.
[Amended 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 09-236Z]
A. The following types of signs or illumination of signs shall be prohibited
in Montgomery Township:
(1) Flashing signs.
(2) Roof signs. [Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z]
(3) Revolving signs.
(4) Festoon lighting.
(5) Animated signs.
(6) Trailer signs.
(7) Beacon lights.
(8) Street banner signs, except for street banner signs promoting
municipal purposes. A municipal purpose shall be any event wholly
or partially sponsored by Montgomery Township. [Amended
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-200Z]
(9) Vehicular signs.
(10) Any sign or part of a sign with flashing, intermittent lighting,
sequential lights or which has revolving, moving, oscillating parts
or which has movable parts or reflectors; with changing colors or
intensity of illumination, which utilize electrical energy; which
changes sign image or text; or which flaps in the wind, with the
exception of signs that display time, temperature and/or date
exclusively and barber poles. [Added 11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
07-220Z]
(11) Mobile or portable signs, including signs intended by design to be
easily moved or relocated or a sign not permanently affixed to a
§ 230-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-125
1:855
structure or the ground, unless permitted as a temporary sign.
[Added 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z]
B. Obstructions. No signs shall be placed in such a position as to endanger
traffic on a street by obscuring a clear view or by confusion with local
street signs or signals by virtue of position or color. In addition, no sign
shall be located or arranged so that it interferes with traffic through
glare, blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks or
driveways or confusion with traffic control devices by reason of color,
location or shape or other means. Signs which are located adjacent to
any driveway or right-of-way must meet the approval of the Township
Engineer.
C. Public right-of-way. No sign, other than official street signs and street
banner signs promoting municipal purposes, shall be erected or
maintained within the existing legal right-of-way of any public road in
Montgomery Township. No sign shall project more than 72 inches over
a public walkway, except for street banner signs promoting municipal
purposes, the use of such street banner signs being specifically
permitted to project into the public right-of-way. The lower edge of any
sign projecting into the right-of-way shall not be less than 10 feet above
the walk level. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-200Z]
D. Temporary illuminated signs. Temporary illuminated signs shall not be
permitted within 10 feet of any existing or future road right-of-way.
E. Any sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, hung, glued or otherwise
attached to a tree, post, bus shelter, stake, light stand, fence or other
object is prohibited unless for the purpose of posting "no hunting" or
"no trespassing."
F. Maintenance. All signs permitted by this article must be constructed of
durable materials and must be kept in good condition and repair. All
signs not properly maintained shall be subject to removal pursuant to
Subsection K of this section.
G. Sign permit. All signs or a portion of any sign projecting into
Montgomery Township from an adjoining municipality other than
Montgomery Township shall require the issuance of a sign permit in
accordance with sign permits, requirements and fees, referred to in
§ 230-130.
H. Street frontage. An establishment may have one freestanding sign per
public street frontage. The total area permitted cannot exceed the
provisions as specified under the individual districts as provided by this
article.
I. Yard requirements. No portion of any freestanding sign, business sign
or advertising sign may be located within the side or rear yard or within
the required buffer zone when located adjacent to a zoning district of a
higher classification.
§ 230-125 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-125
1:856
§ 230-126. Residential district regulations.
J. Supporting standards. No freestanding sign can occupy a designated
parking area or intended parking area, walkway, cartway, driveway or
area designated for any other use.
K. Removal of signs.
(1) The Zoning Officer of Montgomery Township shall have the
authority to require the removal and/or demolition of signs under
the following circumstances:
(a) When it is determined by such officer that the sign has
deteriorated to the point of becoming a danger to the public;
or
(b) When a sign does not comply with the provisions of this article.
(2) In the case of signs which have deteriorated to the point of
becoming a danger to the public or which fail to comply with the
provisions of this article, the sign removal procedure will be
initiated by a letter to the owner or lessee by the Zoning Officer
requiring the removal of such sign within 30 days, provided that if,
within such 30 days, the owner or lessee shall take steps to begin
the repair or rehabilitation of such sign or the alteration thereof so
as to make the same comply with the provisions hereof, then such
letter shall be automatically rescinded, provided that such owner
or lessee promptly commences and diligently pursues such repair
or alteration to conclusion.
(3) Should the subject sign fail to be removed within the time frame set
forth herein, the Zoning Officer shall have the subject sign removed
from the premises, and any costs incurred by Montgomery
Township for the removal of the subject sign shall be billed to the
owner of the premises, including any inspection fees as may be
required by the Zoning Officer, and the owner shall have 30 days
from the date of billing to remit the necessary fees for the removal
of the sign from the premises. Should be owner fail to remit the
necessary funds, appropriate legal action may be taken in order to
collect money due the Township at the expense of the owner.
A. General provisions.
(1) Freestanding signs may not exceed six feet in height.
(2) Parallel and projecting signs or portions of such signs shall not be
located more than four feet above the ground floor of any building.
(3) In all residential districts, the following permitted signs may be
directly illuminated and no other:
(a) Professional sign of a physician, dentist, healer, Justice of the
Peace and such other persons whose services in emergency
§ 230-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-126
1:857
situations are customarily considered essential to the public
health, safety and welfare, provided that the illumination is
white light only, and provided further that the total illumination
for any such sign shall not exceed the equivalent of that given
by a twenty-five-watt incandescent light source.
B. Single-family detached residential district provisions [R-1, R-2
(including cluster developments), R-3, R-3A, R-5 and R-6].
(1) On-premises signs. In the above-indicated residential zones, no onpremises
signs shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) Flags representing education or religious organizations.
(b) One directly illuminated (maximum 25 watts), nonilluminated
or indirectly illuminated sign for home occupations or
accessory offices indicating only names of persons and their
occupations, provided that the area of any such sign shall not
exceed two square feet.
(c) One directly illuminated (maximum 25 watts), nonilluminated
or indirectly illuminated sign in connection with a lawfully
maintained nonconforming use, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(d) One nonilluminated sign advertising the sale or rental of
property on which the sign has been erected or one sign
indicating that said premises has been sold or rented, provided
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet,
and such sign shall be removed upon settlement in the case of
a sale or upon occupancy in the case of a rental.
(e) One temporary nonilluminated sign erected in connection with
a major land development or proposed major land development
of a premises by a builder, contractor or developer or other
person interested in such sale or development, provided that
the area of any such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and
that the sign shall be removed within 20 days after the last
structure has been initially occupied or upon expiration of the
building permit, whichever is sooner.
(f) Temporary nonilluminated signs of contractors, mechanics,
painters and artisans, erected and maintained on the premises
where the work is being performed during the period in which
such work is being performed, provided that not more than one
such sign shall be erected on any one property, and provided
that such signs shall be removed promptly upon the completion
of work, and further provided that such sign shall not exceed
12 square feet.
(g) Signs announcing "No Trespassing," "No Hunting" or "No
Gunning" or similar signs indicating the private nature of a
§ 230-126 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-126
1:858
road, driveway or premises, provided that the total sign area
for every 150 feet of any one street frontage shall not exceed
four square feet.
(h) Nonilluminated or directly illuminated memorial signs or
historical signs or tablets.
(i) Signs for a school, church, hospital, sanitarium or other
institution of a similar nature, on the same lot therewith, for
the purpose of displaying the name of the institution, provided
that the area on one face of the sign shall not exceed 24 square
feet, and provided that not more than one such sign shall be
erected on any one street frontage of any property.
(2) Off-premises signs. No off-premises signs are permitted in the
above-mentioned residential districts except as follows:
(a) Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of
traffic, street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad
crossings and other official signs which are singularly
authorized or erected by duly constituted governmental bodies
may be erected.
(b) Temporary signs advertising political parties or candidates for
elections may be erected or displayed and maintained,
provided that:
[1] The size of any such sign is not in excess of four square
feet.
[2] The sign shall not be erected or displayed earlier than 30
days prior to the election to which it pertains and shall be
removed within seven days after said election.
(c) Temporary nonilluminated signs directing persons to
temporary exhibits, temporary shows, special events of a
noncommercial nature or proposed developments may be
erected subject to the following requirements:
[1] Signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
[2] Signs shall not be posted earlier than seven days before
the occurrence of the event to which they relate and must
be removed within seven days after the date of the show,
event, sale or rental of the final unit in such development.
[3] Nonilluminated signs used for directing patrons, members
or an audience to service clubs, churches or other
nonprofit organizations shall be permitted, provided that
signs indicate only the name of the organization and place,
date and time of meeting.
§ 230-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-126
1:859
§ 230-127. Commercial and industrial district regulations.
C. Residential garden apartments, townhouse developments, mobile home
developments and age-qualified residential communities (R-3, R-3A,
MHP and AQRC). [Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z]
(1) On-premises and off-premises signs. The following are permitted:
(a) All on-premises and off-premises signs permitted in
Subsections A and B above.
(b) Signs displayed for the direction, safety or convenience of the
public, including signs which identify rest rooms, public
telephone booths, parking areas, entrances or exits, freight
entrances or the like, provided that the area of any such sign
shall not exceed four square feet.
(c) One directly illuminated, nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated sign, displaying only the name and address of the
premises or complex, provided that the area of any such sign
shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(d) One directly illuminated, nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated sign, bulletin board or announcement board or an
identification sign for a permitted building or use, provided
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 34 square feet.
A. Shopping center, commercial, business and limited industrial signs (S,
C, LI, HLI and HLI-II Districts). [Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
07-220Z; 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 09-236Z]
(1) On-premises signs. In the above-indicated districts, no on-premises
signs shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) All on-premises signs permitted in § 230-126, plus the
following:
[1] Changeable-copy signs, provided that said sign copy is not
altered at a rate greater than once per hour, and the
changeable-copy sign area is limited to 16 square feet with
a nonchangeable background area.
[2] Time-and-temperature signs, provided that the sign area is
limited to 16 square feet with a nonchangeable
background area.
(2) Parallel signs and awning signs. In the above-indicated zones, no
parallel signs or awning signs shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) The total area for all parallel signs and awning signs shall be
calculated based on either one square foot of sign area for each
foot of distance a building is set back from the curbline or edge
of roadway or two square feet of sign area per linear foot of
§ 230-126 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-127
1:860
front building wall, whichever is less, with a maximum of 350
square feet shall be permitted. If the above calculation renders
the allowable area to be less than 50 square feet, then an area
of 50 square feet is allowed.
[1] The total permitted area may be divided among the
exterior walls of the space occupied. The maximum sign
area on each building wall is limited to 25% of the area of
the building wall, including doors and windows, to which
the sign is attached.
[2] In the case of a building situated not parallel to the
roadway, the average distance the building is set back
from the curbline or edge of roadway shall be used for
calculating the allowable signage area.
[3] In no event shall the placement of the sign impede the
view of vehicular traffic or shall any portion of the sign
overhang a pedestrian walkway or sidewalk.
[4] In the above-indicated zones, when a sign is attached to a
premises occupied by more than one user, then each
business shall be entitled to a total maximum sign area
calculated as though each business were a freestanding
premises with a maximum allowable sign area calculated
as in Subsection A(2)(a) above.
(b) Signs painted on or affixed to the inside or outside of windows
shall be included in the computation of maximum size for signs
if their combined area exceeds 25% of the area of the windows
they occupy.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the total area of
parallel signs and for signs affixed to awnings and any signs
affixed to the inside or outside of windows may not exceed 25%
of the area of the wall, including windows and door area and
cornices, to which they are attached.
(3) Projecting signs. Projecting signs are permitted, provided that only
one such sign shall be permitted on each property for each street
frontage on a public right-of-way.
(4) Freestanding business signs. Freestanding business signs are
permitted, provided that only one such sign shall be permitted on
each property for each street frontage on a public right-of-way, and:
(a) The minimum sign setback shall be 15 feet from the existing
curbline or edge of roadway.
(b) The maximum sign height and sign area shall be determined by
a sliding scale and the number of users within the building in
accordance with 230:A17248, and as follows:
§ 230-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-127
1:861
[1] In the case of single-user buildings, at the minimum sign
setback of 15 feet, the maximum permitted sign height
shall be five feet and the maximum permitted sign area
shall be 34 square feet. The applicant may increase the
height of the sign by one foot and the area of the sign by
two square feet for each additional one foot of setback
beyond the minimum setback, up to a maximum height of
20 feet and a maximum sign area of 70 square feet.
[2] In the case of multitenant buildings or a lot with multiple
buildings under common ownership, for each additional
one foot of setback in excess of 28 feet from the existing
curbline or edge of roadway, an additional 10 square feet
of sign area and one additional foot of sign height shall be
permitted for each tenant in excess of the first such tenant,
up to a maximum sign height of 23 feet and a maximum
sign area of 100 square feet, or two freestanding signs a
minimum of 50 feet apart with a maximum of 50 square
feet of total sign area per street frontage and a maximum
height of five feet located a minimum of 15 feet from the
existing curbline or edge or roadway shall be allowed.
[3] Directional signs. One sign per driveway is allowed. Each
sign is allowed a maximum area of six square feet and
three feet in height and shall not impede the view of
vehicular traffic.
[4] At the time of any future road widening, the sign owner
must relocate the sign(s), at his or her expense, to conform
to the minimum setback requirement unless the sign is a
legal preexisting nonconforming sign, in which case the
setback must conform to the nonconforming setback prior
to the relocation of the curbline in order to maintain the
prior nonconforming distance. In no event shall the
placement of the sign impede the view of vehicular traffic
or any portion of the sign project or overhang a pedestrian
walkway or sidewalk.
[5] Refer also to the landscaping requirements of
§ 230-127A(8).
(5) Temporary signs which advertise sales or special event(s) are
permitted, provided that only one such sign shall be permtted on
each street frontage on a public right-of-way, provided that such
sign must be affixed to a building or awning or may be placed on
the ground, not to exceed 32 square feet on each side, and be a
minimum of 15 feet behind the curbline or edge of pavement in
noncurbed areas, shall not impede the view of traffic in the opinion
of the Township and shall follow the requirements of § 230-125B.
248. Editor's Note: See the freestanding signs table included at the end of this chapter.
§ 230-127 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-127
1:862
(a) The maximum area of such banner shall not exceed 120 feet.
(b) No banner shall extend over a public right-of-way.
(c) Temporary signs or banners may be displayed for a total of
seven consecutive days per permit unless extended by
reissuance of a permit.
(d) Applicants must obtain a temporary sign permit from the
Zoning Officer prior to displaying a banner or temporary sign.
(e) Temporary signs or banners may be displayed for a total of 14
weeks each calendar year.
(6) Inflatable specialty sign. Display of inflatable specialty signs
(balloons) may be requested from the Zoning Officer for special
events such as grand openings or the advertisement of a product
new to the market, provided that:
(a) Such devices are securely fastened to the ground.
(b) The maximum diameter of such devices shall be 12 feet and the
maximum height of such devices is no higher than 12 feet
measured from ground level.
(c) Such devices shall not obstruct pedestrian walkways and/or
required parking.
(d) Such devices shall be displayed for a period of no more than
one week, for a maximum of four times per calendar year.
(e) An inflatable specialty sign for a grand opening only may be
installed upon a roof, provided that it does not exceed a height
of 12 feet above the parapet wall. Such devices may be
displayed one time only for a period of one week.
(7) Real estate signs. One nonilluminated sign advertising the sale or
rental of the property on which the sign has been erected or one
sign indicating said premises has been sold or rented, provided that
the area of any such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet, and such
sign shall be removed upon settlement in the case of a sale or upon
occupancy in the case of a rental. Directional signs will be
permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following:
(a) A maximum of two off-site directional signs are allowed.
(b) Signs allowed after 4:00 p.m. on Friday and must be removed
by 4:00 p.m. Sunday.
(c) Permission must be obtained in advance from the property
owner where the sign is to be placed.
(d) All signs shall be placed a minimum of seven feet behind the
face of curb or edge of pavement in noncurbed areas and shall
§ 230-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-127
1:863
§ 230-128. Regional Shopping Center (RS) regulations. [Amended
4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 09-236Z; 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-266Z]
On-premises signs. In the Regional Shopping Center Zone, all on-premises
signs shall be those that comply with the regulations below. As used herein,
on-premises signs shall not include any signs located within the interior of
any enclosed regional shopping center.
not exceed six square feet in area and shall follow the
requirements of § 230-125B.
(8) Landscaping for freestanding signs. Landscaping must be provided
for all freestanding signs as follows:
(a) The applicant shall provide two square feet of landscaped area
for each square foot of sign area. To the maximum extent
practicable, landscaping shall be situated at or near the base of
the sign, but if such location is not practicable, the specific
location of the required landscaping shall be subject to
approval by the Township Zoning Officer.
(b) The landscaped area shall be counted as part of the district's
green area and landscape requirement.
(9) Off-premises signs. All off-premises signs permitted in these
districts shall comply with the standards herein prescribed for onpremises
signs in § 230-126.
(10) Nonprofit organizations located in the Township shall be allowed
temporary ground signs for promoting events. Such signs shall be
limited to six square feet in size and shall be placed a minimum of
seven feet behind the face of the curb or edge of pavement in
noncurbed areas. Signs are limited to 15 signs throughout the
Township. Such signs may not be erected earlier than 14 days prior
to the event and shall be removed within two days after the event.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain permission of
the property owner prior to placement of sign. Montgomery
Township events are exempt.
A. Parallel wall or fascia signs and awning signs.
(1) Parallel signs and signs affixed to awnings. All retail stores having
one or more exterior dedicated entrances shall be permitted
exterior signage that may be divided on up to four exterior walls in
accordance with the table below. No individual sign shall exceed
500 square feet in area.
§ 230-127 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-128
1:864
Gross Floor Area
Total Square Footage Allowed
per Retail Store with Exterior
Entrance
0 to 5,000 square feet 125 square feet
5,001 to 10,000 square feet 125 square feet plus 1 square
foot for each 40 square feet
over 5,000 square feet
10,001 to 25,000 square feet 250 square feet plus 1 square
foot for each 60 square feet
over 10,001 square feet
25,001 to 50,000 square feet 500 square feet plus 1 square
foot for each 40 square feet
over 25,001 square feet
Over 50,001 square feet 1,200 square feet
Over 100,000 square feet on a
single-floor store
2,000 square feet
B. Freestanding signs.
(1) A regional shopping center shall be permitted to have one
freestanding sign on each state road frontage advertising the
businesses and events conducted in the center, provided that the
area of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed the following
schedule: for regional shopping centers with a gross leasable area
of 800,000 square feet and over, a sign of 450 square feet
maximum; for shopping centers with a gross leasable area of less
than 800,000 square feet, a sign of 300 square feet maximum. Such
signs shall not exceed 35 feet in height, and no such sign shall be
placed closer than 25 feet to the legal right-of-way line of any street
or highway abutting the area where the sign is placed.
(a) One changeable-copy sign per state street frontage shall be
permitted as a part of an allowed freestanding sign. The
changeable-copy area shall be limited to 150 square feet of the
permitted sign area. All aspects of the changeable-copy sign
shall comply with the Township's latest regulations for offpremises/
billboard signs.
(2) A regional shopping center shall be permitted to have one
freestanding monument sign on each entry drive on a county or
local road announcing the regional shopping center, provided that
the area of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed 75 square
feet. Such signs shall be placed no closer than 25 feet from the
legal right-of-way line of the street. No such sign shall exceed five
feet in height.
(3) Directional information signs to guide shoppers shall be permitted
on the premises. Such signs shall be limited to 64 square feet in
§ 230-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-128
1:865
area each, shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall be located
a minimum of 25 feet from the existing curbline or edge of roadway
of a public street. Directional information signs shall only be
permitted where drive-aisles intersect with the ring-road.
(4) In no event shall the placement of any signs obstruct the line of
sight of vehicular traffic.
C. Pad sites.
(1) The total area for all parallel signs and awning signs shall be
calculated based on either one square foot of sign area for each
foot of distance a building is set back from the curbline or edge of
roadway or two square feet of sign area per linear foot of front
building wall, whichever is less, with a maximum of 350 square feet
shall be permitted. If the above calculation renders the allowable
area to be less than 50 square feet, then an area of 50 square feet is
allowed.
(a) The total permitted area may be divided among the exterior
walls of the space occupied. The maximum sign area on each
building wall is limited to 25% of the area of the building wall,
including doors and windows, to which the sign is attached.
(b) In the case of a building situated not parallel to the roadway or
with undulations, the average distance the building is set back
from the curbline or edge of roadway shall be used for
calculating the allowable signage area.
(c) In no event shall the placement of the sign impede the view of
vehicular traffic or shall any portion of the sign overhang a
pedestrian walkway or sidewalk.
(d) In the above-indicated zones, when a sign is attached to a
premises occupied by more than one user, then each business
shall be entitled to a total maximum sign area calculated as
though each business were a freestanding premises with a
maximum allowable sign area calculated as in Subsection C(1)
above.
(2) Signs painted on or affixed to the inside or outside of windows shall
be included in the computation of maximum size for signs if their
combined area exceeds 25% of the area of the windows they
occupy.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the total area of parallel
signs and for signs affixed to awnings and any signs affixed to the
inside or outside of windows may not exceed 25% of the area of the
wall, including windows and door area and cornices, to which they
are attached.
§ 230-128 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-128
1:866
§ 230-129. (Reserved)249
§ 230-130. (Reserved)250
§ 230-131. Sign permits; fees.
§ 230-132. Special events.251 [Added 11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
07-220Z]
D. Banners and temporary signs. All banners and temporary signs shall
comply with the standards specified in § 230-127, Commercial and
industrial district regulations.
E. Landscaping for freestanding signs shall be as required § 230-127,
Commercial and industrial district regulations.
F. Except for the aforementioned signs in this § 230-128, a regional
shopping center shall not be permitted to have any other signs on the
premises.
A. Sign permits. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct or alter any sign in
the Township of Montgomery without first filing with the Building
Department of Montgomery Township an application, in writing, in
order to obtain a formal permit and receiving such a permit.
B. Application form. An application for a permit for the erection,
construction or alteration of a sign in the Township of Montgomery
shall be submitted on such forms as prescribed by the Zoning Officer of
Montgomery Township, and such application shall contain the full
names and addresses of the applicant, the owner of the premises
whereon the sign is to be erected, constructed or altered and the
person or firm engaged to erect, construct or alter such sign. The
application shall contain the affidavit of the owner of the premises
authorizing the application and the work described herein.
C. Plans to accompany application. Applications for permits for the
erection, construction or alteration of signs shall be accompanied by a
site plan, drawings of the proposed work, the zoning district in which
the sign is located and structural details of the sign, all of which are to
be drawn to scale, and any such other details as may be required by the
Zoning Officer of Montgomery Township,
D. Fees. All application fees for permits for the erection, construction or
alteration of signs shall, at the time of making application, be paid to
the Township in accordance with the respective fee schedule adopted
by the Board of Supervisors of Montgomery Township from time to
time.
249. Editor's Note: Former § 230-129, Industrial park (LI) regulations, was repealed
11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z.
250. Editor's Note: Former § 230-130, Special exceptions, was repealed 4-27-2009 by Ord. No.
09-236Z.
§ 230-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-132
1:867
A. A special event is a temporary event which may significantly impact
public or private property, extend beyond the normal use or standards
allowed by Chapter 230, Zoning, and exceed normal vehicular and
pedestrian traffic. It may require the need for services of the Township's
Police and Fire Departments. Such events include, but are not limited
to, entertainment, amusement, cultural recognition, sporting events,
arts and crafts or trade shows, sidewalk sales, special seasonal events,
special automobile sales/shows, fund-raising events and grand
openings or other similar activities. Indoor special events in the RS
District require a permit but are not limited by the number of events
per year.
B. Displays and/or demonstrations held by police or emergency service
organizations, Township-sponsored or recognized events when
conducted on Township-owned property and customary company
picnics are exempt unless a tent(s) or temporary structure(s) is erected.
C. It is the purpose of this policy to provide for the issuance of a special
event permit to regulate events on public streets and outdoor use of
private and public property of the Township or events that impact the
public health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the
Township and to provide for standardized fees which may be changed
from time to time by resolution, charges and procedures required to
administer the permit process. At the Regional Shopping Center, indoor
special events require a permit, and indoor temporary retail sales
require a separate license and are not considered a special event.
D. Activities may not inhibit or block safe access by emergency responders
or adversely impact access and parking required to adequately serve
the facility. Proposed activities may not violate uses permitted in
Chapter 230, Zoning, which regulate the subject property.
E. Permits for special events or outdoor sales shall be limited to no more
than six times per calendar year. Each permit may not exceed seven
days per event. Permits are not nontransferable.
F. Activities such as hot air ballooning, skydiving events, hang gliding,
bungee jumping, etc., as well as carnivals, circuses, festivals, fairs, are
not permitted unless the Zoning Hearing Board approves a special
exception. Fireworks display, unless sponsored by the Township, are
prohibited.
G. The following requirements must be met prior to the issuance of a
special event or outdoor sales permit.
(1) A site plan clearly outlining the property and the proposed area
where event or sales shall occur must be submitted for review.
251. Editor's Note: Former § 230-132, Nonconforming signs; amortization, was repealed
7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z.
§ 230-132 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-132
1:868
§ 230-133. Illustrative sketches.
Attached hereto are illustrative sketches which provide examples of certain
types of signs described in this article. Such sketches are a part of this
article and shall be used in interpreting the provisions hereof.252
(2) A temporary business license shall be obtained for all sales if
business is not already registered in the Township.
(3) Any other required permits shall be obtained if lighting, temporary
construction or sanitary facilities are proposed.
(4) All signs must be approved prior to the issuance of the permit. One
temporary sign per street frontage shall be allowed.
(5) Liability insurance is required for events that are held on Township
property. A copy of the insurance certificate must be submitted
with the policy naming Montgomery Township as an "additional
insured."
(6) For applications that include amplified music, the applicant must
submit supplemental information regarding noise. No music shall
be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(7) A temporary retail sales license must be obtained by all vendors or
merchants prior to issuance of permit, unless vendor is already
registered with the Township.
(8) If food or beverage are included in the event, provisions for
appropriate recycling/trash containers must be provided.
Montgomery County Health Department approval may also be
required.
(9) If the event includes a tent or temporary structure, a building
permit may be required prior to issuance of the permit.
(10) Upon compliance of required items above a permit may be issued.
252. Editor's Note: These sketches appear at the end of this chapter.
§ 230-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-133
1:869

ARTICLE XIX
Off-Street Parking and Loading253
§ 230-134. Required parking. [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No.
13-272Z]
Any building or other structure erected, altered or used or any lot used or
occupied for any of the following purposes shall be provided with minimum
off-street parking spaces, as defined in Article II hereof and as set forth
below, together with adequate passageways, driveways or other means
of circulation and access to and from a street or way. In the case of
access to secondary township, state, and county roads (as set forth in the
Township's Ultimate Classification of Roads Map, as amended), parking
spaces, together with the driveways or passageways, shall be large enough
to permit the circulation or turning around of vehicles on the lot so that
egress to the street or way can be made frontways to avoid backing in or
onto the street or way.
A. Dwelling. Two all-weather parking spaces, on the same lot therewith,
for each family in the dwelling shall be provided.
B. For any of the following uses, the required parking spaces shall be allweather
and shall be located on the same lot therewith or on land
adjacent thereto:
(1) Rooming house: one parking space for each rental unit.
(2) Church, school, public auditorium, stadium, assembly or meeting
room or other similar place of public or private assembly: one
parking space for every five seats.
(3) Hospital or similar institution: one parking space for every four
beds.
(4) Roadside stand: one parking space for every 100 square feet of
sales area.
C. For any of the following uses, the required parking spaces shall be allweather,
and such parking spaces shall be located on the same lot
therewith, except as provided in § 230-135 below: [Amended
8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 17-036; 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
(1) Retail store, shop or supermarket less than 20,000 square feet total
floor area which is not part of a shopping center: 6.5 parking
spaces per 1,000 square feet of total floor area. [Amended
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
(2) Retail store, shop or supermarket 20,000 square feet or greater
total floor area which is not part of a shopping center: 5.0 parking
253. Editor's Note: See the rear of this chapter for examples of parking arrangements which
are acceptable under the terms of the off-street parking and loading space requirements
in residential districts.
§ 230-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-134
1:871
spaces per 1,000 square feet of total floor area. [Amended
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
(3) Indoor theater:
(a) Multi-screened: one parking space for every four seats.
(b) Single- or double-screened theaters or live theaters: one
parking space for every three seats.
(c) Reserve parking. Up to 25% of the required parking area may
be held in reserve, provided that:
[1] The Board of Supervisors, by resolution, grants the
application for reserve parking area.
[2] The reserved parking is required to be fully engineered at
the time of plan approval.
[3] The reserved parking area shall be paved and taken out of
the reserve in the event that it is determined by the Board
of Supervisors, after reviewing the community experience
with each reserved area, that the then existing parking for
the indoor theater or theaters is not adequate.
[4] The Supervisors may designate a lesser percentage of
reserve parking area than 25% originally and
subsequently reduce the reserve, either partially or fully.
[5] When the reserve parking is not in active use for parking,
the area shall be landscaped; the landscaped area shall not
be included in the overall open space requirements.
(4) Outdoor theater. The number of parking spaces is controlled by the
area available for automobiles parked to view the screen. Parking
spaces shall be marked at a minimum of 10 by 20 feet for each of
the motor vehicles consigned to such parking space, with aisles of a
minimum width of 25 feet, and laid out in accordance with the plan
thereof submitted for approval to the Montgomery Township
Supervisors. The parking area shall be landscaped in accordance
with Township ordinances.
(5) Hotel, tourist home or automobile court: one parking space for
each rental unit.
(6) Office building or wholesale establishment: one parking space for
every 200 square feet of total floor area. [Amended 1-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 01-140Z]
(7) Restaurant: one parking space for every three chairs of seating
capacity.
(8) Laboratory or any industrial establishment: one parking space for
every three employees.
§ 230-134 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-134
1:872
(9) Other commercial buildings or open spaces used for commercial
purposes: one parking space for every 1,000 square feet of floor or
open area used for commercial purposes or fraction thereof.
(10) Shopping center for retail, business services, personal services, or
office purposes, preplanned and designed as a complex of related
buildings and circulation patterns having at least five
establishments providing the following minimum square feet of
total floor area (excluding satellite uses): [Amended 1-28-2002
by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
(a) Fifty thousand square feet: 4.5 parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of total floor area. Satellite uses, eating places in
excess of 4,500 square feet, and indoor theaters shall provide
parking at the ratios provided in § 230-134 for each individual
use.
(b) Six hundred thousand square feet: 4.45 parking spaces per
1,000 feet of gross lease area plus 4.45 parking spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross area of outside dining area. Indoor
theaters shall provide parking at the ratios provided in
§ 230-134. [Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-259Z]
(11) Trade or professional school: one parking space per student or one
per 200 gross square feet, whichever is greater. [Added
5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14Z]
(12) Recreational uses: each specific use within a recreational
development shall provide parking in accordance with the
following standards: [Added 5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 93-14Z]
(a) Fitness center or health club: one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
(b) Racquet or tennis club: four spaces per court or one space per
two spectator seats, whichever is greater.
(c) Bowling alley: four spaces per alley.
(d) Skating rink: one space per 180 square feet of gross floor area,
including rink area, or one space per two spectator seats,
whichever is greater.
(e) Golf course: five spaces per hole.
(f) Golf driving range: 2 1/2 spaces per tee.
(g) Miniature golf course: 2 1/2 spaces per hole.
(h) Athletic field and basketball court: 40 spaces per field and 20
spaces per basketball court or one space per two spectator
seats, whichever is greater.
§ 230-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-134
1:873
§ 230-135. Location adjustments.
Parking spaces required in § 230-134C herein may be located elsewhere
than on the same lot when authorized as a special exception and subject to
the following conditions:
(i) Swimming pool or club: one space per 60 square feet of water
surface area or one space per two spectator seats, whichever is
greater.
(j) Batting cage: two spaces per batting cage.
(k) Accessory retail use: one space for every 100 square feet of
store sales floor space.
(l) Accessory restaurant use: one parking space for every three
chairs of seating capacity.
(13) Outdoor sales areas, open to the public and provided in a secured/
enclosed space such as an enclosed garden center, but not
including areas where nursery stock is grown, which are either
generally not open to the public or not in a secure area: 4.5 parking
spaces per 1,000 square feet of total floor area. [Added 1-28-2002
by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
D. Commercial uses and shopping centers located in the C, S, or RS
Districts which undergo a redevelopment, addition or change of use or
an action which shall require the submission of a land development plan
shall comply with the requirements governing parking, landscaping,
sidewalks and pedestrian walkways, lighting, trash enclosures, noise
attenuation, and all other applicable regulations contained herein and
the Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.254 The parking and circulation for these uses shall be
modified to comply with current standards on the basis of not less than
the number of parking spaces and support aisles and drives calculated
by ordinance to support the redevelopment, addition or change of use.
[Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
E. Drive-in/drive-through facilities shall be provided with not less than
eight automobile waiting spaces per drive-through window or drivethrough
lane, whichever results in the greater number of waiting
spaces. [Added 1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
F. Drive-in/drive-through banking facilities shall be provided with not less
than four automobile waiting spaces per drive-through window or drivethrough
lane, whichever results in the greater number of waiting
spaces. [Added 11-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-311ZS]
254. Editor's Note: See Ch. Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-134 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-135
1:874
§ 230-136. Required loading facilities.
In addition to required off-street parking spaces, the foregoing uses shall be
provided with adequate off-street loading space.
§ 230-137. Parking in required yards.
Required off-street parking space shall be permitted within the required
yard areas, except where otherwise specified in industrial districts.
§ 230-138. Parking space sizes. [Amended 1-28-2002 by Ord. No.
01-140Z]
All use groups (not provided with different specific dimensional standards
elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance) shall provide a parking space of 10
feet in width by 20 feet in length and having an area of 200 square feet.
Off-street parking spaces shall be marked with all-weather paint to the size
required by this chapter. For all uses the length of a parking space may be
reduced to 18 feet under the following circumstance: The forward curbed
edge of a parking space shall overhang a landscaped area having a width of
not less than five feet. For those conditions where spaces face one another,
then the minimum total landscaped area shall equal 10 feet.
§ 230-138.1. Reserved parking. [Added 5-17-1993 by Ord. No.
93-14Z]
If the number of required spaces is substantially larger than the number
anticipated by the applicant, the reserve parking option may be utilized to
avoid unnecessary paving, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The owner shall submit, with his application for special exception, a site
plan showing the proposed use and location of the off-street parking
area.
B. If the parking area does not abut the lot served thereby, some portion of
the off-street parking area shall lie within 200 feet of an entrance,
regularly used by patrons, into the building served thereby.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may, in its discretion, reduce the aggregate
amount of required parking space upon determination that greater
efficiency is effected by joint use of a common parking area, but in no
case shall the required off-street parking area be reduced more than
25%.
A. The total number of spaces which must be paved initially may be
reduced by up to 25% by the Township Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Commission and Engineer.
B. Suitable area that meets all requirements of this chapter and Chapter
205, Subdivision and Land Development, must be available and
reserved for construction of the balance of the total number of spaces
otherwise required. A reevaluation of parking capacity shall be
§ 230-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-138.1
1:875
§ 230-138.2. Special requirements for parking structures. [Added
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
required upon a change in status (use, building addition or number
of employees) to determine whether additional parking is needed.
Whenever a parking capacity problem is identified, the Supervisors, at
their sole discretion, may require part or all of the reserve green area
to be converted to parking area to serve needs of the businesses.
C. A financial guaranty must be provided by the applicant to cover the cost
of installation of the reserved parking spaces, for a period of one year
after 90% of the building floor area on the site is occupied. The type and
dollar value of the guaranty must be approved by the Township
Supervisors.
D. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the applicant shall
provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to the Township
Planning Commission and Engineer for their review and
recommendation.
A. Parking structures shall not be located within any required yard, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter. Parking structures shall be
constructed so as to preserve at least one side of the principal building
for which said structure was designed to serve with an unobstructed
visual access (excluding landscaping) to a public or private street or
driveway.
B. Maximum height limitations: 60% of the height of the tallest principal
structure for which the parking structure serves as an accessory use,
but in no event shall the height be greater than four levels of parking
above grade, counting the rooftop as one level.
C. Ramps for the movement of vehicles between parking levels shall be
designed to provide an optimal movement of vehicular traffic within the
parking structure.
D. Parking structures shall be so designed to minimize blank concrete
facades through the use of innovative architectural detail. The design of
the exterior of the parking structure shall be compatible with the
exterior design of the principal structure to the extent that the parking
facility is clearly identified with the principal structure.
E. Any parking structure or group of parking structures containing 300
parking spaces or more in total shall provide a grade-separated
pedestrian walkway connecting the parking facility with the principal
structure or structures.
F. Parking structures shall be landscaped in accordance with and to the
same extent as the overall landscape plan for the principal use and
structure the parking structure shall serve.
§ 230-138.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-138.2
1:876
§ 230-138.3. Exceptions to floor area calculations. [Added
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
Basements, attics and penthouses used principally for storage or utility
purposes shall provide parking at the ratio of one parking space per 1,000
square feet of total floor area in lieu of the higher rates provided in
§ 130-134C above.
G. Parking layouts using ninety-degree parking spaces shall be designed
for two-way travel. Parking layouts using less than ninety-degree
parking spaces shall be for one-way travel only, clearly marked and
signed as such. The parking angle design shall be the same for both
parking structures and surface parking when used in the same
development.
§ 230-138.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-138.3
1:877

ARTICLE XX
Nonconforming Uses
§ 230-139. Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses.
A. Continuation. Any building or other structure or any use of a building or
other structure or land lawfully existing immediately prior to the
effective date of this chapter which does not conform to the provisions
of this chapter shall be considered a lawful nonconforming building,
structure or use and may be continued, except as otherwise herein
provided.
B. Change. Any lawful nonconforming use of a building or land may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same classification when
authorized as a special exception. Whenever a nonconforming use of a
building or land has been changed to a conforming use, such
conforming use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming
use.
C. Restoration. Any lawful nonconforming building or other structure
which has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion,
windstorm or other similar active cause may be reconstructed in the
same location, provided that:
(1) The reconstructed building or structure shall not exceed the
height, area or volume of the damaged or destroyed building or
structure, except as provided in Subsection E of this section; and
(2) Reconstruction shall begin within one year from the date of
damage or destruction and shall be carried on without interruption.
D. Abandonment. If a lawful nonconforming use of a building or other
structure is abandoned or discontinued for a continuous period of one
year or more or if a lawful nonconforming use of land is abandoned or
discontinued for a continuous period of six months or more, subsequent
use of such building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Extension. [Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 17-066]
(1) Nonconforming building or use. Any lawful nonconforming use of a
portion of a building may be extended throughout the building, and
any lawful nonconforming building or any building of which a
lawful nonconforming use is made may be extended upon the lot
occupied by such building and held in single and separate
ownership on the effective date of the ordinance which rendered
the property nonconforming, provided that the increase in
horizontal cross-section area of the building, or portion of building,
shall not be in excess of 30% of the horizontal cross-section area of
the building on the lot existing on the date it became lawfully
nonconforming and provided, further, that any extension shall
conform to all height, area, width, yard, building coverage,
§ 230-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-139
1:879
impervious material coverage, green area coverage and
landscaping and screening requirements for the zoning district in
which it is located and the off-street parking requirements for the
specific use.
(2) Use of nonconforming lot. Any lawful nonconforming use of a lot
which does not involve the use of a building may be extended upon
any lot held in single and separate ownership on the effective date
of the ordinance which rendered the use nonconforming, provided
that the increase in horizontal cross-section area devoted to the use
shall not be in excess of 30% of the horizontal cross-section area
devoted to the use existing on the date it became a lawful
nonconforming use and provided, further, that any extension shall
conform to all area, width, yard, building coverage, impervious
material coverage, green area coverage and landscaping and
screening requirements for the zoning district in which it is
located.
(3) Nonconforming commercial or industrial use. In the case of an
extension of a lawful nonconforming commercial or industrial use,
any extension shall conform to the off-street parking requirements
for the specific use under Article XIX. Any such extension shall also
conform to either the green area coverage and landscaping and
screening requirements for the specific use as provided under
Article XIII, XIV or XVII or the green area coverage and
landscaping and screening requirements of the district in which it
is located, whichever is the more restrictive.
F. Registration. Upon application or request by any owner, the Zoning
Officer shall investigate at the expense of the applicant and, if
appropriate, cause the nonconformity to be identified. After the
investigation, the Township Zoning Officer shall register all legal
nonconforming lots, structures and uses when the nonconformity is
established to the Zoning Officer's satisfaction. [Amended 6-22-1992
by Ord. No. 92-1; 7-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-17Z]
(1) All nonconforming lots, structures and uses shall be identified by:
(a) Location and description of the lot, use or structure.
(b) Name and address of the owner and tenant, if any.
(c) Date when the nonconformity came into existence.
(d) Description of the nonconforming lot, use or structure, being
specific as to the type, extent and nature of the nonconformity.
In regards to a dimensional nonconformity, proof verifiable by
the Zoning Office by way of survey or plan may be required.
(2) After any legal nonconformity has been confirmed, the Zoning
Officer shall provide registration forms to the owner of record of all
lots, structures and uses so identified. The Zoning Officer shall
§ 230-139 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-139
1:880
§ 230-140. Nonconforming lots.
In any residential district, for any use permitted in such district a building
may be erected or altered on any unimproved lot held in single and separate
ownership on the effective date of this chapter which is not of the required
minimum area or width.
maintain an ongoing record in a separate ledger, inscribed
"Established Nonconformities to the Zoning Ordinance," of all
properly registered, legal nonconformities existing within the
Township.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall not have the duty to initiate action to
identify and register nonconforming lots, structures or uses. The
Zoning Officer shall have no legal duty to register any
nonconforming lots, structures or uses except as requested and
properly established by the owner. A schedule shall be established
by the Township to determine by resolution the office cost of the
registration investigation. This registration investigation fee shall
be paid by the applicant, along with such other fees and charges as
are incurred to assist the Code Enforcement Office in the
verification.
§ 230-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-140
1:881

ARTICLE XXI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 230-141. Public utility corporations. [Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 04-190Z]
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof or to any land used or to be used by a public utility
corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the Public Utility
Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or
proposed situation or use of the buildings or land in question is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. Aboveground
structures and buildings shall be located to avoid adverse impacts on
natural features such as floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, mature
vegetation and historic buildings and provide a screen buffer along the
property boundaries adjacent to residential, institutional and park and
recreational uses. Montgomery Township acknowledges the PUC has
jurisdiction. However, every effort should be made to avoid residential
districts and to comply with all applicable zoning regulations.
§ 230-142. Location of filling station equipment.
A pump, light standard, air tower, water outlet or similar installation of a
gasoline filling station may be placed within the required front yard but in
no case closer to the front lot line than 15 feet, unless otherwise specified
in the district regulations.
§ 230-143. Reduction of lot.
No lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of
the open spaces shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
§ 230-144. Modification of front yard requirements.
A. Where an unimproved lot is situated between two improved lots having
on each a principal building within 25 feet of the side boundary line of
such unimproved lot, which extends into the required front yard of each
such improved lot and has been so maintained since the effective date
of this chapter, the front yard depth of such unimproved lot may be the
average depth of the front yards of such two adjacent improved lots,
notwithstanding the yard requirements of the district in which it is
located.
B. Where an unimproved lot adjoins only one improved lot having a
principal building thereon within 25 feet of the common side lot line,
which extends into the required front yard of such improved lot and has
been so maintained since the effective date of this chapter, the front
yard depth of such unimproved lot may be the average depth of the
front yard of such adjacent improved lot and the front yard required for
the district in which such unimproved lot is located, notwithstanding
the yard requirements for such district.
§ 230-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-145
1:883
§ 230-145. Dwellings in industrial districts.
One single-family detached dwelling may be erected and used on any lot
located in any Limited Industrial District or Heavy Industrial District which
is unimproved and held in single and separate ownership at the effective
date of this chapter, if permitted by and subject to the zoning regulations
applicable to such lot immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and such lot shall then be used only for such dwelling purposes and
accessory uses customarily incidental thereto. Yard requirements shall
conform to R-1 Residential Districts herein.
§ 230-146. Projections into required yards.
No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall project
into or over any required yard in any district.
§ 230-147. Corner vision obstructions.
On any corner lot, no wall, fence, sign or other structure shall be erected
or altered and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained
which, in the opinion of the Township Supervisors, may cause danger to
traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
§ 230-148. Fences and walls. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
92-3Z]
Fences and walls, as defined in Article II, § 230-5, of this chapter, shall
conform to the following criteria and standards:
A. Fence orientation. The posts or vertical supports of fences shall be
oriented or placed on the side of the fence facing the lot in which the
fence is located. The more attractive side of the fence shall face
outward from the lot in which the fence is located. Fences shall be
installed and maintained so that they are straight and do not sag or lean
over the property outward from the lot on which the fence is located.
Fences shall not be painted bizarre colors, or combinations thereof, or
inscribed with offensive designs on the outward side from the lot on
which they are located.
B. Boundary fences and walls.
(1) Location. Boundary fences and walls shall be located within five
feet of the property line; they should be located as close as possible
to, but not on, the property line.
(2) For residential uses or zones:
(a) In front yards, boundary fences and walls shall not be
permitted unless the front yard abuts a major street, as defined
in the Township's Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 205). In
such cases, boundary fences and walls shall be a maximum of
four feet in height.
§ 230-145 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-148
1:884
(b) In rear and side yards, boundary fences and walls shall be a
maximum height of six feet.
(c) For corner lots, side yard boundary fences shall be a maximum
of four feet high and designed to be non-opaque structures.
Fences which are located a minimum of 15 feet back from the
ultimate right-of-way or immediately adjoin another residential
lot may be a maximum of six feet high and may be opaque. No
fence higher than four feet shall be permitted in a front yard.
All fences must meet the sight distance criteria in Article XXI,
§ 230-148J. [Amended 11-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-42]
(3) For nonresidential uses or zones:
(a) In front yards, boundary fences and walls shall be a maximum
height of six feet and be designed as a non-opaque structure.
(b) In rear and side yards, boundary fences and walls shall be a
maximum height of eight feet.
(c) For corner lots, side yard boundary fences shall be a maximum
height of six feet and be designed as a non-opaque structure,
except for fences which immediately adjoin another
nonresidential lot, in which case such fences shall be a
maximum height of eight feet. All fences must meet the sight
distance criteria in Article XXI, § 230-148J.
C. Decorative fences and walls. Decorative fences and walls may be
located anywhere within a parcel and shall have a maximum height of
three feet. Examples of decorative fences and walls include picket
fences, stone walls and iron fences.
D. Privacy fences. Privacy fences shall be located within the building
envelope of a residential lot. The maximum height of privacy fences
shall be six feet. Privacy fences shall not be located in the front yard.
With the exception of where a privacy fence is attached to a structure,
privacy fences shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
structure so as to not create an impediment to fire protection services
or services for any other life-threatening emergency. Where such fences
are attached to a structure, there shall be at least one access gate, of no
less than three feet in width, for rapid access to the yard enclosed by
the fence.
E. Protective fences. Protective fences shall be permitted to enclose
commercial or industrial storage areas or yards which for reasons of
public safety warrant enclosure. Protective fences may be located
anywhere within the side and/or rear yard of commercial or industrial
parcels, provided that these areas require the enclosure of a nuisance,
storage area or yard equipment. The maximum height of protective
fences shall be eight feet.
§ 230-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-148
1:885
§ 230-149. Accessory uses.
F. Temporary fence. The time duration for temporary fences shall be
established by the Zoning Officer in the building permit. Temporary
fences shall be constructed with roll-up woven wire, rolled plastic
fencing material or woodlath material, with a maximum height of six
feet.
G. Prohibited uses of fences and walls. The following uses of fences and
walls shall be prohibited:
(1) Fences and walls shall not be located within floodplain areas and/or
wetlands.
(2) Fences and walls shall not interfere with stormwater flow or
natural water flow.
(3) Electric fences and walls shall be prohibited for all uses with the
exception of agricultural uses.
(4) Barbed wire or razor fences and walls shall be prohibited for all
uses with the exception of industrial and agricultural uses.
(5) Fences and walls with sharp protrusions, such as broken glass or
spikes, are prohibited.
H. Fences with utility, stormwater and/or access easements shall be
discouraged. Any landowner requesting such a fence must first execute
a fence easement agreement with the Township and demonstrate that
such fence meets all requirements of the easement's restrictions. Such
fences shall be designed to be taken down easily.
I. Fences shall be considered a non-opaque structure when the through
visibility at right angles to any surface of the fence has not been
reduced by more than 50% by fence construction.
J. Sight distance. At all intersections of streets, there shall be measured
along the center line a minimum clear sight triangle of 75 feet from the
point of intersection. Any fences that fall within the clear sight triangle
shall be a maximum of three feet in height above the curb level.
A. Accessory uses authorized in this chapter shall include those
specifically stated herein and those similar uses thereto [Amended
7-24-1989 by Ord. No. 17-058; 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-8Z;
3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 00-121Z; 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-166Z;
5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 03-169ZS; 11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
07-220Z]
(1) Uses accessory to agriculture. Direct commercial sales of
agricultural commodities are permitted upon property owned and
operated by a landowner who produces not less than 50% of the
commodities sold and shall be authorized notwithstanding
municipal ordinance, public nuisance or zoning prohibitions. Such
§ 230-148 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-149
1:886
direct sales shall be authorized without regard to the fifty-percent
limitation under circumstances of crop failure due to reasons
beyond the control of the landowner. The location of buildings
and structures involved with the sale of agricultural commodities
shall comply with all yard, setback and height requirements of the
district in which located. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
07-226Z]
(2) Uses accessory to dwelling.
(a) Uses accessory to a dwelling shall be as follows:
[1] Private garage; private stable; barn; shelter for pets.
[2] Private greenhouse; private swimming pool.
[3] Living quarters for a household caretaker within the
dwelling.
[4] Home occupations are permitted in any residence as an
accessory use in compliance with the standards of this
section, as well as all other applicable Township, state and
federal regulations.
[a] Home occupations shall be divided into two classes
and regulated as follows:
[i] Minor home occupations, including no-impact
home-based businesses conducting a lawful
occupation or business activity which is
conducted in whole or in part by a resident from
his/her primary residences. These uses are
permitted by right in all residential dwellings,
limited to one per dwelling unit, in compliance
with the following requirements: [Amended
6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-239Z]
[A] The business activity shall be compatible with
the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses.
[B] The business may employ not more than one
nonresident employee. All other employees
shall be family members residing in the
dwelling.
[C] There shall be no display or sale of retail
goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a
substantial nature.
[D] There shall be no outside appearance of a
business use, including, but not limited to,
parking, signs or lights.
§ 230-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-149
1:887
[E] The business activity may not use any
equipment or process which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
interference, including interference with
radio or television reception, which is
detectable in the neighborhood.
[F] The business activity may not generate any
solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or
type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
[G] The business activity shall be conducted only
within the dwelling and may not occupy more
than 25% of the habitable floor area.
[H] The business may not involve any illegal
activity.
[ii] Major home occupations. [Amended 6-22-2009
by Ord. No. 09-239Z]
[A] There shall be no more than one business
with up to a total of three employees working
at the dwelling at any time who are not a
resident of the dwelling. The business shall
only be conducted by a resident from his/her
primary residence.
[B] Major home occupations are only permitted
by special exception and only permitted if the
residence fronts on and has direct access to
one of the following streets: Bethlehem Pike,
Welsh Road, DeKalb Pike, Upper State Road,
Horsham Road, Cowpath Road, Doylestown
Road, North Wales Road, Lansdale Avenue,
Line Street, County Line Road and Limekiln
Pike. In the case of properties having
frontage and being located at the corner of
one of the streets listed above and any other
street, such properties are still eligible for
special exception so long as the property shall
have only one driveway access which shall be
from the street which is other than those
listed above. To qualify for a special
exception, these home occupations must
demonstrate compliance with these
standards and the standards of § 230-185 and
must show that parking is safe and adequate.
§ 230-149 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-149
1:888
{1} Visitors, customers or clients shall be
permitted only between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
{2} Pickup or delivery shall be limited to
those services that routinely serve
homes, such as the United States Postal
Service, United Parcel Service or
Federal Express.
[b] Requirements for all home occupations.
[i] A resident of the dwelling must be a principal of
the home occupation.
[ii] There shall be no direct sale of goods on the
premises.
[iii] There shall be no business-related exterior
storage or display of goods.
[iv] Signs for the home occupations shall be permitted
in accordance with the requirements of § 230-126
of this chapter.
[v] The area of all home occupations shall not be
greater than 25% of the habitable floor area of the
dwelling. For the purposes of making this
computation, the habitable floor area of the
dwelling unit shall include the first floor and
unfinished basement but not garages or
unfinished attics. [Amended 6-22-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-239Z]
[vi] The home occupation shall in no way cause the
residential appearance or character of the
premises to differ from the surrounding
residential area.
[vii] Home occupations shall not use noxious, toxic,
combustible, explosive or other types of material
in a manner that could endanger the health,
safety and welfare of the occupants and
surrounding residents.
[viii] No sounds or noise shall be audible outside the
dwelling.
[ix] Vehicular access improvements or any need for
additional parking generated by the home
occupation, over what would normally be
expected for a residence as determined by the
Board of Supervisors with the advice of the
§ 230-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-149
1:889
Township Engineer, shall be met off-street and
only in the side yard and/or rear yard in
accordance with § 230-134 of this chapter.
[x] Trash shall not be permitted in excess of that
normally occurring in residential areas. Outdoor
storage of trash or debris shall be in sealed
containers, shielded from view by neighboring
properties by a dense landscape buffer.
[xi] Family day-care homes, group day-care homes
and day-care centers are not home occupations
and are regulated by § 230-156.1.
[xii] The following uses and similar uses shall not be
permitted as a home occupation: clinic, hospital,
laboratory, animal hospital, barbershop, beauty
parlor, massage parlor, restaurant, motel, body
art, auto tag service, tattooing or body piercing.
[Amended 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-239Z]
[xiii] All home occupations must obtain a use and
occupancy permit and register their business with
the Township before commencing business.
[Amended 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-239Z]
[xiv] No odors resulting from the home occupation
shall be detectable outside the dwelling.255
(b) Uses authorized in this chapter as accessory to a dwelling shall
not be deemed to include a business, hospital, clinic, animal
hospital, barbershop, beauty parlor, other personal service
shop, tearoom, hotel or any similar use.
(3) Uses accessory to noncommercial recreational use: customary
recreational, refreshment and service uses and buildings in any
noncommercial recreational area.
B. Setbacks for uses accessory to dwellings. [Added 7-24-1989 by Ord.
No. 17-058]
(1) One shed (storage building up to 144 square feet in size), or shelter
for pets, private parking spaces, patios, decks, swimming pool and
equipment and tennis courts shall meet the requirements and
setbacks outlined below. [Amended 6-10-2002 by Ord. No.
02-158ZS; 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z]
(a) Patios and decks whose floors are no more than three feet
above ground measured at the point where the patio or deck is
255. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2)(a)[5][a] through [h], which permitted no-impact
home-based businesses in all districts under certain conditions, which immediately
followed this subsection, were repealed 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 09-239Z.
§ 230-149 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-149
1:890
attached to the dwelling, which have no walls or roofs
associated with the deck or patio and which have railings that
are no more than four feet high, may use the setback standards
in Subsection B(1)(c) below. No deck floor may be more than
eight feet above existing grade at any point to be able to use
these standards. Patios and decks which do not meet these
standards must be located within the building envelope.
(b) In-ground and aboveground swimming pools which are
screened by a screened buffer, as outlined in § 205-53 of
Chapter 205, the Township's Subdivision Ordinance, or by a
five- to six-foot-high opaque fence may use the setback
standards in Subsection B(1)(c) below. Swimming pools which
do not have this screening must be located within the building
envelope. In no case may a pool be located in the front yard. All
lighting for swimming pools shall be hooded to prevent the
glare of lights from shining beyond the property line, and
wiring for all pool lighting shall be underground.
(c) The accessory uses listed below, including in-ground and
aboveground pools, shall meet the following setback
standards.256
(2) Barns (storage buildings over 144 square feet in size), garages,
greenhouses and any similar uses must be located within the
building envelope and cannot be located in the front yard.
[Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-220Z]
(3) No uses accessory to dwellings are permitted to be located within
any buffer area, as required either by the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance. [Added
1-26-1998 by Ord. No. 98-91Z]
C. Relative quarters in a single-family detached dwelling, including
cooking facilities, may be provided for no more than two persons
related to the principal occupant by blood, marriage or adoption,
subject to the following conditions:
(1) Neither the present structure nor any proposed addition shall at
any time be occupied by any person other than the property owner
and members of his or her immediate family.
(2) Any sale, lease, transfer or other alienation of the property shall be
as a single-family detached dwelling and shall include the entire
structure located on the property.
(3) The relative quarters shall not be leased or rented as an apartment
or separate dwelling, except to persons specified in C(1) above.
256. Editor's Note: See Chart 1, Accessory Use Setbacks, which appears at the end of this
chapter.
§ 230-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-149
1:891
§ 230-150. Prohibited uses.
The following uses shall be prohibited in any district in this Township:
§ 230-151. (Reserved)257
(4) Any relative quarters' kitchen or cooking facility on the property
shall be removed prior to sale, transfer or other alienation of the
property, unless the appropriate deed restriction has been filed
with the Recorder of Deeds that the property is being continued as
a relative quarters by the new owner/buyer.
(5) Relative quarters must be located in the existing dwelling or must
be attached to the existing dwelling, and there shall always be
maintained a single shared standard doorway connecting the
principal residence and the relative quarters. Relative quarters
shall not be located in a separate freestanding building. Relative
quarters shall be limited to a single floor not greater than 700
square feet of floor area, except when approved as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(6) The applicant shall prepare and file with the Recorder of Deeds a
deed restriction, in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor,
setting forth the conditions set forth in Subsection C(1) through (5)
above, which shall reflect that the property is encumbered with
those specific conditions. Upon sale of the property, seller shall
disclose to buyer the nature of any deed restriction regarding the
conditions of any future use of the relative quarters.
(7) A one-year renewable permit issued by the Township Zoning
Officer shall be required to ensure compliance with this chapter.
The fee for this permit shall be established by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
A. The storage above ground or partially above ground of any inflammable
or explosive materials in excess of 550 gallons capacity, except when
authorized as a special exception, and provided that suitable and
substantial fire and explosive protective means are provided in
accordance with Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., requirements.
B. The keeping, breeding and management of livestock or poultry, except
when associated with and only where Agricultural II uses are
permitted. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-226Z]
C. Flashing lights, except in connection with the direction of aircraft.
D. Any use which is noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke,
gas, vibration or noise or any use which may constitute a public hazard
by fire, explosion or otherwise; no internal combustion engine shall be
permanently installed on any lot unless objectionable noise and
vibration is eliminated and it is equipped and supplied with an effective
muffler or silencer.
§ 230-149 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-152
1:892
§ 230-152. Farm buildings.
The yard regulations in any district to the contrary notwithstanding, no farm
building or enclosure for the raising of livestock or poultry shall be located
nearer to any lot line than 100 feet.
§ 230-153. Swimming pool fences.
Any swimming pool erected or maintained within the Township shall be
provided on all sides with an enclosing fence, wall, gate, building or other
structure not less than four feet in height.
§ 230-154. Private and semi-private recreation facilities.
Private or semi-private recreation facilities shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Golf course.
(2) Swimming pool.
(3) Tennis court.
(4) Outdoor picnic areas.
(5) Outdoor game area (hard surface or grass).
(6) Buildings providing a meeting room, recreation room or lounge.
(7) Play lot or playground.
B. Location of facilities. Private or semi-private recreation facilities shall
conform to the requirements for front, rear and side yards and for
landscaping and screening as provided by § 230-38 of this chapter.
C. Applications. An application for a special exception to provide private or
semi-private recreation facilities shall include the following
information:
(1) All site information as required elsewhere in this chapter.
(2) Location of all proposed recreation facilities.
(3) Detailed plans for all proposed facilities, including, without
limitation, lighting, screening, fencing, storm drainage and
sanitary facilities.
(4) Detailed information on operation of facilities, including, without
limitation:
257. Editor's Note: Former § 230-151, Conversion of dwellings, amended 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1, was repealed 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z.
§ 230-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-154
1:893
§ 230-155. Landscaping and screening. [Amended 8-3-1987 by Ord.
No. 17-033]
All landscaping and screening requirements pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be in conformance with the landscaping and screening
requirements of Article VI of Chapter 205, the Montgomery Township
Subdivision Ordinance, No. 18, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 230-156. Entrance- and accessways for residential development.
[Added 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-037]
All residential developments shall provide for safe and efficient ingress and
egress of traffic to conform to the following standards:
§ 230-156.1. Day-care facilities. [Added 7-1-1991 by Ord. No.
17-063]
As defined in Article II, § 230-5, in this chapter, day-care facility uses shall
conform to the following criteria and standards:
(a) Membership limitations or requirements.
(b) Documents creating associations or ownership where such
ownership or operational responsibility is to be transferred to a
party or parties other than owner of the development.
(c) Operational details, including hours of operation, type of
supervision or security.
A. All entrance- and accessways shall be of sufficient width, with widened
radii where they meet the sides of roads and highways, to conveniently
and safely accommodate the flow of traffic. The locations of
entranceways shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors. The entrance- and accessways shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient ingress and
egress for traffic without undue congestion or interference with the
normal traffic flow on the abutting streets and highways.
B. If deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation when required, the
developer shall be required to widen the paved road frontage abutting
the residential site, install curbing along the same and/or build
acceleration and deceleration lanes to provide for the safe and efficient
ingress and egress of motor vehicles.
C. Safe and efficient ingress and egress is to be provided to and from
public streets serving the site without undue congestion or interference
with traffic flow within the Township.
A. General provisions. The following general provisions apply to each of
the three defined types of child day-care facilities. In addition, each
§ 230-154 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-156.1
1:894
type of child day-care facility shall comply with the specific individual
regulations for each type of facility.
(1) Categories included. The provisions of this section pertain to daycare
service for children by caregivers in family day-care homes,
group-day care homes and day-care centers, subject to Chapter II,
§§ 8A, 8B, and 8C of Department of Public Welfare (DPW) Social
Services Manual Regulations. Day-care service for part of a twentyfour-
hour day for children under 16 years of age by caregivers,
excluding care provided by relatives. Day-care service for children
shall not include babysitting or day care furnished in places of
worship during religious services.
(2) Registration and licensing. Family day-care homes, as defined in
this chapter, must hold an approved and currently valid DPW
registration certificate. Group day-care homes and day-care
centers, as defined in this chapter, must hold an approved and
currently valid DPW license. In addition, all child day-care facilities
shall comply with all current DPW regulations, including those
standards governing adequate indoor space, accessible outdoor
play space and any applicable state or local building and firesafety
codes.
(3) Township notification. Each operator of a newly established child
day-care facility shall notify the Township in writing at least 60
days prior to the initiation of such use, for the purpose of allowing
the Township to establish a record of the new land use. Already
existing licensed or registered facilities shall be required to notify
the Township of its operation in writing at least 60 days after the
enactment of this chapter. In addition, the operator of any facility
must certify compliance with all aspects of this chapter and all
other applicable Township requirements.
(a) Family day-care homes must provide proof of an approved
DPW registration certificate at the time of initial notification to
the Township and must show proof of the registration renewal
every two years.
(b) At such time that a family day-care home wishes to expand its
operation to the level of a group day-care home, the operator of
the facility shall notify the Township in writing at least 60 days
prior to the expansion of the use and provide proof that all
requirements for licensure by DPW have been met. The
operator must also satisfactorily demonstrate that the facility
meets the standards for group day care homes established in
Subsection C below.
(c) Group day-care homes and day-care centers must provide
proof of an approved and currently valid DPW license at the
time of initial notification to the Township and must provide
proof of annual license renewal.
§ 230-156.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-156.1
1:895
(4) Inspection. The operator of a family day-care home, group day-care
home or day-care center will allow appropriate representatives of
the Township to enter the property at reasonable times to inspect
such use for compliance with the requirements of this section and
all other applicable Township and state ordinances.
(5) General safety. No portion of a child-care facility shall be located
within a distance of 1,000 feet of a hazardous land use or activity
which could pose a threat to the safety and welfare of the children,
staff and other occupants at the facility. Hazardous land uses or
activities include but shall not be limited to gasoline service
stations, heavy industrial operation, quarries, storage of flammable
materials, high-pressure underground pipelines, truck loading
areas, etc. Specifically, there shall not be objectionable or unsafe
levels of noise, vibration, fumes, odors, dust, glare, heat, toxic
gases, electric or electronic interference, liquid waste or sewage or
any other physical activity on sites within 1,000 feet.
B. Zoning requirements. The various types of day-care facilities shall be
permitted uses in the following use districts in Montgomery Township:
(1) The family day-care home shall be permitted by right in any
residential district except the R-6 Golf Course District, MHP Mobile
Home Park District, R-3 Residential District and R-3A Residential
District, where it is not permitted. The family day-care home use
shall be permitted by right in any nonresidential district, except the
LI, where it is permitted only by conditional use. [Amended
6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 99-111Z]
(2) The group day-care home use shall be permitted as a special
exception in the R-1, R-2 and R-5 single-family detached residential
districts in the Township. The group day-care home use shall be
permitted by right in any nonresidential district, except the LI
Limited Industrial District, where it is permitted only by conditional
use.
(3) The day-care center use shall be permitted by right in any
nonresidential district in the Township, except the LI Limited
Industrial District, where it is permitted only by conditional use.
C. Family day-care homes and group day-care homes shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Any residence used as a group day-care home must have a
minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet.
(2) Group day-care homes shall be located no less than 500 feet from
any existing group day-care homes.
(3) On-site parking. There shall be one on-site parking space provided
for each nonresident employee above.
§ 230-156.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-156.1
1:896
(4) Dropoff areas. A dropoff area shall be provided with sufficient area
to allow the temporary parking of one vehicle. An existing driveway
may be used for the dropoff area if it can be demonstrated that
there is sufficient space available in the driveway. If a driveway is
used for the dropoff area and the proposed use fronts a major,
secondary or rural street, an on-site turnaround area shall be
provided so that vehicles can exit the site driving forward. In cases
where the existing driveway cannot function as a dropoff area, new
on-site dropoff spaces, which conform to the dimensional standards
for parking spaces, shall be provided.
(5) The requisite outdoor play area shall only be located in the rear
yard of the residence or subject property.
(6) The outdoor play area of group day-care homes shall not be located
within 20 feet of an adjoining property line.
(7) The outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a safety fence
impenetrable by children or small animals, with a minimum height
of four feet and constructed of materials suitable to the existing
residential environment.
(8) The amount of floor area used for day-care purposes shall not
exceed 25% of the total floor area of the building.
(9) Any sign shall comply with standards in this chapter governing the
use of signs in residential districts.
(10) Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
(11) Outdoor play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
D. Day-care centers shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The requisite outdoor play area shall only be located in the rear
yard of the subject property.
(2) The outdoor play area shall not be located within 20 feet of an
adjoining residential property line.
(3) On-site parking. A minimum of one on-site parking space shall be
provided for each employee.
(4) Dropoff area.
(a) Number of dropoff spaces. A minimum of one safe dropoff
space shall be provided for each 10 children that the facility is
licensed to accommodate. Each dropoff space shall conform to
the dimensional standards for parking spaces.
(b) Dropoff area location and design.
§ 230-156.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-156.1
1:897
§ 230-156.2. Procedures and standards for conditional use
approval. [Added 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-11Z]
An application for any conditional use as specified in the various Articles
of this chapter shall be considered by the Township Board of Supervisors
according to the following procedures. The Board may grant conditional use
approval, provided that the applicant complies with the following standards
and criteria for conditional uses and any other reasonable conditions
imposed by the Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof shall rest with
the applicant.
[1] The dropoff area shall be located immediately adjacent to
the facility. The dropoff area should be designed in such a
way that pedestrians do not cross vehicular traffic lanes in
any parking area or driveway. The dropoff area may be
designed either as a part of the on-site parking area or as a
part of the driveway providing direct access to the daycare
facility.
[2] When the dropoff area is incorporated into the on-site
parking area, the parking spaces nearest to the facility
shall be designated as dropoff spaces. When the dropoff
area is incorporated into a driveway, the dropoff spaces
shall be located within a vehicle turnout area 12 feet in
width, exclusive of the driveway through traffic lane(s).
(5) The outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a safety fence
impenetrable by children or small animals, with a minimum height
of four feet. Play areas adjacent to vehicular traffic areas or parking
shall be protected by a concrete New Jersey barrier or equivalent
barrier.
(6) Any sign shall comply with standards in this chapter governing the
use of signs in the appropriate use district.
(7) Outdoor play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
A. Applicant requirements.
(1) The application shall be submitted in writing to the Township
Planning Commission.
(2) The application shall include the request for approval of a
conditional use and sufficient information to document compliance
with the application standards and criteria of this chapter, a
tentative sketch plan of the proposed development and any study
deemed necessary by the Township Engineer. The applicant shall
provide with the application a list of every abutting lot owner on
the same street and every abutting lot owner directly across the
street from the lot or building in question.
§ 230-156.1 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-156.2
1:898
(3) The Township Planning Commission shall submit one copy of the
application to the Montgomery County Planning Commission for its
advisory review and other copies to agencies and/or technical
consultants whose review may be relevant.
B. Public hearing.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall schedule a public hearing thereon
within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request, unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of this time limit.
(2) Public notice of the public hearing, stating the time, place and the
particular nature of the case to be considered, shall be published
twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The
first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing. The Township Secretary shall notify, by mailing or
delivering a notice thereof to the owner, if his residence is known,
or the occupier of every abutting lot on the same street and every
lot directly across the street from the lot or building in question,
provided that failure to give notice shall not invalidate any action
taken by the Board.
(3) The Board of Supervisors shall consider the comments and
recommendations of the Township and County Planning
Commissions, other advisors and those present at the public
hearing prior to deciding to approve or deny the proposed use. In
allowing a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
C. Standards and criteria. In deciding all applications for conditional uses,
the Board of Supervisors shall be guided by the following standards and
criteria:
(1) The proposed use is permitted by conditional use, and it will
conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is
located or any district regulations which may relate to or apply to
the use, including but not limited to setbacks, building coverage,
open space and buffering.
(2) The proposed use will conform to the regulations applicable
according to use and/or district, including but not limited to
regulations contained in Article XVIII, Signs, Article XIX, Off-Street
Parking and Loading, Article XX, Nonconforming Uses and Article
XXI, Miscellaneous Provisions.
(3) Points of vehicular access to the lot are provided at a distance from
the intersections and other points of access and in number
sufficient to prevent undue traffic hazards and obstruction to the
movement of traffic.
§ 230-156.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-156.2
1:899
(4) The location of the site with respect to the existing public roads
giving access to it is such that the safe capacity of the public roads
is not exceeded by the estimated traffic attracted or generated by
the proposed use, and the traffic generated or attracted is not out
of character with the normal traffic using said public roads.
(5) A determination that the proposed use will not have an
unwarranted impact on traffic in the area, either creating
significant additional congestion in an area of existing congestion
or posing a threat of significant additional congestion where there
is a high probability of future congestion. In addition, the Board
shall consider whether the proposed use will create any traffic
hazard dangerous to the public safety.
(6) Screening of the proposed use from adjacent uses is sufficient to
prevent the deleterious impact of the uses upon each other,
considering the type, dimension and character of the screening.
(7) The proposed use does not adversely affect or contradict
Montgomery Township's Comprehensive Plan.
(8) The proposed use meets the purpose described in Article I of this
chapter.
(9) The proposed use is suitable for the character of the neighborhood
and the uses of the surrounding properties.
(10) The proposed use will not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to adjacent property.
(11) The proposed use will not adversely affect the public health, safety
or general welfare.
(12) The proposed use will not adversely affect transportation or unduly
burden water, sewer, school, park or other public facilities.
(13) The proposed use shall not overcrowd land or create undue
concentration of population or undue intensity of use.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision on the
application within 45 days after the last hearing in which the Board
considered the application.
E. Where the Board of Supervisors fails to render a decision within the
period required by this section or fails to hold the required hearing
within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on the record,
to an extension of time.
F. Approval of any conditional use shall expire one year after the date of
approval by the Board of Supervisors or the signing of the development
§ 230-156.2 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-156.2
1:900
§ 230-156.3. Additional limitations to required yards. [Added
1-28-2002 by Ord. No. 01-140Z]
No outdoor vending machine, self-service station, or similar use such as an
automated teller machine shall be permitted in any required yard area.
§ 230-156.4. Special regulations for restaurant, outdoor customer
dining area. [Added 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-167Z]
§ 230-156.5. Special regulations for flag lots. [Added 11-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-203Z]
plan, whichever is later, if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit
or use and occupancy permit.
A. Zoning requirements. Outdoor dining area shall be permitted by special
exception as an accessory use in the C, S, and ECPOD Overlay Districts.
[Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 12-259Z]
B. Floor area devoted to outdoor dining shall provide for off-street parking
in the same manner as prescribed for restaurant use.
C. The area designated and used for outdoor dining shall comply with all
other zoning requirements such as yards, impervious surface ratio,
setbacks from parking areas, and for the purposes of this chapter
outside dining areas shall be included in the calculation and limitations
which govern building coverage and building location.
D. The outdoor dining area shall not infringe on any public sidewalk, or
encroach upon required green space or parking areas; and shall be
physically separated from the above by any combination of railing,
fence, deck, planting boxes, or natural vegetation.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider other items, including but not
limited to music, sound, hours of operation of the outdoor dining area,
traffic, outdoor lighting, and impacts on neighboring properties.
A. The following provisions shall apply:
(1) A flag lot shall provide a lot area of 150% of the minimum
established for the individual district and shall not include the area
located in the access strip.
(2) Each flag lot shall abut along a public street for a width of not less
than 25 feet and this minimum width shall be maintained along the
entire length of the access strip. The portion of a flag lot required
for the access driveway shall not be included in calculating the
required front, side or rear yards, or the minimum required lot
area.
§ 230-156.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-156.5
1:901
(3) The driveway serving flag lots shall be paved and provide a
minimum of 12 feet in width and shall provide a vertical clearance
of not less than 13 feet six inches.
(4) The front yard of a flag lot shall be positioned between the new
building and the street from which access is taken.
(5) The front yard of a flag lot shall be parallel to the street from which
access is taken.
(6) All required side and rear yards shall be not less than 150% of the
minimum required by the district, but in no event shall a side yard
be less than 20 feet nor a rear yard less than 40 feet.
(a) The front yard setback for a flag lot shall be a distance equal to
the front yard requirements for the district in which the lot is
located and shall be measured for the point where the lot first
obtains the minimum required lot width.
(7) No flag lot shall contain an access strip which extends through or
beyond more than one tier of lots.
(8) All flag lots shall be provided with public water and sanitary sewer.
(9) A flag lot approved pursuant to this section shall not be permitted
to be further subdivided.
(10) Flag lots will be permitted for single-family detached units only.
(11) Flag lots shall only be permitted when the area cannot practically
be subdivided.
(12) Flag lots shall not be permitted as part of a major subdivision.
Major subdivision shall be as defined by the Montgomery Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.258
B. Flag lots, subject to the above regulations, shall be permitted when
approved as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors.
258. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-156.5 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-156.5
1:902
ARTICLE XXII
Administration
§ 230-157. Enforcement.
There shall be a Zoning Officer who shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors and whose duty it shall be and he is hereby given the power
and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall examine all
applications for permits, issue permits only for construction and uses which
are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, record and file
all applications for permits with any accompanying plans and documents,
which shall be matters of public record, and make such reports as the Board
of Supervisors may require. Permits for construction and uses which are a
special exception or a variance from the requirements of this chapter shall
be issued only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 230-158. Building permit required.
A building permit shall be required prior to the erection or alteration of or
addition to any building or other structure or portion thereof.
§ 230-159. Building permit applications.
All applications for building permits shall be made, in writing, on forms
furnished by the Township and shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing
the exact size and location of any buildings or other structures existing on
the lot in question or upon abutting land within 50 feet of the side and
rear lot lines of such lot and the lines within which the proposed building
or other structure shall be erected or altered. There shall, in addition, be
included with all applications such other plans, documents and information
as may be necessary to enable the Zoning Officer to ascertain compliance
with this chapter and all other pertinent ordinances.
§ 230-160. Issuance of building permit.
No building permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has certified that
the proposed building, structure or alteration complies with the provisions
of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
§ 230-161. Use and occupancy permit required.
A use and occupancy permit shall be required prior to any of the following:
A. Each change of use or occupancy of any commercial, industrial or
business/professional building or unit of building where a building
permit is not necessary. [Amended 10-25-1999 by Ord. No.
99-118Z]
B. Use of land or change in the use thereof, except that the placing of
vacant land under cultivation shall not require a use and occupancy
permit.
§ 230-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-161
1:903
§ 230-162. Use and occupancy permit applications.
All applications for use and occupancy permits shall be made, in writing, on
forms furnished by the Township and shall include all information necessary
to enable the Zoning Officer to ascertain compliance with this chapter.
§ 230-163. Issuance of use and occupancy permit.
No use and occupancy permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has
certified that the proposed use complies with all the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 230-164. Approval or refusal of permits.
If the Zoning Officer determines that an application is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his duty to issue the appropriate
permit; and if he determines that an application is not in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his duty to refuse the permit,
in which case he shall instruct the applicant in the method of appeal or
application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Change in use of any nonconforming use where a building permit is not
applicable.
§ 230-161 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-164
1:904
ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 230-165. Establishment; membership; terms; removal. [Amended
5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 17-054]
A. There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board which shall consist of three
residents of Montgomery Township who shall be appointed by
resolution of the Supervisors of Montgomery Township. In addition to
the three member appointments, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consist also of two alternate members who shall also be appointed by
the Supervisors of Montgomery Township. As used in this article, the
term "Board" shall mean the Zoning Hearing Board. The terms of office
shall be three years for Board members and three years for alternates
and shall be so fixed that a member term shall expire each year. The
terms of the alternates shall be so fixed that the terms shall expire in
separate years, i.e., in the original appointment, one alternate shall be
appointed for a two-year term and the other alternate shall be
appointed for a three-year term. Members may succeed themselves.
The Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors wherever any
vacancies occur, and the Board of Supervisors shall thereupon appoint
a resident of the Township to serve for the unexpired portion of the
term. Members of the Board and alternates shall hold no other office in
the Township, and no member of the Board or alternate may also be a
member of the Planning Commission.
B. When by reason of absence or disqualification one or more members is
unavailable for a hearing, the Chairman of the Board shall designate
one or both alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may
be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the board
shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the
matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until the
Board has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation
of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case
basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. Members of the Board shall receive such compensation as may be fixed
by the Board of Supervisors for the performance of their duties as
members of the Zoning Hearing Board. Alternate members of the Board
may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors,
for the performance of their duties when designated as alternate
members pursuant to Subsection B above. Both with respect to
members and alternate members, the compensation paid to members
or alternate members shall not exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to members of the Board of Supervisors.
D. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the
Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be
compensated pursuant to Subsection C above unless designated as a
voting alternate member pursuant to Subsection B above.
§ 230-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-165
1:905
§ 230-166. Organization; quorum; rules; annual report. [Amended
5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 17-054; 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve
annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of
any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than
a majority of the three-member Board, which may include a designated
alternate member or members. The Board may appoint a hearing officer
from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf. The decision
or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board;
however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to
the Township, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for
its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business and
shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors once a year.
§ 230-167. Hearings.
The Board shall meet monthly to hear and consider all such matters which
shall properly come before it. All such meetings shall be open to the public.
§ 230-168. Persons entitled to initiate action.
Appeals from the Zoning Officer pursuant to § 230-182 hereof and
proceedings to challenge an ordinance under § 230-183 hereof may be
filed by an officer or agency of the Township or by any person aggrieved.
Requests for a variance under § 230-184 and for a special exception under
§ 230-185 hereof may be filed by any landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner.
§ 230-169. Manner of initiating action.
All action before the Board shall be initiated by a written application for
hearing which shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at least three weeks
prior to the meeting at which the particular matter is to be heard. All
applications shall be made on forms specified by the Board, and no
application form shall be accepted unless the same shall be fully and legibly
completed and unless all exhibits and supplemental material required by
the application shall be attached and until all fees required under this
chapter shall have been paid.
E. Any member of the Board or alternate may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the Board of Supervisors taken after the member
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member or
alternate shall request it in writing.
§ 230-165 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-170
1:906
§ 230-170. Time limitations.
All appeals from the Zoning Officer shall be filed within 30 days following
the refusal of the Zoning Officer to grant a building permit or zoning permit.
§ 230-171. Notice of hearing. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No.
17-054]
§ 230-172. Parties.
The parties to the hearings shall be the municipality, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board and any other person, including civic or community organizations,
permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have the power to
require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
A. Notice of the time and place of all hearings shall be given by the
Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board as follows:
(1) By publishing a notice thereof once a week for two successive
weeks before the date fixed for the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The first publication shall not
be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be fewer
than seven days from the date of the hearing.
(2) By mailing a notice thereof to the parties in interest.
(3) By mailing a notice to the Township Secretary and to each member
of the Board of Supervisors.
(4) By mailing a notice thereof to every resident or association of
residents of the Township who shall have registered their names
and addresses, in writing, for this purpose, provided that each
registrant requesting such notice agrees to pay a fee in the sum of
$1 for each notice mailed, due and payable upon mailing.
(5) By mailing or delivering a notice thereof to the owner, if his
residence is known, or to the occupier of every abutting lot on the
same street and every lot directly across the street from the lot or
building in question, provided that failure to give notice required
by this Subsection A(5) shall not invalidate any action taken by the
Board.
(6) By conspicuously posting written notice of the hearing on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. The
applicant shall submit a photograph at the hearing of said posting.
B. The notice herein required shall state the location of the lot or building
and the general nature of the question involved.
§ 230-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-173
1:907
§ 230-173. Witnesses.
The Chairman of the Board, the hearing officer, if one is designated, or,
in the absence of both, the member of the Board presiding at the hearing
shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
§ 230-174. Representation.
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and crossexamine
adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
§ 230-175. Rules of evidence.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
§ 230-176. Record of proceedings.
The Board shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings, and a
transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material
received in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost.
§ 230-177. Communications. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No.
17-054]
The Board shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or
his representative in connection with any issue involved except upon notice
and opportunity for all parties to participate. In addition, the Board shall
not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded
an opportunity to contest the material so noticed, and shall not inspect
the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any
party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present. The term "Board," as used herein, shall include not only the
members but also any secretary, clerk, legal counsel or consultant to the
Board.
§ 230-178. Decisions. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 17-054]
The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written
decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the
application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board or hearing
officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together
with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,259 other statutes or of any
259. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 230-173 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-178
1:908
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light
of the facts found. Where the Board has power to render a decision and
the Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, fails to render the
same within the period required by this clause, the decision shall be deemed
to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has
agreed, in writing or on record, to an extension of time. When a decision
has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the
Board to meet or render a decision, the Board shall give public notice of
said decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to render
a decision in the same manner as provided in § 230-171. If the Board shall
fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this section
shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 230-179. Copies of decisions.
A copy of the final decision or, when no decision is called for, of the findings
shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than
the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their names
and addresses with the Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the
Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or
findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings
may be examined.
§ 230-180. Appeals to the courts.
Appeals may be taken to the court by any party aggrieved, filed not later
than 30 days after notice of report or decision of the Board is issued.
§ 230-181. Expiration of special permits, exceptions and variances.
[Amended 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 94-40]
Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a permit, special exception or
variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit or
a use and occupancy permit, as the case may be, within 18 months from
the date of granting thereof. Further, within 18 months from the date
of issuance of a building permit or a use and occupancy permit by the
Zoning Officer or the granting of a permit, special exception or variance
by the Board, substantial construction of the proposed building, addition or
alteration or such other activity as was contemplated or appropriate under
the permit or order of the Board must be completed or taken; otherwise,
said permit, special exception or variance shall expire and the land or
building which was the subject of the permit issued by the Zoning Officer
by the order of the Board shall revert to its former status.
§ 230-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-182
1:909
§ 230-182. Appeals from Zoning Officer. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord.
No. 17-054]
The Board shall hear and decide appeals from the determination of the
Zoning Officer, including but not limited to the granting or denial of any
permit or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any
cease-and-desist order or the registration or refusal to register any
nonconforming use, structure or lot. These appeals must be filed within
30 days of the date the decision is rendered by the Zoning Officer, and
all appeals shall be on forms prescribed by the Zoning Hearing Board,
accompanied by the requisite fees. All appeals shall refer to the specific
provisions of this chapter involved.
§ 230-183. Challenging validity of ordinances. [Amended 5-8-1989
by Ord. No. 17-054; 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
The Board may hear:
§ 230-184. Variances.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the Board of Supervisors as curative amendments.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the progress of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance.
A. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon
the appellant. The Board may grant a variance, provided that the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
§ 230-182 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-184
1:910
§ 230-185. Special exceptions. [Amended 3-17-1986 by Ord. No.
17-032]
The Board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions to the terms
of this chapter in such cases as are expressly provided for in this chapter.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in this chapter as
it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of this section and this
Zoning Ordinance. Where, in this chapter, additional standards are set forth
for a particular use that may be requested for a special exception, then the
Board shall consider whether the request meets those standards in addition
to the standards set forth in this section. In deciding all applications for
special exceptions, the Board shall be guided by the following criteria and
standards:
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter.
A. The proposed use is one permitted by special exception.
B. The proposed use is permitted, and it will conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located or any district
regulations which may relate to or apply to the use, including but not
limited to setbacks, building coverage, open space and buffering.
C. The proposed use will conform to the regulations applicable according
to use and/or district, including but not limited to regulations contained
in Article XIX, Off-Street Parking and Loading; Article XX,
Nonconforming Uses; and Article XXI, Miscellaneous Provisions.
[Amended 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 09-236Z]
D. Points of vehicular access to the lot are provided at a distance from the
intersections and other points of access and in number sufficient to
prevent undue traffic hazards and obstruction to the movement of
traffic.
E. The location of the site with respect to the existing public roads giving
access to it is such that the safe capacity of the public roads is not
exceeded by the estimated traffic attracted or generated by the
proposed use, and the traffic generated or attracted is not out of
character with the normal traffic using said public roads.
§ 230-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-185
1:911
§ 230-186. Other appeals. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 17-054]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and determine the following:
F. A determination that the proposed use will not have an unwarranted
impact on traffic in the area, either creating significant additional
congestion in an area of existing congestion or posing a threat of
significant additional congestion where there is a high probability of
future congestion. In addition, the Board shall consider whether the
proposed use will create any traffic hazard dangerous to the public
safety.
G. Screening of the proposed use from adjacent uses is sufficient to
prevent the deleterious impact of the uses upon each other, considering
the type, dimension and character of the screening.
H. The suitability of the property for the proposed use.
I. The proposed use not adversely affect or contradict the Comprehensive
Plan of the municipality.
J. The general purpose and intent of this chapter.
K. The Board will be guided by sound subdivision practice, sound land use
planning and the preservation and conservation of natural resources.
L. The suitability of the proposed use to the character of the neighborhood
and the uses of the surrounding properties.
M. The proposed use will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property.
N. The proposed use will not adversely affect the public health, safety or
general welfare.
O. The proposed use will not adversely affect transportation or unduly
burden water, sewer, school, park or other public facilities.
P. The presence or absence of protestants against the proposed use shall
not be dispositive, but the Board may weigh such presence or absence
of protestants as evidence of the effect that the proposed use may be
deemed to have.
Q. The proposed use shall not overcrowd land or create undue
concentration of population or undue intensity of use.
A. Appeals from a decision by a Municipal Engineer or Zoning Officer
regarding floodplains.
B. Appeals from the decision of any agency or officers regarding transfer
of development rights or performance density provisions.
C. Appeals from the decision of a Municipal Engineer or Zoning Officer
regarding sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
§ 230-185 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-186
1:912
management, insofar as the same relate to development not involving
subdivision, land development or cluster development applications.
§ 230-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-186
1:913

ARTICLE XXIV
Amendments
§ 230-187. Power of amendment.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map, by
proceeding in the manner prescribed in this article.
§ 230-188. Public hearing and notice.
§ 230-189. Citizens' petition.
Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the area in any district shall
present to the Board of Supervisors a petition, duly signed and
acknowledged, requesting an amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal of any of the regulations or restrictions prescribed
by this chapter for their district or a change or modification of the Zoning
Map with reference to such district, it shall be the duty of the Board of
Supervisors to hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be
given in the manner prescribed in § 230-188 above.
§ 230-190. Citizens' protest.
In case of a protest against any proposed amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal signed by the owners of 20% or more, either of the
area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately
adjacent in the rear or in the front or to either side thereof, extending
100 feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by
favorable vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Supervisors.
A. The Board of Supervisors, by resolution adopted at a stated or special
meeting, shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed
change, amendment or repeal and cause notice thereof to be given as
follows:
(1) By publishing a notice thereof once a week for two successive
weeks before the date fixed for the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township.
(2) By mailing a notice thereof to every resident or association of
residences of the Township who shall have registered their names
and addresses for this purpose with the Township Secretary.
B. The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed change,
amendment or repeal.
C. Full opportunity to be heard will be given to any citizen and all parties
in interest attending such hearing.
§ 230-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-191
1:915
§ 230-191. Referral to Planning Commission.
The Board of Supervisors shall refer each petition or proposal for change or
amendment under this article XXIV to the Planning Commission, which shall
consider whether or not such proposed change or amendment would be, in
the view of the Commission, consistent with and desirable in furtherance
of the Comprehensive Plan upon which this chapter is based, as the same
may be modified from time to time. The Commission shall transmit its
conclusion thereon within a reasonable period of time, together with its
reasons therefor, to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
shall take such conclusion and reasons into consideration in reaching its
decision but shall not be bound thereby.
§ 230-191 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-191
1:916
ARTICLE XXV
Enforcement
[Amended 10-27-1986 by Ord. No. 17-038; 6-26-1989 by Ord. No.
17-055]
§ 230-192. Enforcement notice.
§ 230-193. Causes of action.
In case any building, sign, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed
to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained
or used in violation of any ordinance, the Board of Supervisors or, with
the approval of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the municipality
or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land or to prevent in or about such premises any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of any zoning ordinance
has occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record.
C. The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of the ordinance.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the date of the notice.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described by
attaching a copy of §§ 230-193 and 230-195.
§ 230-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-193
1:917
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun
by serving a copy of the complaint on the Board of Supervisors of the
Township. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
§ 230-194. Jurisdiction.
District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought
under § 230-195.
§ 230-195. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, be levied or
be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there has
been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed
to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter,
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of
zoning ordinances shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 230-193 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-195
1:918
ARTICLE XXVI
Fees
§ 230-196. Fees.
Fees for building permits shall be paid in accordance with the Montgomery
Township Building Code.260 Other fees required in the administration of
this chapter shall be paid in advance or accompanying the application in
accordance with the schedule of fees which may be adopted from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.261
260. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
261. Editor's Note: Original Art. XVIII, Airport Hazard Areas "AHA," added 2-10-1986 by Ord.
No. 17-025, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
92-1.
§ 230-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-196
1:919

ARTICLE XXVII
ECPOD Expressway Corridor Preservation Overlay District
[Added 9-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-60; amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No.
96-68]
§ 230-197. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the purposes contained in Article I, § 230-2, of this chapter,
and the policies and recommendations of the Township's Comprehensive
Plan, as amended, the primary intent of this district is to preserve the
Route 202 expressway bypass corridor for highway use while permitting
development of appropriate land uses on adjoining lands. In addition, other
specific intents and purposes of this district include the following:
§ 230-198. Application procedures standards and criteria.
This district shall apply as a mapped overlay, confined to the tracts shown
on the maps as Exhibit A, which represents land defined by Vesterra Corp.,
and Exhibit B, which describes land defined by General Hancock
Partnership, and also described by metes and bounds on Exhibit C for
land described by Vesterra Corp. and Exhibit D for land described by
General Hancock Partnership, which are attached hereto and incorporated
herein.262 This shall apply only when authorized by the Board of Supervisors
as a conditional use in compliance with the following standards and criteria:
A. Permit a variety of higher intensity land uses to offset the loss of
developable land and design flexibility on sites where the Route 202
bypass corridor is reserved from development.
B. Require a combination of land uses according to fixed standards.
C. Use incentive standards to permit combinations of land uses to be
adjusted to satisfy market demands, in return for public benefits.
D. Allow the expansion of the established regional retail core along Route
309 within a corridor similar in depth to that of existing major
commercial developments.
E. Require new development to be compatible with existing land uses on
abutting properties or provide transitional buffers in proportion to the
degree of incompatibility.
F. Require transitional buffers where new development is near, but not
abutting, existing less compatible development.
G. Preserve natural features and open space for public recreation,
consistent with recommendations of the Township's Open Space Plan.
H. Encourage implementation of land use and transportation principles
identified in the Montgomery Township Comprehensive Plan Update of
1987, and as amended.
§ 230-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-198
1:921
A. Eligibility. The district may be applied to individual parcels or groups of
parcels under unified application that contain 100 acres or more and
are crossed by the proposed Route 202 expressway corridor shown in
the Circulation Plan element of the Township's Comprehensive Plan
update of 1987. When approved as a Zoning Map amendment, the
district shall be shown on the Township Zoning Map as an overlay of the
conventional mapped districts.
B. Expressway corridor preservation. The Route 202 expressway corridor
shall be shown on the applicant's plans, using the latest PennDOT
alignment available at the time the plans are submitted. The corridor
shall be reserved from development for a period of 25 years from the
date of final plan approval. Any part of the proposed corridor that is not
acquired by PennDOT after 25 years may be retained by the property
owner for use in compliance with the requirements of this overlay
district.
C. Use of the expressway corridor.
(1) Interim use. Until the corridor is used for highway purposes, the
land may be used as public open space, or for private farming and/
or private open space and recreation uses, provided that no
buildings are constructed within the corridor for these purposes
and provided that the applicant agrees that these uses shall stop
when highway construction is approved, or when otherwise
required by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Permanent use. The corridor may be used for road and utility
crossings, driveways and stormwater management facilities
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Ownership and application procedure. Land proposed for this district
shall be under single and separate ownership or be subject to a unified
application. Applications shall be submitted and processed in
compliance with § 230-156.2 of this chapter, Procedures and standards
for conditional use approval, in addition to the following:
(1) The application for conditional use shall include the land use area
plan, as required by § 230-204, herein.
(2) The application for conditional use shall also include a traffic
management study, as required by Article XVI of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.263
(3) In allowing a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this article. Such conditions and safeguards may
262. Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are located at the end of this chapter. Exhibits C and D
consist of boundary descriptions, which descriptions are on file in the Township offices.
263. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-198 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-198
1:922
§ 230-199. Permitted land use categories. [Amended 1-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 98-97Z]
Permitted uses are listed under five permitted land use categories,
nonretail, retail, institutional, low-density residential and medium- and
high-density residential. These five are subject to the mixing regulations
and development options in § 230-201, herein. In addition, wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be permitted by right, special exception
or conditional use, depending on the type of facility, in compliance with
Article XXX herein.
include, but need not be limited to, agreements to perform
transportation improvements, reserve open space, preserve
historic structures and natural features or other measures that
implement the purposes of this article.
E. Standards and criteria for conditional uses, land use and development.
The requirements of §§ 230-198 through 230-205, herein, are
conditional use standards and criteria to be satisfied for approval of
conditional use, as well as land use, subdivision and land development.
A. Nonretail uses. The following are permitted nonretail uses and shall be
regulated according to the provisions specifically stated in each
subsection:
(1) Business or professional offices, including office parks and
corporate headquarters according to the provisions of § 230-205I,
herein, except that the maximum building coverage for each lot
shall be 25% of the lot area.
(2) Hotels, convention or conference centers, bed-and-breakfast
facilities according to the provisions of § 230-205I, herein, except
that the maximum building coverage for each lot shall be 25% of
the lot area.
(3) Scientific research laboratory, engineering center, manufacturing,
fabricating, assembling, processing, warehousing and storage
according to the provisions of §§ 230-115, Height regulations, and
230-116, Area, width and yard regulations, of the LI Limited
Industrial District. These may include limited retail sales as
permitted under § 230-103D of the Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Large scale indoor or outdoor public or private recreation facility,
including tennis and racket clubs, skating rinks, public swimming
pools, bowling alleys, fitness centers, golf centers, miniature golf
and similar facilities (but not including stadiums or arenas), as
regulated under § 230-103C(2) and (3) herein, according to the
provisions of §§ 230-115, Height regulations, and § 230-116, Area,
width and yard regulations, of the LI Limited Industrial District of
the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 230-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-199
1:923
(5) Indoor theaters containing not less than six nor more than 22
screens. [Added 1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 00-129Z]
B. Retail uses.
(1) Unless otherwise noted, all retail uses listed in this section shall
comply with the retail center regulations in §§ 230-206 through
230-213, herein. Retail uses of 10,000 square feet of floor area or
less, and not associated with a retail center, shall comply with the C
Commercial District Regulations in §§ 230-76 and 230-77.
(2) Retail uses shall be further separated into five subcategories:
standard uses permitted by right, standard uses permitted by
conditional use, alternative uses permitted by right, alternative
uses permitted by conditional use and alternative uses permitted
by special exception. Alternative retail uses are those that are
characterized by one or more of the following: less vehicular traffic,
lower parking demands or parking demands at time periods
different from those of standard retail uses. Alternative retail uses
need not be separate from standard retail uses, but the alternative
retail uses shall represent a minimum of 10% of the total retail
uses. The conditional use or special exception application for
individual uses may be submitted at the time of the conditional use
application for the overall development, or at any time after the
conditional use for the overall development has been approved.
(a) Standard retail uses permitted by right. Shops, stores or other
indoor facilities for the retail sale of goods or merchandise to
the general public for personal, household or other private
consumption and the rendering of services incidental to the
sale of such goods, including but not limited to the following
types of stores, are permitted by right:
[1] Retail sale of dry goods, variety merchandise, clothing,
food, beverages, flowers and plants, drugs, household
supplies, garden supplies and equipment, athletic and/or
recreational equipment and auto parts or similar goods.
[2] Motor vehicle sales facilities for new and used motor
vehicles are prohibited.
[3] Retail sale and repair of jewelry, clocks, optical goods,
cameras, home appliances, computers and other
electronic equipment, scientific and professional
instruments or similar goods.
[4] Restaurants, taverns and indoor eating facilities; drivethrough
and fast food facilities are permitted up to 5,000
square feet maximum in gross floor area each. (Fast food
facilities are defined as being establishments where any
one of the following occur or apply: no table service, food
§ 230-199 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-199
1:924
is dispensed by cafeteria style; no bussing of tables; and
the use of disposable utensils).
(b) Standard retail uses permitted by conditional use.
[1] Restaurants or similar indoor eating facilities with drivethrough
and fast food facilities larger than 5,000 square
feet in gross floor area each shall be standard retail uses
permitted by conditional use.
[2] Motor vehicle sales facilities for new and used motor
vehicles are prohibited.
(c) Alternative retail uses permitted by right. The following
alternative retail uses shall be permitted by right:
[1] Banks and financial institutions, including drive-through
facilities.
[2] Offices developed as part of a retail center. Offices may
also be developed as part of the nonretail use category,
according to the provisions of § 230-205A herein.
[3] Service shops, including barber, beauty salons and dry
cleaning pickup.
[4] Restaurants, taverns or similar indoor eating facilities,
excluding all drive-through and fast food facilities.
[5] Stores that sell furniture, carpeting or other large-scale
items and that have lower trip generation rates.
[6] Similar uses to the above alternative retail uses, if the
applicant can demonstrate that the use meets the standard
in § 230-199, above.
[7] Motor vehicle sales facilities for new and used motor
vehicles are prohibited.
(d) Alternative retail uses permitted by conditional use.
[1] Indoor theaters or entertainment facilities (excluding
adult uses or sexually oriented businesses), as regulated
under §§ 230-76 and 230-77 of the C Commercial District
of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be alternative retail uses
permitted by conditional use.
[2] Motor vehicle sales facilities for new and used motor
vehicles are prohibited.
(e) Alternative retail uses permitted by special exception.
[1] Auto repair facilities, when authorized by special
exception and excluding the following: auto parts stores,
§ 230-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-199
1:925
junkyards, auto body and painting facilities, gasoline filling
stations, and car washes. [Amended 4-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-236Z]
[2] Motor vehicle sales facilities for new and used motor
vehicles are prohibited.
C. Institutional uses. The following are permitted institutional uses and
shall be regulated by the dimensional and development regulations in
§ 230-205I, herein:
(1) Licensed institutions for housing and care of the elderly,
handicapped or mentally ill, including personal care, intermediate
care and skilled care facilities.
(2) Places of worship and adjunct dwelling units for clergy and support
staff, and accessory educational, day-care, recreational and social
facilities administered directly by the institution.
(3) Funeral homes, post offices, veterinary facilities and animal
hospitals.
(4) Medical, surgical or rehabilitation clinics or hospitals.
(5) Public or private educational institutions (whether primary or
secondary), trade or professional schools and learning centers.
(6) Day-care centers, subject to the provisions of Article XXI,
§ 230-156.1, herein.
D. Low-density residential uses. Low-density residential uses shall be
regulated by the standards of the R-2 and Cluster Districts, Articles VI
and VIII respectively, of the Township's Zoning Ordinance. The
minimum tract size required by the standards shall not apply but shall
be superseded by the minimum percentage standards in § 230-201,
herein. Open space required by the Cluster District shall be provided in
addition to other open space required by the overlay standards and
shall be located convenient to the R-2 development.
E. Medium-high density residential uses. Duplex, twin and townhouse
development shall comply with § 230-50, Area, height and bulk
regulations, of the R-3A Medium Density Residential District of the
Township Zoning Ordinance, except that the minimum tract size
required by the R-3A standards shall not apply but shall be superseded
by the minimum percentage standards of the overlay options of this
district. Apartment development shall comply with the area, height and
bulk regulations of § 230-37 of the R-3 High Density Residential District
of the Township's Zoning Ordinance, except that the following
regulations shall supersede any contradictory regulations of the R-3
High Density Residential District for apartment complexes within the
ECPOD Expressway Corridor Preservation Overlay District: [Amended
6-25-2001 by Ord. No. 01-137Z]
§ 230-199 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-199
1:926
§ 230-200. Open space, historic preservation and civic uses.
Open space and historic preservation are required by Overlay Options Nos.
2 and 3 of this district, but they do not count as land use categories for
mixing purposes. Land required to be preserved for open space shall not be
counted as acreage for any permitted land use category listed in § 230-199,
herein. The open space shall be offered for dedication, and easements shall
be granted to the Township upon approval of final plans and posting of
escrows for the first phase of development. The Township need not accept
dedication.
(1) The maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre shall not
exceed 14.
(2) The maximum number of dwelling units per building shall not
exceed 30 with the exception that one building in an apartment
complex shall be permitted up to a maximum of 50 dwelling units
provided such building also contains a community room and/or
recreational amenities available to all the residents of the
apartment complex.
(3) The building height of any individual buildings shall not exceed 46
feet or three stories, except that one building in an apartment
complex shall be permitted a building height not to exceed 57 feet
or four stories provided that such building shall contain a
community room and/or recreational amenities available to all the
residents of the apartment complex.
(4) Side and rear yard buffer areas may be eliminated adjacent to
permanently dedicated open space and lands preserved for the
expressway corridor under § 230-198, and may be reduced to 20
feet adjacent to lands zoned or utilized for residential purposes.
(5) The minimum tract size required by the R-3 standards shall not
apply but shall be superseded by the minimum percentage
standards of the overlay options of this district.
(6) The requirements of § 230-38S shall not apply to apartment
buildings within the ECPOD District.
F. Accessory uses. Uses subordinate to and customarily incidental to the
permitted uses listed above shall be permitted in compliance with the
standards applicable to the permitted use to which they are accessory.
A. Use of open space/historic land areas. Land dedicated for open space or
used for historic preservation, civic buildings and their accessory uses
may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors. These may include
community center, museum and public library uses, provided in
addition to recreation and environmental or historic preservation.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Board of Supervisors from
selling, exchanging or trading land intended for the above uses if
§ 230-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-200
1:927
another parcel of land can be acquired by purchase, exchange or trade
that will accomplish the same open space, historic or civic use purpose.
B. Open space preservation easements. On land not dedicated as open
space, open space easements to the Township shall be placed on all
floodplains, wetlands and watercourses for environmental preservation
and passive recreation purposes, including trails.
C. Historic preservation.
(1) If the Board of Supervisors determines that there is any historic
significance to any buildings located on a property, and if the Board
decides that it is economically feasible to rehabilitate such
building(s), the Board of Supervisors shall require that such
building(s) be preserved, within an area that retains the historic
setting.
(2) In lieu of rehabilitating such building(s), the applicant may offer to
convey such building(s) to the Township. If the Township accepts
dedication, the developer will convey the building and tract to the
Township. The conveyance shall include restrictions on the use of
the building(s) as are reasonable, and the Township shall
rehabilitate the building(s) within a reasonable time after
conveyance. The developer will contribute 50% of the cost of
rehabilitation.
(3) The historic building(s) may be used for civic or private purposes
permitted by this district. The bulk, scale and historic character of
the building(s) shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible,
subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Historic preservation easements shall be placed on historic
properties. However, public access to residential/farmstead
properties shall be prohibited as long as they are used privately for
those purposes.
D. Criteria for open space areas. Of the minimum required total open
space on a tract (as determined by § 230-201, herein), the applicant
shall provide one contiguous open space area which shall meet the
following criteria:
(1) The contiguous open space area shall be a minimum of 35% of the
required total minimum open space on the tract. [Amended
12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-77]
(2) The contiguous open space area shall have a minimum of 500 feet
of frontage on a public road (excluding a limited access
expressway) or shall be adjacent and contiguous to existing
Township open space and shall be easily accessible to Township
residents and usable for the purposes proposed.
§ 230-200 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-200
1:928
§ 230-201. Basic and incentive mixing regulations.
Development shall comply with one of the three overlay options in the table
contained in this section, as well as the following standards:
§ 230-202. Incentive standards for overlay option No. 2.
Development under the Overlay Option No. 2, § 230-201C, herein, shall
satisfy the following transportation and open space standards, subject to
approval and conditions by the Board of Supervisors:
(3) No more than 30% of the contiguous open space area can be
covered by designated wetlands and/or floodplain.
(4) Stormwater detention basins shall not be counted toward the
minimum requirement for the open space area. The area of ponds
used as retention basins may be counted toward the minimum
requirement.
(5) The open space area shall comply conceptually with the adopted
Township Open Space Plan.
A. Net tract area. The expressway corridor area shall be subtracted from
the gross area of the property to provide the net tract area used for
mixing calculations.
B. Designation of land use areas. The applicant shall divide the entire net
tract area into areas designated for each land use category chosen from
§ 230-199, herein, new road rights-of-way, open space and/or historic
preservation areas. Land required to be preserved for open space shall
not be counted as acreage for any permitted land use category listed in
§ 230-199, herein. The total of these areas shall equal 100% of the net
tract area and be shown on the land use area plan required by
§ 230-204, herein.
C. Table of Overlay Options. The Table of Overlay Options lists the overlay
options, their requirements, the percentage limits for the land use
categories and the required open space. The designated land use area
for each chosen category shall be not less than the minimum and not
more than the maximum percentages of the net tract area listed in the
table.264
D. The minimum required percentage of net tract area for each land use
category on the Table of Overlay Options shall apply only to the
minimum required three categories. If an applicant chooses to provide
a fourth or fifth land use category, the minimum required percentages
shall not apply to the additional categories.
A. Required transportation improvements.
264. Editor's Note: The Table of Overlay Options is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 230-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-202
1:929
(1) Roads and intersections within the defined study area. The
applicant shall improve all roads and intersections determined to
be in need of improvement by the Montgomery Township Traffic
Management Study and which have been included in the
applicant's traffic impact study, as determined by the Township.
The following criteria shall be applied to all intersections as defined
above:
(a) For each lane group with a predevelopment Level of Service A
or B, the postdevelopment level of service for that lane group
may be increased to no more than 20 seconds of average delay
per vehicle or the middle of Level of Service C.
(b) For each lane group with a predevelopment Level of Service C,
the postdevelopment level of service for that lane group may
be increased to no more than 35 seconds of average delay per
vehicle, or 2/3 of Level of Service D.
(c) For each lane group with a predevelopment Level of Service D,
the postdevelopment level of service for that lane group may
be increased to no more than 40 seconds of average delay per
vehicle, the maximum delay for Level of Service D.
(d) For each lane group with a predevelopment Level of Service E
or F, every effort shall be made to improve the lane group to a
Level of Service D. If a postdevelopment Level of Service D
cannot reasonably be achieved, the applicant shall make
sufficient improvements to maintain a postdevelopment lane
group average delay of no more than the predevelopment delay
plus 10%.
(e) Under no circumstances shall any lane group with a
predevelopment volume/capacity ratio of less than 1.0 be
permitted to increase beyond 1.0.
(f) Criteria; mitigation.
[1] Where the postdevelopment criteria for the level of service
and average delay cannot be attained for any reasons,
including but not limited to geometric design limitations,
topographical constraints, presence of man-made
structures or obstructions and unavailability of necessary
right-of-way, the applicant shall seek the advice of the
Township, through the Township's Traffic Engineer, for
appropriate mitigation measures based upon practical
limitations and sound engineering judgment. The Traffic
Engineer's charges therefor are to be paid by the
developer.
[2] In each and every instance, the Board of Supervisors shall
make the final determination of the predevelopment and
postdevelopment levels of service and the traffic study
§ 230-202 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-202
1:930
§ 230-203. Incentive standards for overlay option No. 3.
Development under the Overlay Option No. 3, § 230-201C, herein, shall
satisfy the following standards, subject to approval and conditions by the
Board of Supervisors:
area and whether there shall be mitigation and, if so, to
what extent thereof.
(2) Public transit improvements. The applicant shall provide bus pulloff
areas, shelters and pedestrian access from major buildings to
the shelters, acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, with advice of
the Township's Traffic Consultant and SEPTA and/or other transit
providers. In addition, turning radii and pavement construction
shall be suitable for bus circulation where appropriate.
(3) Closed loop traffic signal system. As directed by the Board of
Supervisors, applicants shall be required either to contribute to the
funding or to install a Township-wide closed loop traffic signal
system (and pay for a proportionate share of corresponding
hardware and software or to install the proportionate part of
corresponding hardware and software) for every intersection
included within the traffic study area. Where the responsibilities
for a specific intersection overlap between two or more applicants,
funding shall be required on a basis proportional to the trips
generated from each development and the proximity of the
intersection to each development. The decision as to what portion
or for what intersections the closed loop traffic signal system shall
be installed shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors, and,
in doing so, the Supervisors shall take into consideration other
applicants whose proposed development will contribute to the need
for the closed loop traffic system.
B. Required open space. A minimum of 10% of the net tract area shall
either be offered for dedication to the Township or be placed under
permanent easement (the choice to be determined by the Township) for
open space and environmental protection, historic preservation and
civic uses, subject to the standards of § 230-200, herein.
A. Required transportation improvements.
(1) The applicant shall be required to meet the required transportation
improvements standards for Overlay Option No. 2, contained in
§ 230-202, herein.
(2) The applicant shall do at least one of the following two
transportation improvements, subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors:
(a) Additional road connections. A new public road or roads shall
be constructed by the applicant to connect between or among
existing principal and secondary arterial roads adjacent to the
§ 230-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-203
1:931
§ 230-204. Land use area plan.
All applications for conditional use approval or subdivision and development
shall include a land use area plan that complies with the following:
site. Connecting roads shall be designed to handle
nondevelopment traffic, as well as provide access to the
development.
(b) Trip reduction. The applicant shall construct and maintain a
park and ride lot to encourage carpooling and public transit
use by commuters. Location, capacity and design shall be
subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, with the
advice of the Township's Traffic Consultant.
B. Required open space. A minimum of 30% of the net tract area shall
either be offered for dedication to the Township or be placed under
permanent easement (the choice to be determined by the Township) for
open space and environmental protection, historic preservation and
civic uses, subject to the standards of § 230-200, herein.
C. Route 309 frontage and access. For retail development of 25% or more
of the net tract area, permitted only under Overlay Option No. 3, the
subject property must have a minimum of 500 feet of frontage on Route
309, and the subject property must have primary access directly onto
Route 309 via private driveways or new public streets developed for
that purpose.
A. Boundary delineation. Boundaries of the expressway corridor, land use
category areas, open space, historic preservation areas and road rightsof-
way shall be delineated by metes and bounds the same as lot lines
would be shown. No part of the property may be undesignated and no
illogical boundaries will be permitted. Land required to be preserved
for open space shall not be counted as acreage for any permitted land
use category listed in § 230-199, herein.
B. Acreage, classifications and percentages of net tract area. The acreage
and classification shall be noted for each area delineated. Land use
category areas shall also note their percentages of the net tract area to
show compliance with the mixing options. Pockets of other land use
categories may be located within land use category areas, provided that
the limits, acreages and percentages are noted for each.
C. Boundary tolerance. Buildings, parking, service areas, internal
vehicular circulation and required landscaped areas for a designated
land use category shall not overlap a boundary between land use
categories. Vehicular access may be shared along a boundary between
land use categories. Vehicular access for one land use category may
pass through another land use category.
D. Relationship to land development plan. The land use area plan shall
designate land use areas and other site areas on a sketch plan that
§ 230-203 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-204
1:932
§ 230-205. Additional dimensional and development regulations.
The following standards shall apply to development in this district:
shows buildings, parking, landscaped areas and other existing and
proposed features typically shown on a land development plan. The
approved land use area plan shall be used as the basis for subsequent
preliminary subdivision and land development plans.
E. Design and development flexibility. Design and development flexibility
is allowed following approval of a land use area plan, shown on a sketch
plan of subdivision and land development, as follows:
(1) If an applicant wishes to add an adjacent parcel that is not within
the limits of the mapped overlay district and the metes and bounds
description attached to this chapter, the applicant must first apply
for a Zoning Ordinance Map amendment to extend the overlay
district and receive approval to the extension by the Board of
Supervisors. Adjacent parcels may be added to the original
application, provided that they meet the following criteria:
(a) The added parcels are not separated from the subject site by a
public road that existed at the time the district was first
applied to the subject site.
(b) Any land use area and development plan revisions shall be
done in compliance with the standards of this district,
including the percentages of land use areas and required open
space, and applicable zoning requirements.
(2) Individual lots may be leased or sold for development in compliance
with applicable use and dimensional standards.
(3) Development may be done in phases which shall be identified
during the initial preliminary plan review submission. Total
development for all phases shall not exceed development shown on
the approved land use area plan, required under § 230-204, herein.
(4) An approved land use area plan may be revised by the applicant
when approved by the Board of Supervisors, according to the
regulations of this chapter.
A. Offices, institutional uses or other nonretail uses developed in a retail
center shall be counted as retail land use unless they are located within
a designated area of nonretail land use, a minimum of one acre in area
to include buildings, loading areas, walkways, the required minimum
parking area, etc.
B. For reasons of traffic safety and congestion, new vehicular access from
existing streets shall be limited to a minimal number of major access
locations. These intersections shall be justified by a traffic impact
analysis that complies with the Township's requirements. Otherwise, all
§ 230-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-205
1:933
new development shall be internalized so that access occurs from new
internal streets.
C. Medium- and high-density residential development shall be permitted
only on parcels with the following characteristics:
(1) Minimum area of five contiguous acres with a minimum contiguous
road frontage on an arterial road of 200 feet.
(2) Location immediately abutting existing Township open space, or a
parcel that contains existing medium- or high-density residential,
or existing or proposed retail development, with the opportunity
where feasible to provide direct vehicular and/or pedestrian
connections between the proposed and existing developments.
D. Proposed medium- and high-density residential buildings shall be set
back a minimum of 75 feet and parking shall be set back a minimum of
20 feet from the lot lines of off-site, abutting lots with existing singlefamily
dwellings, and such medium- and high-density buildings shall be
set back a minimum of 40 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of arterial
roads and parking and garage buildings shall be set back a minimum of
30 feet from the ultimate right-of-way of arterial roads. Proposed
medium- and high-density residential buildings shall be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from all interior access drives. Parking spaces
within an apartment complex located in the ECPOD Expressway
Corridor Preservation Overlay District shall be no less than 20 feet in
length and nine feet in width. [Amended 6-25-2001 by Ord. No.
01-137Z]
E. All new development under this district shall provide landscaped screen
buffers, as required by § 205-52C(4)(a) of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, where it abuts existing residential
development (including across a public road) that is not similar in land
use type, character and intensity. The screen buffer shall also contain
supplementary earth berms and may contain decorative walls or fences.
F. All buildings for retail development and their accessory uses shall be
located within a corridor limited in depth from the ultimate right-of-way
of Route 309 as follows: 2,500 feet for developments submitted under
Overlay Options Nos. 1 and 2; 1,830 feet for developments submitted
under Overlay Option No. 3. Only nonretail, residential, institutional,
open space and historic preservation areas are permitted beyond the
permitted limits. Paving for retail development will be allowed up to a
distance from the ultimate right-of-way of Route 309 of 1,900 feet for
Overlay Option No. 3 and 2,500 feet for Overlay Options Nos. 1 and 2.
G. Development must comply with Township's landscaping requirements,
Article VI of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
H. All development in this district shall be served by public sewer and
water facilities.
§ 230-205 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-205
1:934
I. Dimensional and development regulations for institutional uses and
nonretail uses specified in § 230-199A(1) and A(2):
(1) Minimum lot size: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width: 100 feet at the building line and 50 feet at the
street line.
(3) Minimum building setbacks:
(a) From the ultimate right-of-way of any street:
[1] One hundred feet if parking is located between the
principal building and the street.
[2] Thirty-five feet if no parking is located between the
principal building and the street.
(b) From property lines: 35 feet.
(4) Minimum parking, driveway and service areas setbacks:
[Amended 11-26-2001 by Ord. No. 01-147Z; 6-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-158ZS]
(a) From the ultimate right-of-way of any street: 35 feet.
(b) From property lines: 10 feet.
(c) From lands preserved for the expressway corridor under
§ 230-198: no setback required.
(5) Minimum setback from property lines abutting existing low-density
residential uses: 100 feet for any buildings, 25 feet for any parking,
driveway and service areas. [Amended 11-26-2001 by Ord. No.
01-147Z; 6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 02-158ZS]
(6) Maximum height: 45 feet.
(7) Maximum building coverage: 40% of lot area.
(8) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 75% for institutional uses
and nonretail uses, specified in § 230-199A(1) and (2), located in
the ECPOD Expressway Corridor Preservation Overlay District.
[Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 07-223Z]
J. Shared parking. Two or more adjacent buildings or lots used for retail,
nonretail or institutional purposes may share parking facilities
according to the following requirements:
(1) The total number of spaces required for all uses sharing the
common parking may be reduced by up to 25% if the applicant
demonstrates that a common parking area will accommodate
expected parking demand and provide substantial benefits in terms
of reduced impervious surface coverage and safe and efficient
access.
§ 230-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-205
1:935
(2) All shared parking spaces shall be adjacent and convenient to the
uses they serve.
(3) Access and parking easements may be required to be shown on the
plan and be recorded in the Montgomery County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds.
(4) Side or rear setbacks for parking, driveways and service areas shall
not apply in the area of shared parking. A shared parking lot shall
be considered as one parking lot with respect to the access and
other requirements of this chapter. The parking lot shall comply in
all other respects with this and other Township ordinances. An
existing parking lot that does not comply with the requirements of
this chapter may be used for shared parking, when approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 230-205 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-205
1:936
ARTICLE XXVIII
RC Retail Center Regulations
[Added 9-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-60; amended 2-3-1997 by Ord. No.
96-68]
§ 230-206. Purpose.
Retail centers shall provide harmonious groupings of buildings, landscaped
areas, vehicular and pedestrian circulation and service and parking areas.
They shall be planned as safe, efficient, convenient and unified development
for retail uses permitted in § 230-199B, of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 230-207. Dimensional standards.
Each retail center shall comply with the following dimensional standards:
A. Building height: maximum 35 feet.
B. Building setbacks:
Feature/Description
Minimum Building Setback
(distance from feature)
Ultimate right-of-way of public roads:
When the entire area
between the road and
building is landscaped (may
contain a sidewalk)
50 feet
When parking or internal
driveways are located
between the road and
building
100 feet
Residential zoning district boundaries
and lot lines of residential parcels
outside the Corridor Overlay District
100 feet
All other lot lines, right-of-way lines of
utility corridors and boundaries of the
preserved Route 202 expressway
corridor and its interchange ramps
50 feet, except that a
maximum of 10% of the length
of a building wall may be
located a minimum of 25 feet
from one of these boundaries
for design flexibility
Entrance driveways to the center
(curb or pavement edge)
50 feet
Storefront driveways 20 feet
All other internal driveways 10 feet
§ 230-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-207
1:937
§ 230-208. Parking regulations.
Feature/Description
Minimum Building Setback
(distance from feature)
Internal driveways at major building
entrances where the building's
roofline is extended as an overhang or
porte-cochere
No setback required
Parking 10 feet
Wetlands and 100-year floodplain 30 feet
Between individual buildings Not less than the height of the
taller building
C. Parking, driveway and service area setbacks:
Feature/Description
Minimum Building Setback
(distance from feature)
From the boundary of the Route
202 Expressway bypass corridor
10 feet
From the ultimate right-of-way of
public streets, all other tract
boundaries
30 feet
From limits of wetlands and
100-year floodplain, except where
a road, driveway, path or utility
line is permitted to cross
10 feet for any earth disturbance
for grading or construction; a
barricade shall be installed to
prevent encroachment by
construction equipment and
materials
D. Building, impervious and landscaped coverage:
Description Coverage
Impervious coverage Maximum 75% of its parcel area
Total building coverage (all
buildings)
Maximum 20% of its parcel area
Landscaping or other green area Minimum 25% of its parcel area
A. Total parking capacity in a retail center shall be a minimum of 4.5
spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.
B. All spaces proposed at a rate greater than 5.0 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross leasable area shall be placed in reserve, in compliance
with § 230-138.1B and C of the Zoning Ordinance. Spaces placed in
reserve shall not be constructed until approved or requested by the
Board of Supervisors.
C. Retail center parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20 feet.
§ 230-207 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-208
1:938
§ 230-209. Central common area.
Each retail center shall provide a central common area to focus attention
on major building entrances and provide an area suitable for shared use
by tenants, customers and visitors for special events such as cultural
performances, exhibitions, health fairs, sidewalk sales and use as a sitting
area and meeting place. Central common areas shall comply with the
following standards:
§ 230-210. Building bulk and construction.
Variations in building facades, canopies, height and roof lines shall be used,
and contrasts in color, texture and materials are encouraged.
D. Shared parking may be permitted where the applicant provides
convincing evidence, consistent with accepted industry standards.
A. It may be an atrium, courtyard or plaza located at the front of the
principal building, visible from entrance driveways and the parking lot.
B. It shall have walkways, seating and landscaping. Water features, play
equipment, performance stage and table facilities are encouraged.
C. As an alternative, the central common area may be located on a large
parking lot island adjacent to the storefront driveway, subject to
approval by the Board of Supervisors.
D. The total area shall be not less than 4% of the gross leasable area of the
principal buildings they serve and may be divided into two separate
locations when approved by the Board of Supervisors.
E. A minimum of 30% of the central common area shall be ornamentally
landscaped (may include water features). The landscaped area may be
included in calculation of the minimum 25% landscaped area of the site
by § 230-207D, herein.
F. The minimum required space for a central common area shall not
include paved areas used for parking, service or driveways, required
storefront landscaping, softening and screen buffers, required parking
lot planting and commercial recreation facilities operated as a principal
use.
A. Building facades that exceed 250 feet in length shall be varied by one or
more of the following methods:
(1) Wall offsets to a minimum depth of 10 feet at intervals of 100 feet or
less.
(2) Variation in the facade height of at least 10 feet in height at
intervals of 100 feet or less.
§ 230-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-210
1:939
§ 230-211. Development regulations.
§ 230-212. Lighting.
Lighting shall be provided for the safety and convenience of customers,
employees and visitors to the center, in compliance with the following:
(3) Addition of major architectural features at intervals of 200 feet or
less, including canopies, towers and three-dimensional ornamental
structures.
B. Building materials, including brick, stone, decorative block and wood,
are encouraged.
C. Side and rear building facades shall be constructed of materials that
reflect the character, color scheme and architectural features of the
building's front facades.
A. Development separated by public roads or the expressway corridor
shall be considered as separate retail centers, and each shall comply
with the retail center regulations individually.
B. Retail center development shall comply with the requirements of
§ 205-25, Design Standards for Shopping Centers, of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
C. Within a retail center, land may be subdivided for sale or leasing
purposes without regard to individual lotting standards, provided that
the development of those lots complies in all respects with the retail
center regulations and is an integral part of the center's plan. Access to
individual lots so created shall be taken only from within the retail
center.
D. Outdoor storage or display and waste disposal shall comply with
§ 230-78E and F of the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Mechanical and site utility equipment projecting from the tops of
buildings shall be screened from public view to the extent reasonable
and practicable.
F. Land development plan submission and processing shall comply with
the following requirements:
(1) Section 230-97, Submission and processing of development plan, of
the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) The preliminary and final plan requirements of Articles VIII, IX and
X of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
A. No lighting standard shall exceed 25 feet in height, and no lighting
fixture shall be mounted on a building higher than 25 feet above the
adjacent grade level.
§ 230-210 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-212
1:940
§ 230-213. Signs.
The sign regulations of § 230-127, Commercial and industrial district
regulations, of the Township's Zoning Ordinance shall apply to retail
centers, except that freestanding signs up to 23 feet in height and 150
square feet in area are permitted for retail centers under Overlay Option
No. 2, and freestanding signs up to 23 feet in height and 250 square feet in
area are permitted for retail centers under overlay Option No. 3.
B. Illumination of all parking areas, around all buildings and along all
pedestrian walkways, shall provide a minimum level of one-halffootcandle
and an average of one footcandle and a maximum level of
four footcandles. (One footcandle equals one lumen per square foot.)
C. All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be arranged, designed
and shielded or directed so as to protect the abutting streets and
highways and adjoining property from the glare of lights. All light
standards or fixtures shall be shielded to eliminate light glare beyond
an angle of 35º from a vertical plane and be so shielded that the source
of the light shall not be visible off of the premises.
D. No flashing or intermittent or moving lights, including lights on signs,
shall be permitted.
§ 230-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-213
1:941

ARTICLE XXIX
HLI Highway Limited Industrial Overlay District
[Added 11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-86Z]
§ 230-214. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the purposes and community development objections
contained in Article I, § 230-2 of this chapter, and the policies and
recommendations of the Township's Comprehensive Plan, as amended, the
primary intent of this district is to provide, as an overlay to underlying LI
Limited Industrial zoning, an alternative category of land use that permits
an appropriate intensity of development for land fronting on Route 309,
while it prohibits the spread of intensive retail-commercial uses that
generate high traffic volumes. In addition, other specific intents, purposes
and objectives of this district include the following:
§ 230-215. Use regulations.
When authorized as a conditional use, a building or group of buildings may
be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any one
of the following uses and no other:
A. Encourage lower intensity land uses that are primarily of nonretail
nature.
B. Permit land uses that are compatible with limited industrial
development and are traditionally highway-oriented.
C. Encourage uses that generate low to moderate traffic volumes,
especially uses that produce peak traffic generation at times other than
the abutting highway peak hours and traditional retail commercial peak
hours.
D. Reduce the adverse effects of driveway intersections with Route 309 by
encouraging businesses to coordinate locations of individual access
points, utilize shared access points where feasible and desirable,
develop an integrated circulation system among adjoining lots and
develop alternative access drives where feasible.
E. Minimize the number of traffic generators along Route 309.
F. Recognize suitable locations for health-care uses to meet the longrange
needs of the community and region. [Added 2-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 01-152Z]
A. Franchised motor vehicle sales agency dealing primarily in new motor
vehicles.
B. Hotel, motel or motor inn with conference facilities and/or full service
restaurant permitted only as accessory uses in the same building as the
guest rooms. Drive-through and takeout services are prohibited for the
restaurant.
§ 230-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-215
1:943
§ 230-216. Establishment of overlay district.
The HLI Overlay District shall be an overlay to the LI Limited Industrial
District as shown on the Zoning Map. The following shall apply to the
overlay district:
§ 230-217. Dimensional standards.
The dimensional standards of the HLI District shall be as follows:
C. Financial institution, including a credit union, bank or savings and loan
association, with drive-through facilities permitted only as an accessory
use.
D. Educational, religious or philanthropic use, excluding nongovernmentoperated
correctional or penal institutions.
E. Motion-picture theater, with a restaurant permitted only as an
accessory use within the same building as the theater.
F. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
permitted use, unless specifically excluded herein.
G. Hospital/medical center. [Added 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 01-152Z]
H. Uses permitted in § 230-75 (C Commercial District) herein, subject to
dimensional standards and development regulations of §§ 230-76
through 230-78. [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-227Z]
A. The provisions of the HLI Overlay District shall serve as a supplement
to the underlying district provisions and, as such, shall apply only to
HLI uses.
B. The provisions of this district apply only to LI Limited Industrial zoned
properties fronting on Route 309. The district shall not apply to any
other LI-zoned properties or any other zoned properties. (See proposed
Ordinance No. 97-87Z which defines the limits of the HLI District
created herein.)
C. Eligible properties within the HLI boundaries maybe developed as LI
Limited Industrial uses, in compliance with the requirements of Article
XVII, or as HLI use in compliance with the requirements of the HLI
Overlay District, when authorized as a conditional use.
A. Minimum lot area.
(1) Motor vehicle, hotel and theater uses: seven acres.
(2) All other uses: four acres.
B. Minimum lot width (at building line and street line): 300 feet.
C. Minimum yard areas.
§ 230-215 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-217
1:944
(1) Front: 70 feet, from existing ultimate right-of-way (50 feet from
center line).
(2) Side: 25 feet.
(3) Rear: 40 feet.
(4) Abutting residential district or use: 100 feet.
D. Maximum building height: 30 feet, except that the height may be
increased to a maximum of 65 feet, provided that for every foot in
excess of 30 feet, each required yard shall be increased one
corresponding foot. In addition, a height of 40 feet or more shall require
conditional use approval.
E. Maximum building coverage: 20%, except where a bonus is granted in
accordance with § 230-219D(3) or 230-219D(4).
F. Maximum impervious material coverage: 65%, except where a bonus is
granted in accordance with § 230-219D(3) or 230-219D(4).
G. Minimum green area coverage: 35%, except where a bonus is granted
for increased building and/or impervious material coverage in
accordance with § 230-219D(3) or 230-219D(4).
H. Special standards for hospital/medical center use. [Added 2-11-2002
by Ord. No. 01-152Z]
(1) Minimum lot area: seven acres.
(2) Minimum lot width and yard areas shall be in accordance with
§ 230-217B and C (above).
(3) Maximum building height: 85 feet subject to the following criteria.
For buildings in excess of 30 feet in height the minimum required
front yard shall be increased one foot for each additional one foot in
height up to a building height of 65 feet. Thence, for buildings in
excess of 65 feet in height the front yard and all other yards shall
be increased one additional foot for each foot in height over 65 feet
which additional setback shall be applied to only that portion of the
building in excess of 65 feet in height. Also referred to as “sky
exposure plane.”
(4) Maximum building coverage: 40%. Bonus provision in § 230-219
shall not apply.
(5) Maximum impervious material coverage: 65%. Bonus provisions in
§ 230-219 shall not apply.
(6) Minimum green area coverage: 35%. Bonus provisions in § 230-219
shall not apply.
I. Special standards for uses permitted at § 230-75: C Commercial District
uses. [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-227Z]
§ 230-217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-217
1:945
§ 230-218. Conditional use standards and criteria.
In addition to compliance with § 230-156.2, Procedures and standards for
conditional use approval, the following shall be met:
(1) There shall be a minimum lot area of two acres and a maximum lot
area of 20 acres. [Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 17-305Z]
(2) In order to qualify for uses permitted at § 230-75 herein, the
property which shall be the subject of this use category shall have
frontage on at least two existing public roads and shall dedicate
any land necessary for the construction and rights-of-way of new
public roads (or extensions of existing public roads) which are an
essential element of Montgomery Township-supported roadway or
signalization improvements of regional public benefit.
(3) In addition to providing the requisite land right-of-way under
Subsection I(2) above, development of the subject lot(s) for uses
permitted in § 230-75 shall also require the developer of proposed
§ 230-75 uses to design, obtain all the necessary approvals,
construct and dedicate all of the Montgomery Township-supported
roadway or signalization improvements.
A. Motor vehicles sales, rental or leasing.
(1) Outdoor storage and/or display of vehicles.
(a) Outdoor storage and display and parking are prohibited within
the minimum front yard building setback but are permitted
between the building and the minimum front yard setback, if
the building is set back a sufficient distance from the ultimate
right-of-way so that outdoor storage and display and parking
does not occur within the minimum front yard area of 70 feet
computed from the existing ultimate right-of-way line.
(b) Vehicles shall not be displayed on aboveground platforms and
shall be displayed to appear similar to customer parking.
(c) Outdoor storage/display shall be limited to motor vehicles.
(2) On-site dispensing of fuel(s) shall only occur as part of a single sale/
lease/rental transaction.
(3) No streamers, pennants or similar ornamentation shall be hung or
strung on a building, other structure or vehicles.
(4) Lighting:
(a) No lighting standard shall exceed 25 feet in height from grade
level.
(b) Illumination of all parking areas, around all buildings and
along all pedestrian walkways shall provide a minimum level of
§ 230-217 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-218
1:946
§ 230-219. Development standards and regulations.
one-half footcandle and an average of one footcandle and a
maximum level of four footcandles. (One footcandle equals one
lumen per square foot.)
(c) All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be arranged,,
designed and shielded or directed so as to protect the abutting
streets and highways and adjoining property from the glare of
lights. All light standards or fixtures shall be shielded to
eliminate light glare beyond an angle of 35º from a vertical
plane and be so shielded that the source of the light shall not
be visible off of the premises.
(d) No flashing or intermittent or moving lights, including lights on
signs, shall be permitted.
(e) The magnitude of the lighting is subject to approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
(5) Painting, bodywork and/or other service and/or repairs shall be
conducted only within buildings or structures upon the property.
B. Drive-through banking facilities. Stacking lanes for each drive-through
window shall be a minimum of four car lengths and shall be so arranged
that they do not interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of the
remaining parking areas and driveways. [Amended 11-27-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-305Z]
A. Landscaping. All landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
Montgomery Township Subdivision Ordinance.265
(1) Side and rear yard areas. An area 25 feet wide shall be landscaped
with a softening or screening buffer. When authorized by the Board
of Supervisors, this may be reduced to no less than 10 feet, but only
where the yard abuts a commercial or industrial use or zoning
district.
(2) Front yard areas. The minimum required yard (70 feet), exclusive
of driveway or access areas, shall be landscaped with a softening
buffer.
B. On-site parking and loading.
(1) Required parking shall be in accordance with Article XIX.
(2) Loading and/or parking is prohibited within the minimum front
yard area.
(3) No paving shall occur within side and rear yard areas abutting a
residential use or zoning district and shall not otherwise be closer
265. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-219
1:947
than 10 feet to a side or rear boundary line except when cross
access arrangements have been approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Performance standards. Zoning Ordinance §§ 230-104 through 230-114
shall apply.
D. Access controls.
(1) All entrance and accessways shall be of sufficient width with
widened radii where they meet the sides of roads and highways to
conveniently and safely accommodate the flow of traffic. The
locations of entranceways shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors. The entrance and accessways shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient
ingress and egress for traffic without undue congestion or
interference with the normal traffic flow on the abutting streets
and highways, in conformance with the requirements of the
Montgomery Township Subdivision Ordinance.266
(2) Number of driveways per parcel.
(a) A maximum of one driveway opening shall be permitted to a
particular site from each abutting street.
(b) When, in the opinion of the Township Traffic Engineer and
PADOT, it is in the interest of good traffic operation, the Board
of Supervisors may permit one additional driveway entrance
along a continuous site with frontage in excess of 500 feet on
one street.
(c) For purposes of this section, the use of dual one-way driveways
will be considered to be equivalent to one standard two-way
driveway. Only one pair of one-way drives may be used per
street frontage.
(3) Bonus for shared driveway.
(a) When two adjacent property owners agree to share a driveway,
the Township will grant an incentive bonus to all affected lots
consisting of:
[1] A reduction of required lot width by 15% for each lot; and
[2] An increase in the impervious coverage of each lot of 5%
from that which is allowed under § 230-217F.
(b) If two or more property owners share a common driveway,
individual driveways are prohibited unless a lot conforms with
Subsection D(2)(b) above. Also, if two or more property owners
share a common driveway, cross-easement agreements shall be
266. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-219 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-219
1:948
submitted and the location of the cross-easement indicated on
the land development plans.
(4) Bonus for provision of a joint access drive. When two or more
adjacent property owners agree to provide an access drive that
conforms to the characteristics of Subsection D(5) below and its
location is acceptable to the Township, the Township will grant an
incentive bonus consisting of:
(a) An increase in the building coverage of each lot of 5% from
that which is allowed under § 230-217E;
(b) An increase in the impervious coverage of each lot of 5% from
that which is allowed under § 230-217F; and
(c) A reduction of required lot width by 15% for each lot.
(5) Joint access drive criteria. In order to receive the incentive bonus, a
joint access drive shall conform with all of the following criteria:
(a) A fifty-foot-wide access drive cross-easement shall be provided
across all affected properties, with each property owner
responsible for maintenance of his or her portion of the crosseasement.
A public right-of-way is to be substituted for the
cross-easement at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors at
the time of final plan approval.
(b) A twenty-six-foot-wide curbed cartway shall be provided
whether publicly or privately owned and maintained.
(c) If accepted as a public right-of-way, a cul-de-sac shall be
required at the end of an access drive, unless the access drive
is designed to connect to an adjacent tract.
(d) The access drive shall be located only at the rear of the site,
relative to Route 309. All required landscaping for the yard
area shall be installed in accordance with Subsection A(1)
above. If accepted as a public street, the yard area and
landscaping may be located on the interior side of the right-ofway,
when authorized by the Board of Supervisors.
(e) The access drive shall be physically separated from the
internal circulation system of each affected lot, with no more
than one access onto the access drive from each lot, unless the
Township determines that additional access is appropriate.
(f) Perpetual maintenance of the access drive cross-easement
shall be provided for by some instrument acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation by the Township
Solicitor. The instrument shall be filed with the Recorder of
Deeds of Montgomery County upon recording of the final
subdivision and/or land development plan and shall authorize
the Township, at the Township's option, to maintain the access
§ 230-219 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-219
1:949
drive and assess all applicable property owners 100% of such
maintenance, or foreclose on said funds to cover said
maintenance, if a private ownership fails to function and said
failure permits a hazard to health and safety.
(g) Impervious coverage associated with the access drive shall be
excluded from the maximum impervious coverage permitted
per lot. If accepted as a public right-of-way, the fifty-foot rightof-
way shall be included for lot area and building coverage
calculations.
(6) A bonus will be granted for providing either a shared driveway or
joint access drive, but not both.
E. Application and approval procedure. All proposals for HLI use shall
meet the requirement of Zoning Ordinance § 230-218.
F. Unified development. When the development of a tract and the uses
permitted thereon pursuant to Article XXIX, § 230-215, are in
accordance with a unified development plan, then title to the parcels
within the development plan may be held by more than one owner or a
conveyance or mortgage of a parcel within the development plan shall
be permitted upon compliance with the following conditions: [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 01-152Z; amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No.
17-305Z]
(1) Irrevocable cross easements in favor of and duly binding on all the
owners within the area of the development plan, their successors
and assigns, with respect to use, control and maintenance of the
common areas, including access, green space and parking areas,
are in effect and recorded.
(2) Application of zoning regulations including, but not limited to, road
frontage requirements, building coverage, impervious surface
requirements, required green space, parking, loading and
landscaping, as well as required areas, width and yard regulations
shall apply to the overall tract approved as a unified development
plan. Individual lots created pursuant to this section need not
comply with these zoning requirements.
(3) Responsibility for the construction, control and maintenance of the
facilities in areas to be used in common shall be in one entity.
§ 230-219 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-219
1:950
ARTICLE XXX
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 98-97Z]
§ 230-220. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the purposes contained in Article I, § 230-2, of this chapter,
and the policies and recommendations of the Township's Comprehensive
Plan, as amended, the primary intent of this article is to permit and regulate
wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to
communications antennas, communications antenna support structures and
communications equipment buildings, in conformance with the
"Telecommunications Act of 1996," enacted by the United States Congress.
In addition, other specific intents and purposes of this article include the
following:
§ 230-221. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or
reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by or
permitted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate
A. Recognize that technical developments in the telecommunications field
have provided new options for the expansion and delivery of wireless
communications services to Montgomery Township and its residents.
B. Recognize that the Township's police, fire and emergency medical
services, residents and visitors rely on wireless communications
services for business and personal uses.
C. Encourage efficient wireless communications services within the
Township while protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
D. Permit communications services while protecting the interests of
Township residents by regulating the placement and construction of
wireless telecommunications facilities, including satellite dish
antennas.
E. Respect federal and state statutes and regulations that impose certain
limitations on the Township's ability to regulate the placement and
construction of wireless telecommunications facilities.
F. Minimize adverse visual effects of wireless telecommunications
facilities through proper design, siting and vegetative screening.
G. Encourage good and efficient planning through the joint use of any new
or existing communications antenna support structures.
§ 230-220 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-221
1:951
such device. This definition shall include but not be limited to the following
specific types of antennas:
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure,
such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, specifically designed
for communications antennas and used to support communications
antennas; buildings, water towers, electric utility transmission towers and
other structures constructed and used for a purpose other than supporting
communications antenna shall not be considered a communications antenna
support structure.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or
cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennas.
HEIGHT OF COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — The vertical distance
measured from the portion of the antenna closest to ground level to the
highest point on the antenna.
HEIGHT OF COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE —
The vertical distance measured from the ground level to the highest point
on a communications antenna support structure, including communications
antennas attached to the support structure.
CONVENTIONAL TELEVISION RECEPTION ANTENNAS — The
traditional pole and grid antennas used by individual property owners
and generally mounted on rooftops for reception of VHF and UHF
television signals.
A.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS:
Noncommercial. Those used by an individual property owner for
reception of signals from satellites for use only within the property
on which the satellite dish is located.
(1)
Commercial. Those used by a commercial business for reception of
signals from satellites for distribution to other properties or for the
transmission of signals to satellites.
(2)
B.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS — Includes ham and citizens band radio
antennas or others operated by individual amateur radio operators or
clubs on a nonprofit basis for use only within the property on which the
amateur radio antenna is located.
C.
WIRELESS TELEPHONE ANTENNAS — Those used to receive and
transmit wireless communications signals for all types of wireless
telephones and pagers
D.
BROADCAST RADIO AND/OR BROADCAST TELEVISION ANTENNAS
— Includes AM and/or FM radio and/or VHF and/or UHF television
transmission antennas.
E.
TWO-WAY RADIO ANTENNAS — Includes business band, emergency
services and other public band radio antennas.
F.
§ 230-221 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-221
1:952
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Includes
communications antennas, communications antenna support structures and
communications equipment buildings and appurtenances.
§ 230-222. Use and height regulations.
The following table lists all antennas, support structures and equipment
buildings that are permitted by right, by special exception or by conditional
use. Any antenna, support structure or equipment building not listed in this
table or not meeting the height requirements of this table is prohibited.
All uses permitted by this table must also comply with all other applicable
standards in this article.267
§ 230-223. Development regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to communications antennas,
communications antenna support structures and communications
equipment buildings in all zoning districts.
A. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Conventional television reception antennas.
(a) Such antennas shall not be located within the front yard.
(2) Noncommercial satellite dish antennas.
(a) Setbacks. Noncommercial satellite dish antennas shall comply
with the following setback requirements:
[1] Antennas shall be set back from side and rear lot lines by a
distance at least equal to the minimum yard setback for
the district in which the antenna is located or by a distance
at least equal to the height of the antenna, whichever is
greater.
[2] Antennas with a total height of less than four feet may be
located in the front yard or in front of the primary building,
provided that such antenna is entirely within four feet of
the front wall of the building; otherwise, antennas shall not
be permitted within the front yard or in front of the
primary building.
[3] Building-mounted antennas may intrude into front, side
and rear yard setbacks for a distance no greater than any
existing intrusion by an existing building.
(b) Height. All noncommercial satellite dish antennas mounted on
buildings shall not exceed the maximum building height of the
zoning district in which the antenna is located.
267. Editor's Note: The Wireless Telecommunications Table is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 230-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-223
1:953
(3) Commercial satellite dish antennas and support structures.
(a) Setbacks. Commercial satellite dish antennas and support
structures shall comply with the following setback
requirements:
[1] All antennas and support structures shall be set back a
distance that is at least equal to the minimum yard setback
for the district in which the antenna is located. When this
yard setback is less than 50 feet, antennas and support
structures 50 feet or more in height shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from property lines and street ultimate
rights-of-way lines.
[2] Antennas and support structures shall not be permitted
within the front yard or in front of the primary building.
(b) Height. All commercial satellite dish antennas and support
structures mounted on buildings shall not exceed the
maximum building height of the zoning district in which the
antenna is located. Commercial satellite dish antennas and
support structures that are ground-mounted shall not exceed
150 feet in total height and shall meet the conditional use
requirements in § 230-224.
(4) Amateur radio antennas and support structures.
(a) Setbacks. Amateur radio antennas and support structures may
be placed anywhere on a lot.
(5) Wireless telephone, broadcast radio, broadcast television and twoway
radio antennas, communications equipment buildings and or
support structures.
(a) Setbacks. Such antennas and support structures shall comply
with the following setback requirements:
[1] All antennas and support structures shall be set back a
distance that is at least equal to the minimum yard setback
for the district in which the antenna is located. When this
yard setback is less than 50 feet, antennas and support
structures 50 feet or more in height shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from property lines and street ultimate
rights-of-way lines.
[2] Setbacks within residential districts and setbacks from
residential district boundaries or residentially used
property boundaries shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
(b) Communications equipment buildings shall meet the setback
requirements for principal buildings in the zoning district in
which the building is located. No more than two
communications equipment buildings may be located on any
§ 230-223 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-223
1:954
lot. Communications equipment buildings shall not exceed 144
square feet in total building floor area.
(c) Security fencing. Ground-mounted antennas, support
structures and communications equipment buildings shall be
enclosed by locked security fencing, a minimum of six feet in
height. [Amended 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-306Z]
(d) Access and parking.
[1] Access shall be provided to ground-mounted facilities
directly from a public street or by easement to a public
street. The easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
width and improved with a driveway at least 10 feet in
width, built in accordance with the Montgomery Township
standards for a residential driveway.
[2] For facilities that are not fully automated, the number of
required parking spaces shall be sufficient for only the
number of people on the largest shift.
(e) Within residential districts, only fully automated facilities shall
be permitted and parking and access shall be sufficient for
maintenance purposes only.
B. Buffering requirements.
(1) The following antennas, support structures and equipment
buildings shall provide a screen buffer:
(a) Ground-mounted noncommercial satellite dish antennas 4 feet
or greater in height.
(b) Ground-mounted commercial satellite dish antennas and/or
support structures 12 feet or greater in height.
(c) Ground-mounted wireless telephone, broadcast radio,
broadcast television and two-way radio antennas,
communications equipment buildings and/or support
structures.
(2) Screen buffers shall meet the definition and regulations in the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,268
except that landscape plantings shall be located around the base of
antennas, support structures and equipment building facilities.
C. Safety requirements.
(1) All communications antenna and communications support
structures shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation,
Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation and airport zoning regulations.
268. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-223
1:955
(2) Structural integrity. Except for amateur radio support structures,
the applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvaniaregistered
professional engineer that the proposed
communications antenna support structure will be designed and
constructed in accordance with the current Structural Standards
for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures,
published by the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association and the applicable
requirements of the Montgomery Township Building Code.269
(3) Building-mounted antennas and support structures. The applicant
proposing to mount on a building any noncommercial satellite
dishes three feet or greater in size; commercial satellite dish
antennas and support structures; or wireless telephone, broadcast
radio, broadcast television and two-way radio antennas and
support structures shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvaniaregistered
professional engineer certifying that the proposed
installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building,
considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna and/
or support structure location.
(4) Anticlimbing devices. When required by the Township, all
communications antenna support structures shall be fitted with
anticlimbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
(5) Maintenance. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
protected and maintained in accordance with the requirements of
the Montgomery Township Building Code and current industry
standards.
(6) Guy wires. All guy wires shall be clearly marked to be visible at all
times.
(7) Amateur radio antenna and support structure safety. The Township
Code Enforcement Officer may inspect amateur radio antennas and
support structures to determine if these facilities are safely
installed. If the Township Code Enforcement Officer determines
that safety problems exist, the Code Enforcement Officer can
require remediation of the safety problems at the owner's expense
or can require removal of the unsafe antenna and/or support
structure. [Added 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-110Z]
D. Appearance.
(1) Color or finish. Communications antennas and communications
antenna support structures shall be painted, colored or finished in
a manner that minimizes the visual impact on the area in which it is
located.
269. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 230-223 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-223
1:956
§ 230-224. Conditional use requirements.
All conditional uses shall meet the requirements of § 230-156.2 of this
chapter and the following requirements:
(2) Lighting. Antennas and support structures shall not be artificially
illuminated except when required by Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations or other applicable governmental
regulations.
(3) Advertising or signs. No advertising or signs shall be affixed to any
wireless telecommunications facilities.
A. Conditional use approval must be received for the proposed use, the
proposed dimensions of the use and the proposed development
characteristics of the use.
B. Evidence of attempt to share support. Any applicant proposing
construction of a new antenna support structure as a conditional use
shall demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to obtain
permission to mount the antennas on an existing building or antenna
support structure. A good faith effort shall require that all owners of
potentially suitable structures within a one-fourth-mile radius of the
location of the proposed antenna be contacted and that one or more of
the following reasons for not selecting such structure apply:
(1) The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcement
cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio
frequency interference with other existing equipment for that
existing structure, and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space,
access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to
allow it to perform its intended function.
(4) Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would
result in electromagnetic radiation from such facility exceeding
standards established by the Federal Communications Commission
governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
(5) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with
the owners of such structures.
C. If an applicant proposes a new antenna support structure, the applicant
shall demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the antenna and
its support structure must be located where proposed in order to
properly function.
§ 230-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-224
1:957
§ 230-225. Administrative and procedural requirements.
The following administrative and procedural requirements apply to all
commercial satellite dish antennas and support structures; or wireless
telephone, broadcast radio, broadcast television and two-way radio
antennas and support structures:
D. The applicant shall provide evidence that the antenna is proposed to be
at the minimum height needed to properly function.
E. Abandonment. The applicant shall agree that the antenna and/or
antenna support structure will be dismantled and removed, in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) If a communications antenna and/or communications antenna
support structure permitted as a conditional use is not utilized for a
continuous period of 12 months, it shall be considered abandoned,
whether or not the owner/operator intends to make use of it or any
part of it in the future. In that event, the owner or operator of the
communications antenna and/or communications antenna support
structure and the owner of the property where the communications
antenna and/or communications antenna support structure is
located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned
communications antenna and/or communications antenna support
structure within six months of the expiration of such twelve-month
period. If such communications antenna and/or communications
antenna support structure is not removed within 60 days of receipt
of notice from Montgomery Township notifying the owners of such
abandonment and its obligation to remove the communications
antenna and/or communications antenna support structure, the
Township may remove it/them and place a lien upon the property
for costs of removal. The Township may pursue all legal remedies
available to it to ensure that abandoned communications antennas
and/or communications antenna support structures are removed
and the costs of removal paid by the owners.
F. In order to reduce the number of communications support structures
and communications equipment buildings needed in Montgomery
Township in the future, the applicant shall agree that any proposed
communications antenna support structure and/or communications
equipment building permitted by conditional use shall reasonably
accommodate other users, including other communication companies
and local police, fire and ambulance companies.
A. Site plan. A site plan shall be required for all new communications
antenna support structures proposed to be more than 50 feet in height,
for the construction of new communications equipment buildings and
for all ground-mounted commercial satellite dish antenna proposals.
The site plan shall show the following information:
§ 230-224 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-225
1:958
(1) Property lines, building setbacks required by the Zoning
Ordinance, zoning district(s) of all adjacent lots and areas subject
to easements and deed restrictions.
(2) Existing buildings and other structures, streets, sidewalks, parking
areas and large trees.
(3) The proposed telecommunications facilities, including any
proposed fencing, guy wires, landscaping or other related features.
(4) The drop zone for any proposed communications antenna support
structures.
(5) Any other information deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Construction and elevation drawings. For communications antennas
proposed to be mounted on a building or other structure, the applicant
shall submit, as part of its site plan, construction and elevation
drawings indicating how the antennas will be mounted on the structure
for review by the Code Enforcement Officer for compliance with the
Montgomery Township Building Code270 and other applicable laws.
C. Compliance with electrical codes. All communications antennas shall
comply with all regulations in the latest edition of the national electrical
codes.
D. Licensing. When an applicant must be licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission, the applicant shall submit a copy of its
current FCC license to the Township.
E. Township identification. An identification tag with the Township permit
number shall be attached to all wireless telecommunications facilities
that require a Township permit.
270. Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 230-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-225
1:959

ARTICLE XXXI
HLI-II Highway Limited Overlay District II
[Added 6-12-2000 by Ord. No. 00-123Z; amended 9-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-130Z]
§ 230-226. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the purposes and community development objectives
contained in Article I, § 230-2, of this chapter, as amended, the primary
intent of this district is to provide, as an overlay to the underlying LI
Limited Industrial Zoning, an alternative category of land use that permits
an appropriate intensity of development for land fronting on Route 309,
while it prohibits the spread of intensive general retail/commercial uses
that generate high traffic volumes. In addition, other specific intents,
purposes and objectives of this district include the following:
§ 230-227. Use regulations.
Where authorized as a conditional use, one building or a group of
nonconnected buildings may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be
used or occupied, for any of the following uses and no other:
A. Encourage lower intensity land uses that are primarily nonretail or
specialty retail in nature.
B. Permit land uses that are compatible with limited industrial
development and are traditionally highway-oriented.
C. Encourage uses that generate low to moderate traffic volumes,
especially uses that produce peak traffic generation at times other than
the abutting highway peak hours and traditional general retail
commercial peak hours.
D. Reduce the adverse effects of driveway intersections with Route 309 by
encouraging businesses to coordinate locations of individual access
points, utilize shared access points where feasible and desirable,
develop an integrated circulation system among adjoining lots and
develop alternative access drives where feasible.
E. Minimize the number of traffic generators along Route 309.
A. The uses set forth in § 230-215, Use regulations, of the HLI Overlay
District. However, a motion-picture theater shall not be permitted.
B. Provided that a property or group of properties has both at least a
second means of access other than Route 309 and no more than one
driveway per two buildings on Route 309: individual specialty retail
uses having a minimum gross floor area of 15,000 square feet and a
maximum gross floor area of 45,000 square feet.
(1) A “specialty retail use” is a retail use that does not sell general
merchandise. A specialty retail use is characterized by an inventory
§ 230-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-227
1:961
materially limited to one specific market segment. By way of
example, specialty retail uses include stores marketing furniture,
clothing, electronics, and children's clothing and accessories. It is
not the intention of this definition to be all-inclusive, but it is part of
the specific legislative intent that a specialty retail use is a use that
generates less traffic volume than a retail store that carries general
merchandise including, but not limited to, supermarkets, building
supplies, large volume discount merchandise stores, among others.
(2) The square footage of buildings devoted to a specialty retail use
shall be determined by a calculation equal to 75% of the weekday
afternoon adjacent street peak hour trip generation for the largest
general office buildings permitted on a lot located in the HLI-II
District. The calculation of the square footage based upon gross
floor area shall adhere to the following formula:
(a) Calculate the maximum general office buildings permitted on a
building lot in the HLI-II District subject to a maximum
building coverage of 40%;
(b) Calculate the weekday afternoon adjacent street peak hour
total new trips for general office buildings located in the HLI-II
District, in accordance with the Institute of Transportation
Engineers' Trip Generation Formula for Land Use Code 710,
General Office;
(c) Reduce the HLI-II general office buildings weekday afternoon
adjacent street peak hour total new trip generation by 25%;
(d) Increase the reduced new trips by 5% in order to account for
specialty retail interaction trips, in addition to the new trips
generated;
(e) Divide the total (new plus interaction) trips by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Rate for Land Use
Code 814, Specialty Retail, to result in the permitted size of
specialty retail buildings on the building lot; and
(f) Apply a 25% density increase bonus to the permitted specialty
retail buildings size, if access is limited to one-half driveway
per each building along Pa. Route 309 and one driveway
connection to a road other than Pa. Route 309. If an odd
number of buildings is proposed, then the total number of
driveways along Pa. Route 309 will be rounded up to the
nearest whole driveway. Only one driveway connection to a
road other than Pa. Route 309 is required.
C. Assisted living facility and/or independent living units designed for the
elderly and restricted to residents of age 55 and over in accordance
with the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended.
D. Medical center.
§ 230-227 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-228
1:962
§ 230-228. Establishment of overlay district.
The HLI-II Overlay District shall be an overlay to the LI Limited Industrial
District as shown on the Zoning Map. The following shall apply to the
overlay district:
§ 230-229. Dimensional standards.
A. The provisions of the HLI-II Overlay District shall serve as a supplement
to the underlying district provisions and, as such, shall apply only to
HLI-II uses.
B. The provisions of this district apply only to LI Limited Industrial zoned
properties fronting on Route 309 as designated by the Township Zoning
Map, as amended. The district shall not apply to any other LI zoned
properties or any other zoned properties.
C. Eligible properties within the HLI-II boundaries may be developed as LI
Limited Industrial uses, in compliance with the requirements of Article
XVII, or as HLI-II uses in compliance with the requirements of the HLIII
Overlay District, when authorized as a conditional use.
A. In order to qualify for development under the HLI-II regulations, a lot or
group of lots must comprise at least 12 acres.
(1) Individual building lots having a minimum of three acres are
permitted, but only in accordance with § 230-233 herein, provided
that a unified development plan is approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) For each qualifying lot or groups of lots, there shall be no more
than four buildings or five uses. [Amended 7-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-184Z]
B. HLI-II dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum yard areas:
(a) Front: 70 feet, from existing ultimate right-of-way (50 feet from
center line).
(b) Side: 25 feet.
(c) Rear: 40 feet.
(d) Abutting residential district or use: 100 feet.
(2) Maximum building height: 30 feet, except that the height may be
increased to a maximum of 65 feet, provided that for every foot in
excess of 30 feet, each required yard shall be increased one
corresponding foot. In addition, a height of 40 feet or more shall
require conditional use approval.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
§ 230-228 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-229
1:963
§ 230-230. Conditional use standards and criteria.
All applications for development shall comply with the procedures and
standards for conditional use approval contained in the Township Zoning
Ordinance as well as the specific conditional use standards and criteria
which govern the HLI Highway Limited Industrial Overlay District.
§ 230-231. Development standards and regulations.
All buildings within an HLI-II development shall be designed as a unified
development with compatible architectural design and building materials
for all components including buildings, signs, walkways, plazas, and other
open spaces.
(4) Maximum impervious material coverage: 65%.
(5) Minimum green area coverage: 35%.
A. Landscaping. All landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
Montgomery Township Subdivision Ordinance.271
(1) Side and rear yard areas. An area 25 feet wide shall be landscaped
with a softening or screening buffer. When authorized by the Board
of Supervisors, this may be reduced to no less than 10 feet, but only
where the yard abuts a commercial or industrial use or zoning
district.
(2) Front yard areas. The minimum required yard (70 feet), exclusive
of driveway or access areas, shall be landscaped with a softening
buffer.
B. On-site parking and loading.
(1) Loading and/or parking is prohibited within the minimum front
yard area.
(2) No paving shall occur within side and rear yard areas abutting a
residential use or zoning district and shall not otherwise be closer
than 10 feet to a side or rear boundary line except when cross
access arrangements have been approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Performance standards. The following standards of the Zoning
Ordinance shall apply: smoke; dust and gases; noise; odors; glare and
heat; vibration; radioactivity and electrical disturbance; uses to be
conducted indoors; outdoor storage and waste disposal; electric, diesel,
gas or other power; and industrial waste or sewage.
D. Access controls. All entrance and accessways shall be of sufficient
width with widened radii where they meet the sides of roads and
highways to conveniently and safely accommodate the flow of traffic.
271. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-229 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-231
1:964
§ 230-232. Parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
established in the RS Regional Shopping Center District, but at a reduced
ratio of a minimum four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area of specialty retail space. In meeting the parking requirements,
a unified development may include joint use of one or more common parking
areas. If located off site, some portion of the off-street parking area shall lie
within 200 feet of an entrance regularly used by patrons. A parking space
shall be defined as an area at least 10 by 20 feet in size.
§ 230-233. Special conveyancing.
When the development of a tract and the uses therein are in accordance
with a unified development plan, then a conveyance of a parcel within the
development plan shall be permitted upon compliance with the following
conditions:
§ 230-234. Change in use.
There shall be no change in use without first obtaining conditional use
approval.
The locations of entranceways shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors. The entrance and accessways shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to provide safe and efficient ingress and
egress for traffic without undue congestion or interference with the
normal traffic flow on the abutting streets and highways, in
conformance with the requirements of the Montgomery Township
Subdivision Ordinance.272
E. Limitation on uses. Unless approved by the Board of Supervisors as part
of the conditional use approval, each building shall be limited to one
use.
A. Irrevocable cross-easements in favor of and duly binding on all title
owners within the area of the development plan, their successors and
assigns, with respect to use, control and maintenance of the common
areas including access, green space, and parking areas are in effect and
recorded.
B. Individual lots or parcels created pursuant to this section need not
comply with the dimensional standards of § 230-229 herein but shall
remain in compliance with all aspects of the approved unified
development plan of the entire tract. [Amended 7-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-219Z
272. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-234
1:965

ARTICLE XXXII
Historic Preservation Cluster District
[Added 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-139Z]
§ 230-235. Community development objectives.
In addition to the goals listed elsewhere in this chapter, the district
established by this article is in accordance with and in furtherance of the
Township land use policies and objectives of the Montgomery Township
Comprehensive Plan, as adopted by the Board of Supervisors. It is intended
to achieve the following:
§ 230-236. Overlay on applicable zoning districts.
The Historic Preservation Cluster District shall be an overlay on the existing
Zoning Map of Montgomery Township. The designation "Historic
Preservation Cluster District" shall be permitted when approved by
conditional use in addition to the residential designation R-1, R-2, and/or
R-5 Zoning Districts. Permitted uses shall be specifically limited to singlefamily
detached dwelling and accessory uses on the lot and customarily
incidental thereto, subject to the provisions of Article XXI, § 230-149,
herein, and permanent open space, the area and arrangement of which shall
be subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 230-237. General requirements.
A. To provide for the preservation and protection of historic resources and
open spaces in the Township and for the protection of existing
residential districts.
B. To encourage a more creative, varied, efficient, attractive and
economical development pattern.
C. To provide an effective means of responding to site conditions,
including preserving floodplains, historic areas, recreation sites, and
other areas in a manner consistent with the Township development.
D. To preserve scenic vistas of historic and natural resources within the
Township.
E. To encourage the development of housing meeting the needs of the
population at all income levels.
A. In order to apply the uses within the Historic Preservation Cluster
District, a parcel of land shall be a contiguous tract of land in single and
separate ownership of not less than six acres.
B. Designation as an Historic Preservation Cluster District may be
requested only for properties zoned as an R-1 Residential District, R-2
Residential District, or R-5 Residential District at the time of application
that contains an historic resource either identified in the Township's
§ 230-235 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-237
1:967
Comprehensive Plan or approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
C. The proposed development must be served by public sewer and public
water systems.
D. Permanent open space shall be required for each tract developed
pursuant to the Historic Preservation Cluster District net of ultimate
rights-of-way of existing streets in accordance with the following
percentages:
District
Percent of Tract Area Required
for Open Space
R-1 Residential 50%
R-2 Residential 20%
R-5 Residential 20%
NOTE:
1 “Tract area” is a defined term.
E. The required permanent open space shall be contiguous where
practicable, must surround the preserved historic resources on the site,
and, where possible, maintain scenic views of the historic resources
from surrounding roadways. When more than five acres of open space
are required, then additional open space parcels may be created. Their
area, location, and configuration shall be subject to the specific
approval of the Board of Supervisors, which shall consider
recommendations by the Township Planning Commission.
F. Permanent open space created by the approval by conditional use of the
Historic Preservation Cluster District may be comprised of any one or a
combination of the following options:
(1) Retained for private use of the residents or owners of properties
within or adjacent to the development, pursuant to a covenant or
legal entity and facade easements applied to the historic structures
in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor and approved by the
Township Board of Supervisors; or
(2) Designated as an estate lot in the proposed subdivision, with a
conservation easement applied to the lot and facade easements
applied to the historic structures acceptable to the Township
Solicitor and approved by the Township Board of Supervisors; or
(3) Dedicated to and accepted by Montgomery Township or to any
other public or private agency or association with the concurrence
of the Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors for use by the
public.
§ 230-237 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-237
1:968
§ 230-238. Density standards.
G. Permanent open space areas, including land surrounding the historic
resources to be preserved, should include when present the following
characteristics:
(1) Woodlands.
(2) Farmlands.
(3) Lands adjoining and including any water or drainage course or
body of water subject to periodic flooding or overflow and
delineated as alluvial soils by the Soil Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture, in the Soil Survey of
Montgomery County, 1960-1963.
(4) Lands having slopes in excess of 15% or other natural features
worthy of preservation.
(5) Areas providing yards around and vistas of historic resources sites.
(6) Lands suitable for development of public or private recreation
areas.
(7) Areas providing unique or ecological characteristics, including bird
or wildlife sanctuaries and botanical preservation areas.
H. Landscaping and screening. All landscaping, screening and buffering
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the
Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.273
A. The overall density of development within the Historic Preservation
Cluster District shall not exceed:
District Dwelling Units Per Gross Acre
R-1 Residential 1.00
R-2 Residential 2.00
R-5 Residential 2.30
B. A density bonus of up to 10% may be approved as follows:
(1) Applicant guarantees in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor that applicant shall rehabilitate, preserve and reconstruct
historic resources in a manner satisfactory to the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) The number of lots approved up to the maximum permitted 10%
shall be based on applicant's demonstration of cost to implement
273. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-238
1:969
§ 230-239. Lot area.
Minimum lot area in an Historic Preservation Cluster District shall be:
Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
R-1 Residential 15,000 square feet
R-2 Residential 10,500 square feet
R-5 Residential 10,500 square feet
§ 230-240. Yard and impervious surface coverage regulations.
[Amended 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z
Minimum front, rear and side yard regulations shall be as follows:
§ 230-241. Initiation of district.
An application for designation as an Historic Preservation Cluster District
may be initiated by the owner of lands meeting the minimum requirements
of this article.
§ 230-242. Application procedure.
An application for designation as an Historic Preservation Cluster District
shall be submitted and processed in two parts:
Subsection B(1) above versus value of additional lots to offset such
cost.
(3) Approval of this option is at the sole discretion of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Minimum lot width at street line: 50 feet.
B. Minimum width at building line: 70 feet.
C. Minimum building setback: 25 feet.
D. Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
E. Minimum side yard, corner lot: 25 feet.
F. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
G. Impervious surface ratio.
(1) The maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on a lot used for
a single-family detached dwelling shall be 40%.
A. Conditional use application. The conditional use application shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
procedures and standards of the Township's Zoning Ordinance for
conditional use approval. The following additional information shall
also be provided with the conditional use application:
§ 230-238 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-242
1:970
(1) A map and legal description of the land to be developed.
(2) A sketch plan of the development, showing the proposed locations
of all lots, roads, easements, watercourses, historic resources, tree
masses and areas proposed for permanent open space.
(3) Evidence of availability of public sewer and public water.
(4) A written description of the historic resources located on the site;
including a plan for preservation, permanent protection and
maintenance of historic buildings and structures and timing of
implementation.
(5) A condition of approval may include immediate implementation of
Subsection A(4) above in order to preserve the integrity of
buildings and avoid demolition by neglect of historic resources.
(6) A statement as to the proposed use and preservation of historic
resources and permanent open space area on the site.
B. Subdivision application. A subdivision plan shall be submitted pursuant
to the Montgomery Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.274 The subdivision application shall include the following
information in addition to the requirements of the Township's
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance:
(1) The site plan, showing the exact location and areas of all lots,
historic resources, permanent open space areas, streets and other
proposed facilities, public or private.
(2) Cost estimates for all proposed improvements for historic
resources and/or open space areas.
(3) Legal documents providing for preservation of all historic
resources and open space areas. Such documents shall be in a form
acceptable to the Township Solicitor and approved by the Board of
Supervisors and shall include:
(a) Deed of dedication for all historic resources and/or permanent
open space areas proposed for public dedication.
(b) Performance bond escrow agreement or other approved means
of insuring completion of all required improvements to historic
resources and/or permanent open space areas proposed for
dedication.
(c) Deed restriction to ensure preservation of all historic
resources and/or permanent open space areas not proposed for
public dedication.
274. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 230-242 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-242
1:971
(d) Form of entity or other approved ownership of historic
resources and/or permanent open space areas not proposed for
public dedication.
(e) A homeowners' association declaration or other approved
means of insuring maintenance of historic resources and/or
permanent open space areas not proposed for public
dedication.
(4) Final approval shall be contingent upon the subdivision plan
indicating preservation for the area designated as Historic
Preservation Resource and Permanent Open Space, the area and
management of which shall be consistent with the conditional use
approval.
(5) Application for final approval shall be submitted within 180 days of
conditional use approval. Failure to submit the application for final
approval within the required time shall void conditional use
approval.
§ 230-242 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-242
1:972
ARTICLE XXXIII
BLI Billboard Limited Industrial District
[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 02-161Z]
§ 230-243. Establishment of overlay district.
The BLI Overlay District shall be an overlay to the LI Limited Industrial
District as shown on the Zoning Map. All of the following criteria shall apply
to the BLI Overlay District:
§ 230-244. Permitted uses.
In addition to uses permitted in the LI Limited Industrial District, the BLI
Billboard Overlay District shall permit off-premises commercial signage/
structures. Said off-premises commercial signage being a sign which directs
attention to a business, person, profession, product, home occupation or
activities not conducted on the same premises (hereafter "billboard
facilities").
§ 230-245. Dimensional standards.
The dimensional standards for all billboard facilities in the BLI Billboard
Limited Industrial Overlay District shall be as follows:
A. The provisions of the BLI Overlay District shall serve as a supplement to
the underlying district provisions and, as such, shall apply only to BLI
uses.
B. The provisions of this district apply only to the LI Limited Industrial
Zone properties which meet all of the following criteria and are
specifically identified and located on the Township Zoning Map:
[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 11-251Z]
(1) The property upon which the proposed billboard is to be situated
must have frontage on Pennsylvania Route 309. The BLI Billboard
Limited Industrial District shall be measured to a depth of 150 feet
from and parallel to the center line of Route 309 (Bethlehem Pike).
(2) (Reserved)
(3) The property must have a minimum lot size of one acre.
C. The district shall not apply to any other LI zoned properties, or any
other zoned properties.
D. Eligible properties within the BLI boundaries may be developed as LI
Limited Industrial uses, in compliance with the requirements of Article
XVII, and/or as BLI use in compliance with the requirements of the BLI
Overlay District.
A. Area. Only elevated, freestanding billboard sign structures shall be
permitted. Such billboard facilities shall be permitted to have a sign
§ 230-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-245
1:973
§ 230-246. Compliance with code requirements. [Amended
7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-219Z]
face not exceeding a maximum area of 672 square feet per face. A sign
having two parallel faces with a separation between faces not to exceed
five feet or a "V-shaped" sign with a horizontal angle not greater than
45º shall be permitted with a maximum of 672 square feet per face.
B. Height. No billboard sign face shall exceed 20 feet in height. The
maximum height of an elevated sign shall be 40 feet measured from the
elevation of the paved surface grade of the public street or highway to
the top of the sign.
C. Yard setbacks.
(1) Right-of-way. No billboard sign or structure, or any part thereof,
shall be erected or maintained within 15 feet of any ultimate rightof-
way of a public street or road.
(2) Front yard setback. The front yard setback for any building or
structure shall be calculated as running from the billboard sign
face (i.e., not the right-of-way), for the entire length of the front
yard.
D. Side or rear yards. No billboard sign or structure, or any part thereof,
shall be erected or maintained within 15 feet of any side or rear
property line.
E. No billboard sign shall be erected within 1,500 feet of any other
billboard sign on the same side of the public street or road.
F. There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between a proposed
billboard and any building or structure.
G. When the applicant for a billboard facility is other than the legal or
equitable owner of the property in question, the application shall be
accompanied by a lease agreement between the applicant and owner or
some other writing signed by the legal or equitable owner indicating
that the applicant has authority and permission to make the subject
application in its own name.
A. Any billboard sign/facility hereafter erected or used shall conform to
the provisions of this article and the provisions of the Township.
B. Electrical services and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the National Electric Code and shall be certified by one
of the approved electrical inspection agencies of the Township. Indirect
sign illumination shall be in compliance with § 230-123A of the
Montgomery Township Zoning Ordinance. All sign components,
connections, and installations shall conform to all electrical
specifications of the Pa Act 45 of 1999,275 National Electric Code, as
amended, and Underwriters Laboratories and bear a UL seal. In no case
§ 230-245 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-246
1:974
shall any open spark or flame be used for display purposes. In no case
shall flashing lights be used for display purposes. External illumination
shall only be directed at the billboard itself and shall be directed and
designed so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to motorists. In no
case shall a billboard in total or part consist of a beacon light, festoon
lighting, flashing sign, animated sign, or nonstationary sign as these
terms are defined in § 230-123A in Article XVIII herein. [Amended
3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 11-251Z]
C. Applicants for a building permit for a billboard must submit to the
Township a building and electrical permit application and sealed plans
prepared by a licensed professional structural engineer certifying that
the billboard meets or exceeds industry standards for wind load
standards as a requirement for the permit. [Amended 3-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 11-251Z]
D. Regulations for internal illumination and changeable copy. [Added
3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 11-251Z]
(1) The image, copy, or message of a billboard shall be static and not
change more frequently than once per 30 seconds. The change of
an image, message, copy, color or brilliance of a billboard shall be
instantaneous without any audio or visual effects. All changeable
copy on a billboard shall change uniformly and completely. Once
changed, the copy of any part of the billboard shall not change
again in less than 30 seconds.
(a) No image shall be transferred by any means beyond the
perimeter of the billboard sign face.
(b) Billboards having internal luminance shall have a pixel pitch or
equivalent resolution of not greater than 20 millimeters. The
light source shall be equipped to automatically adjust
brilliance levels based on ambient light conditions. White or
light color backgrounds shall not exceed 50% of the surface
area of the sign face of the billboard. [Amended 7-23-2012
by Ord. No. 12-257Z]
(c) No image shall be interactive, display interactive messages or
three-dimensional images; nor shall any sign or any part of a
billboard structure produce sound of any kind.
(d) No billboard sign shall flash, scroll, fade, revolve, move, or
have intermittent lighting or movable characters or animated
parts.
(2) Brightness.
(a) No billboard may be brighter than is necessary for clear and
adequate visibility and it shall not exceed a maximum of 700
275. Editor's Note: See the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 230-246 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-246
1:975
§ 230-247. Maintenance.
nits during nighttime hours. For the purpose of this regulation,
nighttime shall be between one hour after sunset and sunrise.
(b) No billboard may display light of such intensity or brilliance to
cause glare or otherwise impair the vision of the driver or
result in a nuisance to a driver.
(c) No billboard may be of such intensity or brilliance that it
interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign,
device, or signal.
(d) All digital billboards must be equipped with both a dimmer
control and a photocell that automatically adjusts the display's
intensity according to natural ambient light conditions.
(e) Prior to issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide
written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light
intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed 10,000 nits
daytime maximum and adheres to the nighttime hours
maximum brilliance of 700 nits and that the intensity level is
protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected
software or other method determined appropriate by the
Township. Annual recertification shall be required from the
manufacturer and delivered to the Township on the
anniversary date of the issuance of the original permits to
erect an electronic changeable copy billboard.
(3) Default display. All billboards shall be designed and equipped to
freeze in one position or immediately discontinue the display if a
malfunction occurs.
A. Every billboard sign permitted by this article must be constructed of
durable materials and kept in good condition and repair at all times.
B. Weeds shall be kept out from in front of, underneath of, and around the
base of all freestanding, elevated billboard signs and facilities.
C. No rubbish or debris shall be permitted near any freestanding billboard
signs/facilities, especially when such rubbish or debris might constitute
a fire hazard.
D. All billboard signs shall be kept clean and neatly painted.
E. All billboard signs shall be kept free from all hazards such as, but not
limited to, faulty wiring or loose fastenings.
F. All billboard signs shall be maintained at all times in such safe condition
that they shall not be a danger to the public health and safety.
§ 230-246 MONTGOMERY CODE § 230-247
1:976
Appendix
Chapter A235
(RESERVED)
Chapter A236
FEES
§ 230-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-247
1:977

ARTICLE I
Township Fees
[The schedule of fees which may be adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors is on file in the Township
offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-247
1:979

ARTICLE II
County and Professional Fees
[Fees of the Montgomery County Planning Commission and fees of
attorneys and various planners and engineers which might apply to
Township procedures are on file in the Township offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-247
1:981
Chapter A237
STREET LIGHTING
§ A237-1. Montgomery Township street lighting specification.
§ A237-2. Payment of costs; initial maintenance responsibility.
§ A237-3. Ownership and operation of street lighting.
After the developer's street lighting dedication to the Township, all aspects
of street lighting, including lamps, lights, and associated equipment, shall
A. Street lighting shall be installed along each street in each subdivision
and along each street front abutting a public street in each land
development by the developer and at the expense of the developer,
unless specifically waived by the Board of Supervisors.
B. A developer shall submit a plan showing compliance with the
Montgomery Township street lighting specification, as amended, and
any other applicable Township Code requirements, including the type
and location of each streetlight to be installed. The plan will be
submitted for review and approval by the Township. No streetlights
shall be installed prior to such review and approval. The Montgomery
Township street lighting specifications may be amended and/or
supplemented from time to time by Board resolution, without further
revision to this chapter.
C. Upon final approval of construction and dedication of all public
improvements, the developer shall, if required by the Township,
dedicate the streetlights to the Township and shall assign all applicable
warranties to the Township.
D. All streetlights shall be constructed in accordance with Montgomery
Township street lighting specifications, as amended.
A. Any developer installing street lighting, including lamps, lights, and
associated equipment (collectively "street lighting"), shall pay for street
lighting service, including the electricity consumed, in accordance with
the electric utility provider's current rate and electric service tariff
from the date each lamp is energized until such time as the Township, if
applicable, shall, upon formal resolution of the Township, accept a
dedication of such street lighting.
B. Until such time as the Township approves a formal resolution accepting
dedication of the street lighting, the developer shall be responsible for
all charges and costs for operation of the streetlight system.
C. Until the aforesaid dedication, the developer shall arrange for the
maintenance and operation of the street lighting.
§ 230-247 MONTGOMERY CODE § A237-3
1:982
be owned, maintained, and operated by the Township. Street lighting that is
not dedicated to the Township is not the responsibility of the Township.
§ A237-4. Assessments.
After dedication, the Township shall cause to be assessed, by resolution,
the cost, expense, and maintenance of the street lighting, equipment, and
facilities, including reimbursements for the billing of the energy costs,
the cost of maintenance and operation by the Township, as well as an
administrative charge, by a uniform annual assessment of each property
benefited by the Township-owned street lights as follows:
§ A237-5. Assessment collection.
All such assessments for street lighting shall be filed with the Township
Tax Collector, who shall give 30 days' written notice that the assessments
are due and payable, stating the due date to each party assessed, either by
service on the owner of the property or by mailing such notice to the owner
at his last known post office address. If any assessments remain unpaid at
the end of the fiscal year, the Tax Collector will turn the matter over to
the Township, at which time the Township may attempt to collect the debt
by giving the delinquent owner written notice setting forth (1) the amount
owing; (2) when the assessments were initially due; and (3) a cure-period
with the due date for payment. Such notice and cure-period shall not exceed
60 days. If the assessment remains unpaid at the expiration of the 60 days,
the Township may file a municipal claim filed against the property of the
delinquent owner, as provided by law, for the amount owing, interest, and
associated costs. Where an owner has two or more lots against which there
is an assessment for the same year, all such lots shall be embraced in one
claim. All assessments, when collected, shall be paid over to the Township
Treasurer. The Treasurer shall make a report and/or supply information to
the Township auditors when requested.
Chapter A238
WATER DISTRICTS
A. District 1: All single-family dwelling within residential developments
benefiting from Township-owned streetlights.
B. District 2: All multifamily units within residential developments where
any or all of the roads within the development are benefiting from
Township-owned streetlights.
C. District 3: Any residential development as may be determined adopted
from time to time by Board resolution.
§ A237-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A237-5
1:983

ARTICLE I
Establishment of Water District No. 1
[Adopted 6-29-1964 by Ord. No. 21]
§ A238-1. Agreement approved.
The agreement between the Township of Montgomery and the North Wales
Water Authority, to be dated June 29, 1964, together with the exhibits
attached to said agreement relating to the construction of a water supply
system in a certain area and district of Montgomery Township by the
Authority, is approved.
§ A238-2. Authorization to execute agreement.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to forthwith
execute the aforementioned agreement.
§ A238-3. Establishment; boundaries.
There is hereby created in Montgomery Township a water district to be
known as "Water District No. 1," the mains of which are shown on the
plan of the District, attached to the contract between the Township of
Montgomery and the North Wales Water Authority as an exhibit, and said
District is described as follows: All properties and real estate abutting on
the mains in and under the roads and streets shown upon the map attached
to and made a part of this ordinance which shall be designated as the
"Water District No. 1 Map." The said map consists of 15 sheets, and all the
notations, references and other things shown thereon shall be as much a
part of this ordinance as if the matters and things shown by said map were
all fully described therein. Water District No. 1 includes the mains in the
following streets and roads: Taylor Road between the Bethlehem Pike and
Cowpath Road; Cowpath Road between Lansdale Avenue and Line Street;
Line Street between Cowpath Road to a point of terminus in line of property
of Yassi Tract, a distance of approximately 2,800 feet; Bridle Path Road from
Taylor Road to a point of terminus approximately 575 feet from Taylor Road;
Lantern Lane from Bridle Path Road to a point of terminus approximately
725 feet from Bridle Path Road; Yassi Tract; Lenape Drive from Line Street
to a point of terminus approximately 775 feet from Line Street; Greenbriar
Road between Lenape Drive and Bridle Path Drive; Bridle Path Drive from
Line Street to a point of terminus approximately 785 feet from Line Street;
Hagy Tract; all mains in streets of said tract totalling approximately 5,775
feet of mains; Ulmer Tract; Meadowood Drive from Lansdale Avenue to a
point of terminus approximately 960 feet from Lansdale Avenue; Knollwood
Drive between Meadowood Drive and Heartwood Drive; Heartwood Drive
from Meadowood Drive to a point of terminus approximately 1,000 feet from
Meadowood Drive; Sandalwood Drive from Heartwood Drive to Cowpath
Road; Lansdale Avenue between Cowpath Road and Knapp Road; Knapp
Road between Lansdale Avenue and Sycamore Drive; Beechwood Drive
between Sycamore Drive and Lansdale Avenue; Pecan Drive between
Beechwood Drive and Lansdale Avenue; Vilsmier Road from Lansdale
§ A238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-3
1:985
Avenue to a point of terminus approximately 400 feet West of Route 309;
Morningside Drive from Vilsmier Road to West Thomas Drive; West Thomas
Drive from Vilsmier Road to Vilsmier Road; Sunset Drive from West Thomas
Drive to Morningside Drive; South Drive from Sunset Drive to a point of
terminus approximately 500 feet from Sunset Drive.
§ A238-4. Plans and costs approved.
The plans and specifications showing the facilities to be constructed by the
North Wales Water Authority as a part of the said water supply system and
the cost estimate of the same are approved.
§ A238-5. Future assessment ordinances.
The Township of Montgomery shall at a time which it deems appropriate
in the future adopt the necessary ordinance or ordinances to assess all
properties abutting on the water mains in proportion to the frontage of
properties abutting on the mains, pursuant to the provisions of the Second
Class Township Code.276
§ A238-6. Easements granted.
The Township hereby grants to the North Wales Water Authority all and
every easement, right-of-way and other rights necessary or desirable on,
over or under the streets within Water District No. 1 described herein for
the purpose of constructing the water system therein.
§ A238-7. Changes to district.
The Township hereby reserves the right to change the Water District No.
1 herein created, by adding new property or territory to it, by eliminating
from it any or all property or territory which is included in it or by
disestablishing the said Water District No. 1.
276. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ A238-3 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-7
1:986
ARTICLE II
Water District No. 1 Acceptance and Assessments
[Adopted 1-4-1965 by Ord. No. 22]
§ A238-8. Assessment levied.
The Township hereby charges and assesses a portion of the cost of
construction of the water system known as Water District No. 1 against each
of the properties accommodated or benefited thereby in accordance with
the foot front rule at the rate of $2.95 per assessable foot front, calculated
as set forth in § A238-9 hereof; and the Township hereby determines and
declares that the aggregate amount thus charged against such properties
does not exceed the estimated total assessable cost of construction of said
water system heretofore approved by the Township of Montgomery.
§ A238-9. Method of assessment.
In cases of corner lots where lots are serviced by water mains in more
than one street, the property owner shall pay the linear foot frontage on
the long side of said lot and shall not be assessed for any portion of the
short side thereof. In cases of corner lots located on the curve of a street
where the lot is incapable of subdivision under the Subdivision Ordinance
and Zoning Laws of the Township of Montgomery,277 the property shall be
assessed a maximum of 250 linear feet for the foot frontage abutting on
said street. It is the intention of this section to make equitable assessments
against properties accommodated or benefited by the water system, and the
Township reserves the right to make such adjustments as may be necessary
to carry out such intention, including, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, adjustments for lots of irregular shapes.
§ A238-10. System accepted.
The Township accepts the certificate of completion presented by the North
Wales Water Authority evidencing completion of the said water system,
and said certificate of completion has been executed by the officers of
the Authority and by its construction supervisor, certifying that the water
system was completed on the 14th day of December, A.D. 1964.
§ A238-11. Property list.
The Secretary of the Township, or such other officer as the Township
may appoint, shall prepare or cause to be prepared a list showing each
property assessed by virtue of § A238-8 hereof and the dollar amount of the
assessment against such property calculated in accordance with §§ A238-8
and A238-9 hereof, together with the names of the owners of each such
property and such other information as he may deem relevant, and shall
277. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 230, Zoning,
respectively.
§ A238-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-11
1:987
prepare or cause to be prepared assessment bills with regard to each of said
properties.
§ A238-12. Service of bills.
The Secretary or such other officer shall serve or cause to be served
assessment bills upon the owner or owners of all properties assessed by
§ A238-8 hereof within 20 days of the date of the enactment of this
ordinance. The service of assessment bills may be made either by personal
service or by leaving the bill with an adult member of the family with
whom the owner or owners shall reside. If the owner or owners of any such
property shall have no residence in the Township of Montgomery or cannot
be found in the Township, then the assessment bill shall be posted upon the
premises or a copy thereof left with the occupant of the premises, if there
is such an occupant, and, in addition, a copy of such assessment bill shall
be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner or owners of his or
their duly designated agent at his or their last known address. The person
actually serving the respective assessment bill shall file (or endorse on a
copy of the bill) a return of service with the Secretary, setting forth the time,
place and manner of service with regard to each such bill.
§ A238-13. Payment of bills.
All water assessment bills shall be payable immediately, and if any bill is not
paid within 90 days from the date of service or mailing, as the case may be,
it shall be deemed delinquent, and the Township shall cause a claim for its
lien in respect thereof to be filed in accordance with law.
§ A238-14. Records.
The Township Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all bills paid
and shall pay over to the Philadelphia National Bank, Lansdale Branch,
Lansdale, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in the account entitled
"Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors Water Fund," all assessment
receipts not later than the third business day following receipt thereof, and
until such receipts are so paid over, shall hold the same apart from all other
funds of the Township. The Secretary shall submit periodic reports (but not
less than monthly) to the Solicitor showing, for the period ending on the
date of his report, all assessment bills fully paid and all assessment bills
becoming delinquent.
§ A238-15. Filing claims.
The Solicitor shall, and he is hereby authorized and directed to file claims
for liens on behalf of the Township against all properties for which the
Secretary reports, pursuant to § A238-14 hereof, assessment bills have
become delinquent and to take all necessary action, including, if directed by
the Township, the filing of a suit or suits in assumpsit, to collect said claims,
together with legal interest thereon and all costs and expenses allowed by
law.
§ A238-11 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-16
1:988
§ A238-16. Administration.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to do all matters
and things required to be done by this resolution or by the laws of
Pennsylvania for the purpose of carrying out the intent and purposes of this
ordinance.
§ A238-17. Amendments.
The Township reserves the right from time to time to adopt modifications of,
supplements to or amendments of this ordinance, provided that the rate of
assessment and provisions with respect to filing of claims or liens shall not
be changed in substantial manner unless such change shall be necessary to
bring the same in compliance with applicable law.
§ A238-18. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences or parts of this
ordinance, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder shall be
and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ A238-19. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions of the Township of Montgomery or parts
thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ A238-20. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after the date of its adoption
and enactment.
§ A238-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-20
1:989

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Water District No. 2
[Adopted 1-18-1965 by Ord. No. 23]
§ A238-21. Agreement approved.
The agreement between the Township of Montgomery and the North Wales
Water Authority, to be dated January 18, 1965, together with the exhibits
attached to said agreement relating to the construction of a water supply
system in a certain area and district of Montgomery Township by the
Authority, is approved
§ A238-22. Authorization to execute agreement.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to forthwith
execute the aforementioned agreement.
§ A238-23. Establishment; boundaries.
There is hereby created in Montgomery Township a water district to be
known as "Water District No. 2," the mains of which are shown on the
plan of the District, attached to the contract between the Township of
Montgomery and the North Wales Water Authority as an exhibit, and said
District is described as follows: All properties and real estate abutting on
the mains in and under the roads and streets shown upon the map attached
to and made a part of this ordinance which shall be designated as the
"Water District No. 2 Map." The said map consists of four sheets, and all of
the notations, references and other things shown thereon shall be as much
a part of this ordinance as if the matters and things shown by said map
were all fully described therein. Water District No. 2 includes the mains
in the following streets and roads: Richardson Road between County Line
Road and the Bethlehem Pike, a distance of approximately 4,961.5 feet; the
Bethlehem Pike between Richardson Road and Taylor Road, a distance of
approximately 850 feet; a crossing of the Bethlehem Pike from the east side
to the west side of Taylor Road, a distance of approximately 53 feet; Line
Street between Cowpath Road and a point approximately 350 feet northeast
of the boundary line on Line Street between Montgomery Township and
the Borough of Lansdale, a distance of said mains along Line Street of
approximately 4,370 feet.
§ A238-24. Plans and costs approved.
The plans and specifications showing the facilities to be constructed by the
North Wales Water Authority as a part of the said water supply system and
the cost estimate of the same are approved.
§ A238-25. Future assessment ordinances.
The Township of Montgomery shall at a time which it deems appropriate
in the future adopt the necessary ordinance or ordinances to assess all
§ A238-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-25
1:991
properties abutting on the water mains in proportion to the frontage of
properties abutting on the mains, pursuant to the provisions of the Second
Class Township Code.278
§ A238-26. Easements granted.
The Township hereby grants to the North Wales Water Authority all and
every easement, right-of-way and other rights necessary or desirable on,
over or under the streets within Water District No. 2 described therein for
the purpose of constructing the water system therein.
§ A238-27. Changes to districts.
The Township hereby reserves the right to change the Water District No. 2
herein created by adding new property or territory to it, by eliminating from
it any or all property or territory which is included in it or by disestablishing
the said Water District No. 2.
278. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ A238-25 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-27
1:992
ARTICLE IV
Water District No. 2 Acceptance and Assessments
[Adopted 7-6-1965 by Ord. No. 30]
§ A238-28. Assessment levied.
The Township hereby charges and assesses a portion of the cost of
construction of the water system known as Water District No. 2 against each
of the properties accommodated or benefited thereby in accordance with
the foot front rule at the rate of $2.95 per assessable foot front, calculated
as set forth in § A238-29 hereof; and the Township hereby determines and
declares that the aggregate amount thus charged against such properties
does not exceed the estimated total assessable cost of construction of said
water system heretofore approved by the Township of Montgomery.
§ A238-29. Method of assessment.
In cases of corner lots where lots are serviced by water mains in more
than one street, the property owner shall pay the linear foot frontage on
the long side of said lot and shall not be assessed for any portion of the
short side thereof. In cases of corner lots located on the curve of a street
where the lot is incapable of subdivision under the Subdivision Ordinance
and Zoning Laws of the Township of Montgomery,279 the property shall be
assessed a maximum of 250 linear feet for the foot frontage abutting on
said street. It is the intention of this section to make equitable assessments
against properties accommodated or benefited by the water system, and the
Township reserves the right to make such adjustments as may be necessary
to carry out such intention, including, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, adjustments for lots of irregular shapes.
§ A238-30. System accepted.
The Township accepts the certificate of completion presented by the North
Wales Water Authority evidencing completion of the said water system,
and said certificate of completion has been executed by the officers of
the Authority and by its construction supervisor, certifying that the water
system was completed on the 27th day of April, A.D. 1965.
§ A238-31. Property list.
The Secretary of the Township, or such other officer as the Township
may appoint, shall prepare or cause to be prepared a list showing each
property assessed by virtue of § A238-28 hereof and the dollar amount
of the assessment against such property calculated in accordance with
§§ A238-28 and A238-29 hereof, together with the names of the owners of
each such property and such other information as he may deem relevant
279. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 230, Zoning,
respectively.
§ A238-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-31
1:993
and shall prepare or cause to be prepared assessment bills with regard to
each of said properties.
§ A238-32. Service of bills.
The Secretary or such other officer shall serve or cause to be served
assessment bills upon the owner or owners of all properties assessed by
§ A238-28 hereof within 20 days of the date of the enactment of this
ordinance. The service of assessment bills may be made either by personal
service or by leaving the bill with an adult member of the family with
whom the owner or owners shall reside. If the owner or owners of any such
property shall have no residence in the Township of Montgomery or cannot
be found in the Township, then the assessment bill shall be posted upon the
premises or a copy thereof left with the occupant of the premises, if there
is such an occupant, and, in addition, a copy of such assessment bill shall
be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner or owners or his or
their duly designated agent at his or their last known address. The person
actually serving the respective assessment bill shall file (or endorse on a
copy of the bill) a return of service with the Secretary, setting forth the time,
place and manner of service with regard to each such bill.
§ A238-33. Payment of bills.
All water assessment bills shall be payable immediately, and if any bill is not
paid within 90 days from the date of service or mailing, as the case may be,
it shall be deemed delinquent, and the Township shall cause a claim for its
lien in respect thereof to be filed in accordance with law.
§ A238-34. Records.
The Township Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all bills paid
and shall pay over to the Philadelphia National Bank, Lansdale Branch,
Lansdale, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in the account entitled
"Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors Water Fund," all assessment
receipts not later than the third business day following receipt thereof and,
until such receipts are so paid over, shall hold the same apart from all other
funds of the Township. The Secretary shall submit periodic reports (but not
less than monthly) to the Solicitor showing, for the period ending on the
date of his report, all assessment bills fully paid and all assessment bills
becoming delinquent.
§ A238-35. Filing claims.
The Solicitor shall, and he is hereby authorized and directed to file claims
for liens on behalf of the Township against all properties for which the
Secretary reports, pursuant to § A238-34 hereof, assessment bills have
become delinquent and to take all necessary action, including, if directed by
the Township, the filing of a suit or suit in assumpsit, to collect said claims,
together with legal interest thereon and all costs and expenses allowed by
law.
§ A238-31 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-36
1:994
§ A238-36. Administration.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to do all matters
and things required to be done by this resolution or by the laws of
Pennsylvania for the purpose of carrying out the intent and purposes of this
ordinance.
§ A238-37. Amendments.
The Township reserves the right from time to time to adopt modifications of,
supplements to or amendments of this ordinance, provided that the rate of
assessment and provisions with respect to filing of claims or liens shall not
be changed in substantial manner unless such change shall be necessary to
bring the same in compliance with applicable law.
§ A238-38. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences or parts of this
ordinance, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder shall be
and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ A238-39. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions of the Township of Montgomery or parts
thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ A238-40. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after the date of its adoption
and enactment.
§ A238-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-40
1:995

ARTICLE V
Establishment of Water District No. 3
[Adopted 4-16-1968 by Ord. No. 35]
§ A238-41. Agreement approved.
The agreement between the Township of Montgomery and the North Wales
Water Authority, to be dated the 16th day of April, 1968, together with the
exhibits attached to said agreement relating to the construction of a water
supply system in a certain area and district of Montgomery Township by the
Authority, is approved.
§ A238-42. Authorization to execute agreement.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to forthwith
execute the aforementioned agreement.
§ A238-43. Establishment; boundaries.
A. There is hereby created in Montgomery Township a water district to be
known as "Water District No. 3," the mains of which are shown on the
plan of the District, attached to the contract between the Township of
Montgomery and the North Wales Water Authority as an exhibit, and
said District is described as follows: All properties and real estate to the
depth and distance specified hereinafter abutting on the mains in and
under the roads and streets shown upon the maps attached to and made
a part of the agreement between the Township of Montgomery and the
North Wales Water Authority dated April 16, 1968 and referred to in
§ A238-41 of this ordinance above, said maps consisting of five sheets,
being Section 1 of two sheets and Section 2 of three sheets. The said
maps and sheets and all notations, references and other things shown
thereon are incorporated in this ordinance and made a part hereof as if
the matters and things shown on said maps and sheets were all fully
described herein in full. Water District No. 3 shall extend to and include
the first 200 feet of each abutting property in depth or distance
measured by a perpendicular line from the legal right-of-way line of the
side of the respective road or street on which each property abuts. That
portion of any abutting property which extends beyond the
aforementioned depth and boundary line 200 feet from the right-of-way
line of the road or street shall not be served by the water mains
constructed and installed therein.
B. Water District No. 3 includes the mains in the following streets and
roads: Horsham Road from a point just southeast of the
Montgomeryville intersection and extending along Horsham Road in a
southeasterly direction a distance of approximately 1,550 feet;
Cowpath Road between the Montgomeryville intersection and Lansdale
Avenue a distance of approximately 3,112 feet; Bethlehem Pike (Route
309) between the Montgomeryville intersection and North Wales Road
a distance of approximately 2,400 feet; Vilsmier Road from its
§ A238-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-43
1:997
§ A238-44. Plans and costs approved.
The maps and specifications showing the facilities to be constructed by the
North Wales Water Authority as the said water supply system and the cost
estimate including the bid price of the same are approved.
§ A238-45. Future assessment ordinances.
The Township of Montgomery shall at a time which it deems appropriate
in the future adopt the necessary ordinance or ordinances to assess all
properties abutting on the mains, pursuant to the provisions of the Second
Class Township Code.280
§ A238-46. Easements granted.
The Township hereby grants to the North Wales Water Authority all and
every easement, right-of-way and other rights necessary or desirable on,
over or under the streets within Water District No. 3 described herein for
the purpose of constructing the water system therein.
§ A238-47. Changes to district.
The Township hereby reserves the right to change the Water District No. 3
herein created by adding new property or territory to it, by eliminating from
it any or all property or territory which is included in it or by disestablishing
the said Water District No. 3.
intersection with Bethlehem Pike (Route 309) and extending in a
southwesterly direction a distance of 400 feet to a point of connection
with an existing water line; North Wales Road from the intersection
of said road with the Bethlehem Pike (Route 309) and extending in
a southwesterly direction a distance of approximately 4,000 feet to a
point of terminus 400 feet from the intersection of North Wales Road
and Knapp Road.
280. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ A238-43 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-47
1:998
ARTICLE VI
Water District No. 3 Acceptance and Assessments
[Adopted 8-5-1968 by Ord. No. 36]
§ A238-48. Assessment levied.
The Township hereby charges and assesses a portion of the cost of
construction of the water system known as Water District No. 3 against each
of the properties accommodated or benefited thereby in accordance with
the foot front rule at the rate of $3 per assessable foot front, calculated
as set forth in § A238-49 hereof; and the Township hereby determines and
declares that the aggregate amount thus charged against such properties
does not exceed the estimated total assessable cost of construction of said
water system heretofore approved by the Township of Montgomery.
§ A238-49. Method of assessment.
In cases of corner lots where lots are serviced by water mains in more
than one street, the property owner shall pay the total of the linear foot
frontage on the long side of said lot plus the linear foot frontage on the
short side less 100 feet subtracted from the short side thereof. In cases of
corner residential lots used as single-family dwellings located on the curve
of a street where the lot is incapable of subdivision under the Subdivision
Ordinance and Zoning laws of the Township of Montgomery,281 the property
shall be assessed a maximum of 250 linear feet for the foot frontage
abutting on said street. It is the intention of this section to make equitable
assessments against properties accommodated or benefited by the water
system, and the Township reserves the right to make such adjustments as
may be necessary to carry out such intention, including, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, adjustments for lots of irregular shapes.
§ A238-50. System accepted.
The Township accepts the certificate of completion presented by the North
Wales Water Authority evidencing completion of the said water system,
and said certificate of completion has been executed by the officers of
the Authority and by its construction supervisor, certifying that the water
system was completed on the 22nd day of July, A.D. 1968.
§ A238-51. Property list.
The Secretary of the Township, or such other officer as the Township
may appoint, shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a list showing each
property assessed by virtue of § A238-48 hereof and the dollar amount
of the assessment against such property calculated in accordance with
§§ A238-48 and A238-49 hereof, together with the names of the owners of
each such property and such other information as he may deem relevant,
281. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 230, Zoning,
respectively.
§ A238-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-51
1:999
and shall prepare or cause to be prepared assessment bills with regard to
each of said properties.
§ A238-52. Service of bills.
The Secretary or such other officer shall serve or cause to be served
assessment bills upon the owner or owners of all properties assessed by
§ A238-48 hereof within 20 days of the date of the enactment of this
ordinance. The service of assessment bills may be made either by personal
service or by leaving the bill with an adult member of the family with
whom the owner or owners shall reside. If the owner or owners of any such
property shall have no residence in the Township of Montgomery or cannot
be found in the Township, then the assessment bill shall be posted upon the
premises or a copy thereof left with the occupant of the premises, if there
is such an occupant, and, in addition, a copy of such assessment bill shall
be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner or owners or his or
their duly designated agent at his or their last known address. The person
actually serving the respective assessment bill shall file (or endorse on a
copy of the bill) a return of service with the Secretary, setting forth the time,
place and manner of service with regard to each such bill.
§ A238-53. Payment of bills.
All water assessment bills shall be payable immediately, and if any bill is not
paid within 90 days from the date of service or mailing, as the case may be,
it shall be deemed delinquent, and the Township shall cause a claim for its
lien in respect thereof to be filed in accordance with law.
§ A238-54. Records.
The Township Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all bills paid and
shall pay over to the bank, in an account entitled "Montgomery Township
- Water Fund," all assessment receipts following receipt thereof and, until
such receipts are so paid over, shall hold the same apart from funds of the
Township. The Secretary shall submit periodic reports (but not less than
monthly) to the Solicitor showing, for the period ending on the date of his
report, all assessment bills fully paid and all assessment bills becoming
delinquent.
§ A238-55. Filing claims.
The Solicitor shall, and he is hereby authorized and directed to file claims
for liens on behalf of the Township against all properties for which the
Secretary reports, pursuant to § A238-54 hereof, assessment bills have
become delinquent and to take all necessary action, including, if directed by
the Township, the filing of a suit or suit in assumpsit, to collect said claims,
together with legal interest thereon and all costs and expenses allowed by
law.
§ A238-51 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-56
1:1000
§ A238-56. Administration.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to do all matters
and things required to be done by this resolution or by the laws of
Pennsylvania for the purpose of carrying out the intent and purposes of this
ordinance.
§ A238-57. Amendments.
The Township reserves the right from time to time to adopt modifications of,
supplements to or amendments of this ordinance, provided that the rate of
assessment and provisions with respect to filing of claims or liens shall not
be changed in substantial manner unless such change shall be necessary to
bring the same in compliance with applicable law.
§ A238-58. Severability.
In the event that any provisions, section, sentence, clause or part of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences or parts of this
ordinance, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder shall be
and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ A238-59. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions of the Township of Montgomery or parts
thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ A238-60. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after the date of its adoption
and enactment.
§ A238-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-60
1:1001

ARTICLE VII
Establishment of Water District No. 4
[Adopted 12-27-1968 by Ord. No. 37]
§ A238-61. Agreement approved.
The agreement between the Township of Montgomery and the North Wales
Water Authority, to be dated the 27th day of December, 1968, together with
the exhibits attached to said agreement relating to the construction of a
water supply system in a certain area and district of Montgomery Township
by the Authority, is approved.
§ A238-62. Authorization to execute agreement.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to forthwith
execute the aforementioned agreement.
§ A238-63. Establishment; boundaries.
A. There is hereby created in Montgomery Township a water district to be
known as "Water District No. 4," the mains of which are shown on the
plan of the District, attached to the contract between the Township of
Montgomery and the North Wales Water Authority as an exhibit, and
said District is described as follows: All properties and real estate
abutting on the mains in and under the streets shown upon the map
attached to and made a part of the agreement between the Township of
Montgomery and the North Wales Water Authority dated December 27,
1968, and referred to in § A238-61 of this ordinance above. The said
map and all notations, references and other things shown thereon are
incorporated in this ordinance and made a part hereof as if the matters
and things shown on said map were all fully described herein in full.
B. Water District No. 4 includes the mains in the following streets and
roads: Mele Avenue from its intersection with Line Street and extending
the full length of Mele Avenue to its intersection with the Bethlehem
Pike (Route 309), a distance of approximately 1,050 feet; the Bethlehem
Pike (Route 309) commencing at the intersection of the Bethlehem Pike
and Mele Avenue and extending in a northwesterly direction
approximately 360 feet to a point on the westerly side of the said
Bethlehem Pike, which point of terminus is the boundary line between
the property of Robert B. and Gladys Holmes, Block 4 Unit 15, and the
property of Levine and Sons on the said westerly side of the Bethlehem
Pike. The properties along the said section of the Bethlehem Pike to be
benefited, serviced and assessed for said water line improvements are
and shall be only the four properties or lots located on the westerly side
of the said Bethlehem Pike in the area described. All properties
abutting and located on both sides of Mele Avenue in the area described
will and shall be benefited, serviced and assessed for said water line
improvements.
§ A238-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-64
1:1003
§ A238-64. Plans and costs approved.
The map and specifications showing the facilities to be constructed by the
North Wales Water Authority as the said water supply system and the cost
estimate including the bid price of the same are approved.
§ A238-65. Future assessment ordinances.
The Township of Montgomery shall at a time which it deems appropriate
in the future adopt the necessary ordinance or ordinances to assess all
properties abutting on the water mains in proportion to the frontage of
properties abutting on the mains, pursuant to the provisions of the Second
Class Township Code.282
§ A238-66. Easements granted.
The Township hereby grants to the North Wales Water Authority all and
every easement, right-of-way and other rights necessary or desirable on,
over or under the streets within Water District No. 4 described herein for
the purpose of constructing the water system therein.
§ A238-67. Changes to district.
The Township hereby reserves the right to change the Water District No. 4
herein created by adding new property or territory to it, by eliminating from
it any or all property or territory which is included in it or by disestablishing
the said Water District No. 4.
282. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ A238-64 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-67
1:1004
ARTICLE VIII
Water District No. 4 Acceptance and Assessments
[Adopted 3-18-1969 by Ord. No. 38]
§ A238-68. Assessment levied.
The Township hereby charges and assesses a portion of the cost of
construction of the water system known as Water District No. 4 against each
of the properties accommodated or benefited thereby in accordance with
the foot front rule at the rate of $3 per assessable foot front, calculated
as set forth in § A238-69 hereof; and the Township hereby determines and
declares that the aggregate amount thus charged against such properties
does not exceed the estimated total assessable cost of construction of said
water system heretofore approved by the Township of Montgomery.
§ A238-69. Method of assessment.
In cases of corner lots where lots are serviced by water mains in more
than one street, the property owner shall pay the total of the linear foot
frontage on the long side of said lot plus the linear foot frontage on the
short side less 100 feet subtracted from the short side thereof. In cases of
residential lots used as single-family dwellings where the lot is incapable
of subdivision under the Subdivision Ordinance and Zoning laws of the
Township of Montgomery,283 the property shall be assessed not more than
250 linear feet for the foot frontage abutting on said street. It is the
intention of this section to make equitable assessments against properties
accommodated or benefited by the water system, and the Township reserves
the right to make such adjustments as may be necessary to carry out
such intention, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
adjustments for lots of irregular shapes.
§ A238-70. System accepted.
The Township accepts the certificate of completion presented by the North
Wales Water Authority evidencing completion of the said water system,
and said certificate of completion has been executed by the officers of
the Authority and by its construction supervisor, certifying that the water
system was completed on the 13th day of January, A.D. 1969.
§ A238-71. Property list.
The Secretary of the Township, or such other officer as the Township
may appoint, shall prepare or cause to be prepared a list showing each
property assessed by virtue of § A238-68 hereof and the dollar amount
of the assessment against such property calculated in accordance with
§§ A238-68 and A238-69 hereof, together with the names of the owners of
each such property and such other information as he may deem relevant,
283. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 230, Zoning,
respectively.
§ A238-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-71
1:1005
and shall prepare or cause to be prepared assessment bills with regard to
each of said properties.
§ A238-72. Service of bills.
The Secretary or such other officer shall serve or cause to be served
assessment bills upon the owner or owners of all properties assessed by
§ A238-68 hereof within 20 days of the date of the enactment of this
ordinance. The service of assessment bills may be made either by personal
service or by leaving the bill with an adult member of the family with
whom the owner or owners shall reside. If the owner or owners of any such
property shall have no residence in the Township of Montgomery or cannot
be found in the Township, then the assessment bill shall be posted upon the
premises or a copy thereof left with the occupant of the premises, if there
is such an occupant, and, in addition, a copy of such assessment bill shall
be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner or owners or his or
their duly designated agent at his or their last known address. The person
actually serving the respective assessment bill shall file (or endorse on a
copy of the bill) a return of service with the Secretary, setting forth the time,
place and manner of service with regard to such bill.
§ A238-73. Payment of bills.
All water assessment bills shall be payable immediately, and if any bill is not
paid within 90 days from the date of service or mailing, as the case may be,
it shall be deemed delinquent, and the Township shall cause a claim for its
lien in respect thereof to be filed in accordance with law.
§ A238-74. Records.
The Township Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all bills paid and
shall pay over to the bank, in an account entitled "Montgomery - Township
Water Fund," all assessment receipts following receipt thereof and, until
such receipts are so paid over, shall hold the same apart from funds of the
Township. The Secretary shall submit periodic reports (but not less than
monthly) to the Solicitor showing, for the period ending on the date of his
report, all assessment bills fully paid and all assessment bills becoming
delinquent.
§ A238-75. Filing claims.
The Solicitor shall, and he is hereby authorized and directed to file claims
for liens on behalf of the Township against all properties for which the
Secretary reports, pursuant to § A238-74 hereof, assessment bills have
become delinquent and to take all necessary action, including, if directed by
the Township, the filing of a suit or suit in assumpsit, to collect said claims,
together with legal interest thereon and all costs and expenses allowed by
law.
§ A238-71 MONTGOMERY CODE § A238-76
1:1006
§ A238-76. Administration.
The officers of the Township are authorized and directed to do all matters
and things required to be done by this resolution or by the laws of
Pennsylvania for the purpose of carrying out the intent and purposes of this
ordinance.
§ A238-77. Amendments.
The Township reserves the right from time to time to adopt modifications of,
supplements to or amendments of this ordinance, provided that the rate of
assessment and provisions with respect of filing of claims or liens shall not
be changed in substantial manner unless such change shall be necessary to
bring the same in compliance with applicable law.
§ A238-78. Severability.
In the event that any provisions, section, sentence, clause or part of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences or parts of this
ordinance, it being the intent of the Township that such remainder shall be
and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ A238-79. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions of the Township of Montgomery or parts
thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ A238-80. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective five days after the date of its adoption
and enactment.
§ A238-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A238-80
1:1007
Disposition of Ordinances
Chapter D251
DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION
§ D251-1. Disposition list.
The list that follows accounts for the disposition of each ordinance adopted
by the Township of Montgomery after the enactment on October 1, 1962, of
a consolidation of the general body of Township ordinances, which included
the amendment, renumbering and repeal of certain existing ordinances and
the enactment of three new ordinances, Nos. 2, 3 and 14, on the same
said date. Within this list, ordinances included in the Code are noted by
reference to the chapter and article where they may be found. Legislation
omitted from the Code is noted as to the reason for its deletion. An asterisk
(*) indicates enabling legislation that is not general or permanent in nature.
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 1 Dumping and
burning wastes
10-1-1962 Ch. 193, Art. I
Ord. No. 2 Nuisances,
accumulations
10-1-1962 Ch. 155, Art. I
Ord. No. 3 Junk dealers 10-1-1962 Ch. 128
Ord. No. 4 Disorderly conduct 10-1-1962 Superseded by
statute
Ord. No. 5 Weight limits 10-1-1962 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 6 Social security 10-1-1962 Ch. 32, Art. I
Ord. No. 7 Speed limit 10-1-1962 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 8 Abandoned
refrigerators
10-1-1962 Withheld for review
by Township
Ord. No. 9 Planning
Commission
10-1-1962 Ch. 34
Ord. No. 10 Firearms and
hunting
10-1-1962 Ch. 107
Ord. No. 11 Dogs 10-1-1962 Superseded by
statute
Ord. No. 12 Peddling and
soliciting
10-1-1962 Repealed 7-11-1983
by Ord. No. 12A
Ord. No. 13 Parking 10-1-1962 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
§ A238-80 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1008
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 14 Building Code 10-1-1962 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 15 Sewage (privies) 10-1-1962 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
183
Ord. No. 16 Sewage systems 10-1-1962 Not desired by
municipality
Ord. No. 17 Zoning 10-1-1962 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 18 Subdivision and
land development
10-1-1962 Repealed 3-2-1964
by Ord. No. 18
Ord. No. 19 Repealer only 10-1-1962 --
Ord. No. 7A Speed limit 11-5-1962 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 17A Zoning amendment 1-7-1963 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17B Zoning amendment 5-6-1963 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17C Zoning amendment 5-6-1963 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 20 Establishment of
Sewer Authority
6-3-1963 Ch. 46, Art. I
Ord. No. 18 Subdivision and
land development
3-2-1964 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 21 Establishment of
Water District No. 1
6-29-1964 Ch. A238, Art. I
Ord. No. 7 Speed limit 11-2-1964 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 22 Water District No. 1
acceptance and
assessment
1-4-1965 Ch. A238, Art. II
Ord. No. 23 Establishment of
Water District No. 2
1-18-1965 Ch. A238, Art. III
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1009
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 24 Sewer construction
plan
1-28-1965 *
Ord. No. 25 Power to open
streets
1-28-1965 Ch. 46, Art. II
Ord. No. 26 Sewer connections 1-28-1965 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 17D Zoning amendment 3-1-1965 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 27 Tax Collector's
salary
3-1-1965 Ch. 43, Art. I
Ord. No. 7 Speed limit 5-3-1965 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 28 Sewage system
lease
5-11-1965 *
Ord. No. 29 Sewer fees 5-11-1965 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Res. Sewer connection
rules and
regulations
5-11-1965 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 30 Water District No. 2
acceptance and
assessment
7-6-1965 Ch. A238, Art. IV
Ord. No. 17E Zoning amendment 11-1-1965 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 31 Street acceptance 3-7-1966 *
Ord. No. 32 Street vacation 3-7-1966 *
Ord. No. 17F Zoning amendment 4-4-1966 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 33 Plumbing Code 4-4-1966 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 34 Sewer construction
plan
5-12-1966 *
Ord. No. 33A Plumbing
amendment
1-3-1967 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1010
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 33B Plumbing
amendment
6-5-1967 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 17H Zoning amendment 7-24-1967 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17G Zoning amendment 11-6-1967 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17I -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 17J Zoning amendment 12-4-1967 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17K Zoning amendment 12-4-1967 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 14A Building Code
amendment
2-5-1968 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 35 Establishment of
Water District No. 3
4-16-1968 Ch. A238, Art V
Ord. No. 29A Sewer rents
amendment
8-5-1968 New legislation
pending; see Ch
187
Ord. No. 36 Water District No. 3
acceptance and
assessment
8-5-1968
Ch. A238, Art.
VI
Ord. No. 37 Establishment of
Water District No. 4
12-17-1968 Ch A238, Art VII
Ord. No. 29B Sewer rents
amendment
1-6-1969 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 9A Planning
Commission
amendment
2-3-1969 Ch. 34
Ord. No. 38 Water District No. 4
acceptance and
assessment
3-18-1969 Ch. A238, Art. VIII
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1011
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17L Zoning amendment 7-7-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No 17R Zoning amendment 11-3-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17M Zoning amendment 12-1-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17O Zoning amendment 12-1-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17P Zoning amendment 12-1-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17Q Zoning amendment 12-8-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 39 Sewer construction
plan
4-6-1970 *
Ord. No. 40 Sewage system
lease
4-6-1970 *
Ord. No. 17S Zoning amendment 9-8-1970 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17U Zoning amendment 9-8-1970 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 41 Establishment of
park
1-4-1971 *
Ord. No. 17W Zoning amendment 2-1-1971 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1012
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 29C Sewer rents
amendment
3-22-1971 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 43 Fire Prevention
Code
4-19-1971 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 42 Cable television 5-3-1971 Repealed 5-6-1974
by Ord. No. 42A
Ord. No. 7A Speed limit
amendment
5-20-1971 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 29D Sewer rents
amendment
7-21-1971 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 43A Fire lanes 9-7-1971 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 17T Zoning amendment 11-1-1971 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17V Zoning amendment 11-1-1971 Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17N Zoning amendment 12-6-1971 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17X Zoning amendment 12-6-1971 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17Z Zoning amendment 12-15-1971 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17Y Zoning amendment 12-27-1971 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 29E Sewer rents
amendment
12-27-1971 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 18A-1 Subdivision
amendment
5-1-1972 No ordinance found
Ord. No. 29F Sewer rents
amendment
5-1-1972 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1013
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 43B Fire prevention
amendment
5-1-1972 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 44 Holding tanks 5-16-1972 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
183
Ord. No. 9B Planning
Commission
amendment
5-16-1972 Ch. 34
Ord. No. 29G Sewer rents
amendment
9-26-1972 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 44A Holding tanks
amendment
11-27-1972 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
183
Res. Request for stop
signs
9-4-1973 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 17CC Zoning amendment 9-26-1973 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 29H Sewer rents
amendment
12-19-1973 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 17FF Zoning amendment 12-27-1973 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 45 Occupation
privilege tax
12-27-1973 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-247
Ord. No. 17GG Zoning amendment 2-11-1974 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 29I Sewers amendment 4-16-1974 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 42A Cable television
franchise
5-6-1974 Repealer only
Ord. No. 46 Street openings 5-13-1974 Repealed 3-9-1981
by Ord. No. 46A
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1014
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17AA Zoning amendment 7-1-1974 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17HH Zoning amendment 7-1-1974 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 47 Civil Defense 10-7-1974 Ch. 8
Ord. No. 48 Bond 12-2-1974 *
Ord. No. 45A Occupation
privilege tax
amendment
2-3-1975 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-247
Ord. No. 18A Subdivision
amendment
3-3-1975 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 17BB Zoning amendment 4-7-1975 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 7B Speed limit
amendment
4-7-1975 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 49 Brush, grass and
weeds
7-7-1975 Ch. 65
Ord. No. 17DD Zoning amendment 7-21-1975 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17EE -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 50 Sewage
Enforcement Officer
7-21-1975 *
Ord. No. 9C Planning
Commission
amendment
8-11-1975 Ch. 34
Ord. No. 51 Bond election 9-2-1975 *
Ord. No. 53 Park rules and
regulations
2-9-1976 Superseded by Ord.
No. 53A
Ord. No. 52 Park and
Recreation Board
3-1-1976 Ch. 30
Ord. No. 14B Building Code
amendment
5-1-1976 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 17II Zoning amendment 6-7-1976 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1015
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17JJ Zoning amendment 8-30-1976 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 54 Use funds for road
improvement
9-22-1976 *
Ord. No. 55 Bond 12-13-1976 *
Ord. No. 29J Sewer rents
amendment
12-20-1976 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 56 -- -- No ordinance in
minutes
Ord. No. 57 Numbering of
buildings
12-20-1976 See Ch. 72
Ord. No. 58 -- -- No ordinance in
minutes
Ord. No. 29K Sewer rents
amendment
12-20-1976 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 55A Bond amendment 1-3-1977 *
Ord. No. 17LL Zoning amendment 3-15-1977 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17MM Zoning amendment 3-15-1977 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 29L Sewers amendment 4-27-1977 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 7C Speed limits
amendment
6-6-1977 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 17OO Zoning amendment 7-25-1977 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17PP Zoning amendment 7-25-1977 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1016
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17KK Zoning amendment 7-26-1977 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 18C Subdivision
amendment
7-26-1977 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 17NN Zoning amendment 8-1-1977 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 7D Speed limit
amendment
8-8-1977 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 59 Obscenity 9-19-1977 Ch. 159
Ord. No. 60 Lighting District
No. 1
9-19-1977 Ch. A237, Art. I
Ord. No. 17QQ Zoning amendment 9-27-1977 Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 62 Mutual aid
agreement
10-10-1977 Ch. 37, Art. I
Ord. No. 61 Sewer construction
plan
11-2-1977 *
Ord. No. 17RR Zoning amendment 11-28-1977 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17SS -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 29M Sewers amendment 1-23-1978 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 17TT Zoning amendment 4-10-1978 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 29N Sewer construction
plan
5-8-1978 *
Ord. No. 63 User funds for road
improvement
5-8-1978 *
Ord. No. 65 Bond 5-22-1978 *
Ord. No. 64 Stop signs 6-19-1978 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1017
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 14C Building Code
amendment
7-24-1978 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 17WW Zoning amendment 9-25-1978 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17XX Zoning amendment 10-16-1978 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 290 Sewer agreement 11-6-1978 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 65A Snow alerts 11-6-1978 Not desired by
municipality
Ord. No. 66 Mercantile license
tax
12-12-1978 Ch. 209, Art. II
Ord. No. 33C Plumbing Code 2-6-1979 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 66A Mercantile tax
amendment
4-16-1979 Ch. 209, Art. II
Ord. No. 17YY Zoning amendment 4-25-1979 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17W Zoning amendment 7-9-1979 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17ZZ Zoning amendment 7-23-1979 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 67 Cable television
franchise
7-23-1979 Repealed 9-19-1994
by Ord. No. 94-32
Ord. No. 17AAA Zoning amendment 9-4-1979 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17UU Zoning amendment 9-4-1979 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 68 Manager 10-1-1979 Ch. 26
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1018
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17-001 Zoning amendment 11-19-1979 Reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 68A Manager
amendment
12-10-1979 Ch. 26
Ord. No. 17-003 Zoning amendment 1-14-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified 7-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 17-014
Ord. No. 69 Driveways 2-25-1980 Ch. 92
Ord. No. 17-002 Zoning amendment 3-3-1980 Reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17BBB Zoning amendment 3-20-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17-004 -- -- No ordinance in
minutes
Ord. No. 17-005 Zoning amendment 3-24-1980 Reenacted and
7-6-1981 by Ord.
No. 17-014
Ord. No. 17-006 Zoning amendment 3-24-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 70 Parking 5-5-1980 Repealed by Ord.
No. 87
Ord. No. 71 Alarm systems 5-27-1980 Superseded by Ord.
No. 12-267
Ord. No. 69A Driveways
amendment
6-23-1980 Ch. 92
Ord. No. 17-007 Zoning amendment 8-25-1980 Reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 43C Fire prevention 9-8-1980 Repealed by Ord.
No. 91
Ord. No. 17-009 Zoning amendment 10-27-1980 Reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1019
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17-008 Zoning amendment 11-24-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 72 Drug control 12-8-1980 Superseded by
statute; repealed at
time of adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions,
Art. I
Ord. No. 73 Sewers 12-8-1980 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 17-010 Zoning amendment 2-23-1981 Reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17-011 Zoning amendment 2-23-1981 *Map change only;
reenacted and
ratified by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 46A Excavations and
highway occupancy
3-9-1981 Ch. 201, Art. I
Ord. No. 17-012 Zoning 3-16-1981 Reenact zoning;
repealed by Ord.
No. 17-014
Ord. No. 71A Alarm systems
amendment
3-23-1981 Superseded by Ord.
No. 12-267
Ord. No. 17-013 -- -- No information
available
Ord. No. 17-014 Zoning 7-6-1981 Ch. 230 Reenacted
and ratified Ord.
No. 17, as amended
Ord. No. 77 Stop signs 7-6-1981 Repealed by Ord.
No. 87
Ord. No. 74 Street acceptance 7-13-1981 *
Ord. No. 75 Street vacation 7-13-1981 *
Ord. No. 17-015 Zoning amendment 7-27-1981 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 76 Traffic control signs 8-10-1981 Repealed by Ord.
No. 87
Ord. No. 14D Building Code
amendment
9-14-1981 Repealed by Ord.
No. 91
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1020
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 33D Plumbing Code
amendment
9-14-1981 Repealed by Ord.
No. 91
Ord. No. 43D Fire Prevention
amendment
9-14-1981 Repealed by Ord.
No. 91
Ord. No. 78 Road classifications 12-7-1981 *
Ord. No. 79 Parking 1-11-1982 Repealed by Ord.
No. 87
Ord. No. 80 Local Government
Investment Trust
1-11-1982 Ch. 24
Ord. No. 17-016 Zoning amendment 2-22-1982 *Map change only
Ord. No. 17-017 Zoning amendment 3-22-1982 *Map change only
Ord. No. 53A Park rules and
regulations
4-19-1982 Ch. 166
Ord. No. 73A Sewers amendment 6-21-1982 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 17-018 Zoning amendment 9-13-1982 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 79A Parking 11-1-1982 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 18D Subdivision
amendment
11-22-1982 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 82 Parking 12-6-1982 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 66B Mercantile tax
amendment
12-20-1982 Ch. 209, Art. II
Ord. No. 81 Colmar Volunteer
Fire Company
12-27-1982 Ch. 17, Art. I
Ord. No. 82A Parking amendment 1-10-1983 Repealed 7-2-1984
by Ord. No. 87
Ord. No. 17-019 Zoning amendment 6-13-1983 Ch. 230 No copy
found, but appears
in Township
document
Ord. No. 84 Life Safety Code 6-27-1983 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 12A Peddling and
soliciting
7-11-1983 Ch. 170
Ord. No. 83 Temporary retail
businesses
7-11-1983 Ch. 215
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1021
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 83A Temporary retail
businesses
amendment
8-22-1983 Ch. 215
Res. Speed-timing
devices
8-22-1983 Repealed at time of
adoption of Code;
see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
Ord. No. 18E Subdivision
amendment
12-5-1983 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 17-020 Zoning amendment 1-9-1984 *Map change only
Ord. No. 85 Firemen's
cooperative
insurance
agreement
1-16-1984 Ch. 17, Art. II
Ord. No. 14E Building Code
amendment
4-23-1984 Repealed 9-9-1985
by Ord. No. 91
Ord. No. 17-021 Zoning amendment 4-23-1984 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 18F Subdivision
amendment
4-23-1984 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 86 Solid waste
management
6-25-1984 Repealed
11-21-1985 by Ord.
No. 96
Ord. No. 87 Vehicles and traffic 7-2-1984 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 17-022 Zoning amendment 11-19-1984 *Map change only
Ord. No. 88 Sewage treatment
plant agreement
11-20-1984 *
Ord. No. 17-023 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 27A Tax Collector's
salary
1-28-1985 Ch. 43, Art. I
Ord. No. 87A Vehicles and traffic
amendment
3-11-1985 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 90 Bond 7-15-1985 *
Ord. No. 87B Vehicles and traffic
amendment
7-22-1985 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 17-024 Zoning amendment 8-19-1985 *Map change only
Ord. No. 89 Sewer use 8-19-1985 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1022
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 92 Intergovernmental
agreement
(sewage)
9-3-1985 Ch. 21, Art. I
Ord. No. 91 Building
construction and
fire prevention
9-9-1985 Ch. 69
Ord. No. 87C Vehicles and traffic
amendment
9-23-1985 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 93 Amusement tax 10-7-1985 Ch. 209, Art. III
Ord. No. 94 -- -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 17-026 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 17-027 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 17-028 Zoning amendment 11-18-1985 Ch. 230
Ord. No 95 Intergovernmental
cooperation
agreement (solid
waste)
11-21-1985 Ch. 21, Art. II
Ord. No. 96 Solid waste
management
11-21-1985 Repealed by Ord.
No. 92-1
Ord. No. 97 Supervisors'
compensation
12-23-1985 Ch. 43, Art. II
Ord. No. 17-025 Zoning amendment 2-10-1986 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-030 -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 17-032 Zoning amendment 3-17-1986 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-034 Zoning amendment 4-14-1986 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-029 Zoning amendment 6-2-1986 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 28A Terminate sewer 6-16-1986 *
Ord. No. 17-035 Zoning amendment 7-7-1986 *Map change only
Ord. No. 17-031 Zoning amendment 7-14-1986 *Map change only
Ord. No. 17-037 Zoning amendment 7-28-1986 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 87D Vehicles and traffic
amendment
9-15-1986 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 17-038 Zoning amendment 10-27-1986 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 45B Occupational
privilege tax
amendment
12-8-1986 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-247
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1023
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 28B Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
1-12-1987 *
Ord. No. 17-039 Zoning amendment 3-24-1987 *Map change only
Ord. No. 28C Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
4-6-1987 *
Ord. No. 45C Occupational
privilege tax
amendment
4-13-1987 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-247
Ord. No. 87E Vehicles and traffic
amendment
4-27-1987 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 18H Subdivision and
land development
amendment
6-8-1987 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 98 -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 99 Vermin 7-6-1987 Ch. 155, Art. II
Ord. No. 28D Extend sewer
agreement
7-6-1987
Ord. No. 17-033 Zoning amendment 8-3-1987 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 18G Subdivision and
land development
amendment
8-3-1987 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 17-036 Zoning amendment 8-3-1987 Ch. 239
Ord. No. 28E Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
9-28-1987 *
Ord. No. 28F Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
11-9-1987 *
Ord No. 100 Snow and ice
removal
12-14-1987 Ch. 201, Art. II
Ord. No. 101 Lighting District
No. 2
12-21-1987 Ch. A237, Art. II
Ord. No. 28G Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
1-4-1988 *
Ord. No. 101A Lighting District
No. 2 amendment
1-25-1988 Ch. A237, Art II
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1024
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 18I Subdivision and
land development
amendment
1-25-1988 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 18J Subdivision and
land development
amendment
1-25-1988 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 102 -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 103 Real property
transfer tax
2-22-1988 Ch. 209, Art. IV
Ord. No. 17-042 Zoning amendment 2-22-1988 *Map change only
Ord. No. 87F Vehicles and traffic
amendment
2-22-1988 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 28H Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
13-7-1988 *
Ord. No. 104 Bond 3-14-1988 *
Ord. No. 28I Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
4-4-1988 *
Ord. No. 17-040 -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 17-041 Zoning amendment 4-18-1988 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 97A Supervisors'
compensation
amendment
6-13-1988 Ch. 43, Art II
Ord. No. 105 Dogs and other
animals
6-20-1988 Ch. 88
Ord. No. 106 Sewer districts and
charges
6-20-1988 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 107 Sewer District E
and rates
6-20-1988 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 108 Street vacation 6-26-1988 *
Ord. No. 17-043 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 17-044 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 17-045 Zoning amendment 6-27-1988 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 28J Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
7-11-1988 *
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1025
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17-046 Zoning amendment 8-22-1988 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-047 Zoning amendment 8-22-1988 *Map change only
Ord. No. 17-048 Zoning amendment 8-22-1988 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-049 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 87G Vehicles and traffic
amendment
8-22-1988 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 28K Extend sewer
agreement
termination date
9-12-1988 *
Ord. No. 17-050 Zoning amendment 11-7-1988 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 109 Business privilege
tax
11-14-1988 Ch. 209, Art. V
Ord. No. 18K Subdivision
amendment
1-9-1989 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 27B Tax Collector's
salary
1-9-1989 Ch. 43, Art. I
Ord. No. 87H Vehicles and traffic
amendment
2-27-1989 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 18L Subdivision
amendment
4-10-1989 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 18M Subdivision
amendment
4-10-1989 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 18N Subdivision
amendment
4-10-1989 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 17-054 Zoning amendment 5-8-1989 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-051 Zoning amendment 5-15-1989 *Map change only
Ord. No. 17-052 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 17-053 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 17-056 Zoning amendment 6-12-1989 *Map change only
Ord. No. 110 Bond 6-19-1989 *
Ord. No. 17-055 Zoning amendment 6-26-1989 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-057 Zoning amendment -- Not adopted
Ord. No. 18O Subdivision and
land development
amendment
6-26-1989 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 18P Subdivision and
land development
amendment
6-26-1989 Ch. 205
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1026
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 111 Waste management
agreement
6-29-1989 Ch. 193, Art. III
Ord. No. 17-058 Zoning amendment 7-24-1989 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 17-059 -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 17-060 -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 112 Charge on new
construction
11-6-1989 Invalidated by
statute; repealed
9-16-1991 by Ord.
No 112A
Ord. No. 108A Street vacation 12-4-1989 *
Ord. No. 87I Vehicles and traffic
amendment
12-11-1989 Ch. 222
Res. Fees 1-2-1990 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A236
Ord. No. 113 Waste collection
and recycling
2-26-1990 Ch. 193, Art II
Ord. No. 60A District No. 1
amendment
4-16-1990 Ch. A237, Art. I
Ord. No. 101B Lighting District
No. 2 amendment
4-16-1990 Ch. A237, Art. II
Ord. No. 101C Lighting District
No. 2 amendment
4-16-1990 Ch. A237, Art. II
Ord. No. 114 Lighting District
No. 3
4-16-1990 Ch. A237, Art. III
Ord. No. 18Q Subdivision and
land development
amendment
5-14-1990 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 69B Driveways
amendment
6-4-1990 Ch. 92
Ord. No. 87J Vehicles and traffic
amendment
7-2-1990 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 53B Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
8-20-1990 Ch. 166
Ord. No. 116 Consortium of
communities
9-4-1990 *
Ord. No. 115 Waste collection
and recycling
9-17-1990 Ch. 193, Art. II
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1027
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17-061 Zoning amendment 9-17-1990 *Map change only
Ord. No. 117 Solid waste joint
cooperation
9-24-1990 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-244
Ord. No. 118 Recovery of cleanup
expenses
11-12-1990 Ch. 116, Art. I
Ord. No. 18R Subdivision and
land development
amendment
11-19-1990 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 109A Business privilege
tax amendment
12-10-1990 Ch. 209, Art. V
Ord. No. 45D Occupational
privilege tax
amendment
12-10-1990 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-247
Ord. No. 66C Mercantile license
tax amendment
12-10-1990 Ch. 209, Art. II
Ord. No. 119 Pool and billiard
rooms
1-28-1991 Ch. 174
Ord. No. 128 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
4-22-1991 Ch. 170
Ord. No. 18S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
4-22-1991 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 17-062 Zoning amendment 5-6-1991 *Map change only
Ord. No. 120 Delaware Workers'
Compensation
Agreement
6-17-1991 Repealed
11-22-1994 by Ord.
No. 93-27
Ord. No. 17-063 Zoning amendment 7-1-1991 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 18T Subdivision and
land development
amendment
7-15-1991 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 87K Vehicles and traffic
amendment
8-5-1991 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 121 Recycling 8-19-1991 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-244
Ord. No. 112A Rescind impact fee 9-16-1991 Repeals Ord. No.
112
Ord. No. 114A Lighting District
No. 3 amendment
10-7-1991 Ch. A237, Art. III
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1028
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 122 Lighting District
No. 4
10-7-1991 Ch. A237, Art. IV
Ord. No. 123 Lighting District
No. 5
10-7-1991 Ch. A237, Art. V
Ord. No. 18V Subdivision and
land development
amendment
11-25-1991 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 124 -- -- Tabled
Ord. No. 125 Tax certifications 11-25-1991 Ch. 209, Art. VI
Ord. No. 126 Bond 11-25-1991 *
Ord. No. 127 Fees amendment 11-25-1991 New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A236
Ord. No. 17-066 Zoning amendment 3-9-1992 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 18W Subdivision and
land development
amendment
3-9-1992 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 18X Subdivision and
land development
amendment
3-23-1992 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 92-1 Adoption of Code 6-22-1992 Ch. 1, Art I
Ord. No. 92-2 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
7-27-1992 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 92-3Z Zoning amendment 9-21-1992 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 92-5Z Zoning amendment 11-9-1992 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 92-6 Amusement tax
amendment
12-14-1992 Ch. 209, Art. III
Ord. No. 93-7 Real estate registry 3-1-1993 Repealed by Ord.
No. 08-235
Ord. No. 93-8Z Zoning amendment 4-12-1993 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 93-9S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
4-19-1993 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 93-10Z Zoning amendment 4-19-1993 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 93-11Z Zoning amendment 4-19-1993 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 93-12 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
4-26-1993 Ch. 170
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1029
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 93-13Z Zoning amendment 4-26-1993 Superseded by Ord.
No. 93-15Z
Ord. No. 93-14Z Zoning amendment 5-17-1993 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 93-15Z Zoning amendment 5-17-1993 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 93-16 Fire company loan 5-3-1993 *
Ord. No. 93-17Z Zoning amendment 7-26-1993 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 93-18 Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
8-2-1993 Ch. 166
Ord. No. 93-19 Lighting District
No. 3 amendment
8-23-1993 Ch. A237, Art. III
Ord. No. 93-20 Lighting District
No. 4 amendment
8-23-1993 Ch. A237, Art. IV
Ord. No. 93-21 Fire insurance
claims
8-2-1993 Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No. 93-22 Alarm systems
amendment
8-2-1993 Superseded by Ord.
No. 12-267
Ord. No. 93-23 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
8-23-1993 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 93-24 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
8-23-1993 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 93-25 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
10-25-1993 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 93-26 Park and
Recreation Board
amendment; parks
and recreation
areas amendment
11-15-1993 Ch. 30, Ch. 166
Ord. No. 93-27 Worker's
compensation
agreement
11-22-1993 Ch. 21, Art. III
Ord. No. 93-28 Contracts,
franchises and
agreements
amendment
11-22-1993 Ch. D252
Ord. No. 93-29 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
12-6-1993 Ch. 205
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1030
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 93-30 Bond 12-8-1993 Ch. D253
Ord. No. 94-31 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
1-10-1994 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 94-32 Cable television 9-19-1994 Ch. 6; Ch. A235
Ord. No. 94-33 Collection bins 7-18-1994 Ch. 77
Ord. No. 94-34 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
7-18-1994 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 94-35 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
7-11-1994 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 94-36 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
8-8-1994 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 94-37 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
8-8-1994 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 94-39 Zoning amendment 11-28-1994 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 94-40 Zoning amendment 10-17-1994 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 94-41 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
10-24-1994 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 94-42 Zoning amendment 11-28-1994 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 95-43 Lighting District
No. 3 amendment
1-23-1995 Ch. A237, Art. III
Ord. No. 95-44 Lighting District
No. amendment
1-23-1995 Ch. A237, Art. IV
Ord. No. 95-45 Payment of fire
insurance claims
amendment
3-13-1995 Ch. 121 Art. I
Ord. No 95-46 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
3-13-1995 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 95-48 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
9-25-1995 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 95-49Z Zoning amendment 3-11-1996 *Map change only
Ord. No. 95-52Z Zoning amendment 10-16-1995 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 95-53 Shade trees 11-27-1995 Ch. 189
Ord. No. 95-55 Curfew 11-27-1995 Ch. 83
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1031
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 95-56 Supervisors'
salaries amendment
12-11-1995 Ch. 43, Art. II
Ord. No. 96-60 Zoning amendment;
subdivision and
land development
amendment
9-30-1996 Superseded by Ord.
No. 96-68
Ord. No. 96-62 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
9-16-1996 Ch. 170
Ord. No. 96-63 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
1-21-1996 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 96-66Z Zoning amendment 10-21-1996 *Map change only
Ord. No. 96-67 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
10-21-1996 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 96-68 Zoning amendment;
subdivision and
land development
amendment
2-3-1997 Ch. 230; Ch. 205
Ord. No. 96-69Z Zoning amendment 12-16-1996 *Map change only
Ord. No. 96-70 Building
construction and
fire prevention
1-27-1997 Ch. 69
Ord. No. 97-71S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
3-10-1997 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 97-72S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
3-10-1997 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 97-73 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
4-7-1997 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 97-74 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
4-7-1997 Ch. 170
Ord. No. 97-75 Sewers 6-2-1997 Ch. 187
Ord. No. 97-76 Building
construction and
fire prevention
amendment
6-2-1997 Ch. 69
Ord. No. 97-77 Zoning amendment 12-22-1997 Ch. 230
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1032
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 97-80 Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
7-14-1997 Ch. 166
Ord. No. 97-81 Temporary retail
businesses
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No. 97-82 Contracts,
franchises and
agreements
amendment
7-28-1998 Ch. D252
Ord. No. 97-83 Zoning amendment 9-2-1997 *Map change only
Ord. No. 97-84S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
10-27-1997 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 97-86Z Zoning amendment 11-24-1997 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 97-87Z Zoning amendment 11-14-1997 *Map change only
Ord. No. 97-88 Sewers amendment 1-26-1998 Ch. 187
Ord. No. 97-89Z Zoning amendment 1-16-1998 *Map change only
Ord. No. 98-91Z Zoning amendment 1-26-1998 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 98-92 Lighting District
No. 3 amendment
2-17-1997 Ch. A237, Art. III
Ord. No. 98-93 Lighting District
No. 3 amendment
2-17-1998 Ch. A237, Art. III
Ord. No. 98-94 Lighting District
No. 4 amendment
2-17-1998 Ch. A237, Art. IV
Ord. No. 98-95S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
5-11-1998 Ch. 305
Ord. No. 98-96 Intergovernmental
cooperative
agreement:
Municipal Utility
Alliance as
consultant
5-11-1998 Ch. 21, Art. IV
Ord. No. 98-97Z Zoning amendment 1-11-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 98-98 Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
6-22-1998 Ch. 166
Ord. No. 98-99 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
7-13-1998 Ch. 222
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1033
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 98-100 Intergovernmental
cooperative
agreement:
Recreation Director
11-9-1998 Ch. 21, Art. V
Ord. No. 98-101 -- --Denied
Ord. No.
98-102Z
Zoning amendment 1-25-1999 *Map change only
Ord. No.
98-103S
Subdivision and
land development
amendment
1-25-1999 Ch. 205
Ord. No.
98-104Z
Zoning amendment 2-8-1999 *Map change only
Ord. No. 99-105 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
3-8-1999 Ch. 222
Ord. No.
99-107Z
Zoning amendment 5-10-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
99-108Z
Zoning amendment 5-24-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
99-109Z
Zoning amendment 5-24-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
99-110Z
Zoning amendment 6-14-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
99-111Z
Zoning amendment 6-28-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
99-114Z
Zoning amendment 8-9-1999 *Map change only
Ord. No. 99-115 Bond 8-9-1999 Ch. D253
Ord. No. 99-116 Bond 9-13-1999 Ch. D253
Ord. No. 99-117 Delaware Valley
Insurance Trust
Agreement
8-23-1999 Ch. 21, Art. VI
Ord. No.
99-118Z
Zoning amendment 10-25-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
99-119Z
Zoning amendment 10-25-1999 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 99-120 Bond amendment 10-25-1999 Ch. D253
Ord. No.
00-121Z
Zoning amendment 3-27-2000 Ch. 230
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1034
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
00-123Z
Zoning amendment 6-12-2000 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
00-124Z
Zoning amendment 6-12-2000 *Map change only
Ord. No.
00-125Z
Zoning amendment 6-12-2000 *Map change only
Ord. No.
00-126Z
Zoning amendment 6-5-2000 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 00-127 Solid waste, hours
of collection
9-11-2000 Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-244
Ord. No.
00-129Z
Zoning amendment 1-27-2003 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
00-130Z
Zoning amendment 9-25-2000 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 00-131 Mailboxes in street
right-of-way
11-13-2000 Repealed by Ord.
No. 02-156
Ord. No. 00-132 Street vacation 1-22-2001 Ch. D255
Ord. No. 00-133 Dumping, storage
and burning
amendment
12-11-2000 Ch. 193, Art. I
Ord. No. 00-134 Sewer charges
amendment
12-11-2000 Ch. 187
Ord. No. 01-136 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
2-12-2001 Ch. 222
Ord. No.
01-137Z
Zoning amendment 6-21-2001 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 01-138 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
4-30-2001 Ch. 222
Ord. No.
01-139Z
Zoning amendment 9-24-2001 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
01-140Z
Zoning amendment 1-28-2002 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
01-141Z
Zoning amendment 8-27-2001 *Map change only
Ord. No. 01-142 Liquor license
procedures
6-25-2001 Ch. 58, Art. I
Ord. No.
01-143Z
Zoning amendment 9-24-2001 Ch. 230
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1035
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
01-144Z
Zoning amendment 10-9-2001 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 01-145 Street vacation 11-12-2001 Ch. D255
Ord. No.
01-147Z
Zoning amendment 11-26-2001 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 01-149 Waste collection
and recycling
amendment
12-17-2001 Ch. 193, Art. II
Ord. No.
01-152Z
Zoning amendment 2-11-2001 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
01-153Z
Zoning amendment 1-28-2002 *Map change only
Ord. No. 01-154 Sewer use
amendment
3-11-2002 Ch. 187, Art. II
Ord. No. 01-155 Subdivision and
land development
amendment
3-25-2002 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 02-156 Repeals Ord. No.
00-131
4-22-2002 Repealer only
Ord. No. 02-157 Building
construction and
fire prevention
amendment
5-13-2002 Ch. 69
Ord. No.
02-158ZS
Subdivision and
land development
amendment; zoning
amendment
6-10-2002 Chs. 205 and 230
Ord. No.
02-159-A
Increasing
indebtedness
9-23-2002 Ch. D253
Ord. No.
02-159-B
Increasing
indebtedness
9-23-2002 Ch. D253
Ord. No.
02-160S
Subdivision and
land development
amendment
10-28-2002 Ch. 205
Ord. No.
02-161Z
Zoning amendment 4-14-2003 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 02-162 Earned income and
net profits tax
9-11-2002 Ch. 209, Art. VII
Ord. No. 02-163 Fire Department
amendment
12-16-2002 Ch. 17
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1036
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 02-164 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
1-6-2003 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 02-165 Fire Department
amendment
1-6-2003 Ch. 17
Ord. No.
03-166Z
Zoning amendment 3-10-2003 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
03-167Z
Zoning amendment 3-10-2003 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 03-168 Disturbing the
peace
7-14-2003 Ch. 86
Ord. No.
03-169ZS
Subdivision and
land development
amendment; zoning
amendment
2-27-2003 Chs. 205 and 230
Ord. No. 03-171 Tenant lists 6-23-2003 Ch. 217
Ord. No. 03-173 Industrial
Development
Authority
10-27-2003 Ch. 20
Ord. No. 03-174 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
12-15-2003 Ch. 222
Ord. No. 03-175 Sewers amendment 12-15-2003 Ch. 187
Ord. No.
04-177S
Subdivision and
land development
amendment
4-12-2004 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 04-178 Delaware Valley
Health Insurance
Trust Agreement
4-26-2004 Ch. 21, Art. VII
Ord. No.
04-179Z
Zoning amendment 6-14-2004 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
04-180S
Subdivision and
land development
amendment
6-14-2004 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 04-181 Uniform
Construction Codes
6-28-2004 Ch. 80
Ord. No. 04-182 Building
construction and
fire prevention
amendment
6-28-2004 Ch. 69
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1037
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 04-183 Excavations and
highway occupancy
amendment
7-12-2004 Ch. 201, Art. I
Ord. No.
04-184Z
Zoning amendment 7-26-2004 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 04-185 Culvert
Reconstruction
agreement
9-27-2004 Ch. D252
Ord. No. 04-186 Cable television
amendment
11-22-2004 Ch. 6
Ord. No.
04-187Z
Zoning Map
amendment
11-22-2004 Ch. D257
Ord. No. 04-188 Numbering of
buildings and
collection bins
amendment
3-28-2005 Chs. 72; 77
Ord. No.
04-189Z
Zoning amendment 1-24-2005 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
04-190Z
Zoning amendment 2-28-2005 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
04-191Z
Zoning amendment 1-24-2005 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 04-193 Tax Collector's
salary
1-24-2005 Ch. 43, Art. I
Ord. No.
05-194Z
Zoning amendment 2-28-2005 Ch. D257
Ord. No.
05-195Z
Zoning amendment 10-11-2005 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
05-196Z
Zoning Map
amendment
10-11-2005 Ch. D257
Ord. No.
05-197Z
Zoning amendment 5-23-2005 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
05-198Z
Zoning Map
amendment
9-12-2005 Ch. D257
Ord. No.
05-199Z
Zoning Map
amendment
10-11-2005 Ch. D257
Ord. No.
05-200Z
Zoning amendment 11-7-2005 Ch. 230
Ord. No.
05-201Z
Zoning Map
amendment
11-28-2005 Ch. D257
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1038
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 05-202 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
10-11-2005 Ch. 222
Ord. No.
05-203Z
Zoning amendment 11-28-2005 Ch. 230
Ord. No. 05-205 Building
construction and
fire prevention
amendment
11-28-2005 Ch. 69
Ord. No. 06-206 Driveways
amendment
4-10-2006 Ch. 92
Ord. No.
06-207S
Subdivision and
land development
amendment
3-27-2006 Ch. 205
06-208 Verizon cable
franchise
agreement
7-24-2006 Ch. D252
06-209Z Zoning Map
amendment
9-25-2006 Ch. D257
06-210 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
12-18-2006 Ch. 222
06-211Z Readoption of
zoning
2-12-2007 Ch. 230, history
only
06-211S Readoption of
subdivision and
land development
2-12-2007 Ch. 205, history
only
07-212 Realty transfer tax
amendment
2-12-2007 Ch. 209, Art. IV
07-213 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
3-12-2007 Ch. 222
07-216Z Zoning amendment 6-25-2007 Ch. 230
07-218 Waste collection
and recycling
amendment
7-9-2007 Ch. 193, Art. II
07-219Z Zoning amendment 7-23-2007 Ch. 230
07-220ZS Subdivision and
land development
amendment; zoning
amendment
11-12-2007 Chs. 205; 230
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1039
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
07-221 Sewer use and
regulations
amendment
10-22-2007 Ch. 187, Part 1
07-222Z Zoning amendment 11-26-2007 Ch. 230
07-223Z Zoning amendment 11-12-2007 Ch. 230
07-224 Towing contractors 3-24-2008 Ch. 220
07-225Z Zoning Map
amendment
12-3-2007 Ch. D257
07-226Z Zoning amendment 12-17-2007 Ch. 230
07-227Z Zoning amendment 12-17-2007 Ch. 230
07-229 Waste collection
and recycling
amendment
1-28-2008 Ch. 193, Art. II
08-230Z Zoning amendment 5-27-2008 Ch. 230
08-231Z Zoning Map
amendment
5-27-2008 Ch. D257
08-232 Shade trees
amendment
11-24-2008 Ch. 189
08-233 Planning
Commission
amendment
11-24-2008 Ch. 34
08-234 Park and
Recreation Board
11-24-2008 Ch. 30
08-235 Real estate registry
repealer
1-5-2009 Ch. 178, reference
only
09-236Z Zoning amendment 4-27-2009 Ch. 230
09-237Z Zoning amendment 6-8-2009 Ch. 230
09-238 Contractors 6-22-2009 Ch. 82
09-239Z Zoning amendment 6-22-2009 Ch. 230
10-240Z Zoning amendment 6-28-2010 Ch. 230
10-241S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
6-28-2010 Ch. 205
10-242 Shade trees
amendment
6-28-2010 Ch. 189
10-243Z Zoning amendment 6-28-2010 Ch. 230
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1040
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
10-244 Solid waste
management:
dumping, storage
and burning
amendment; waste
collection and
recycling
amendment; solid
waste joint
cooperation
repealer; hours of
collection repealer;
recycling repealer
9-27-2010 Ch. 193, Arts. I, II,
III, IIIA, and IV
10-245 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
11-8-2010 Ch. 170
10-247 Local services tax 11-22-2010 Ch. 209, Art. I
10-248 Sewer use and
regulations
amendment
1-3-2011 Ch. 187, Part 1
11-249 Removal of snow
and ice amendment
9-26-2011 Ch. 201, Art II
11-250 Sewer use and
regulations
5-23-2011 Ch. 187, Part 1
11-251Z Zoning amendment 3-26-2012 Ch. 230
11-252Z Zoning Map
amendment
3-26-2012 Ch. D257
11-253 Sewer use and
regulations
amendment
1-3-2012 Ch. 187, Part 1
12-254 Increasing
indebtedness
1-23-2012 Ch. D253
12-255 Sewer use and
regulations
amendment
2-13-2012 Ch. 187, Part 1
12-256 Removal of snow
and ice amendment
3-26-2012 Ch. 201, Art. II
12-257Z Zoning amendment 7-23-2012 Ch. 230
12-258Z Zoning Map
amendment
6-25-2012 Ch. D257
12-259Z Zoning amendment 6-25-2012 Ch. 230
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1041
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
12-260 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
5-29-2012 Ch. 222
12-262Z Zoning amendment 9-10-2012 Ch. 230
12-263Z Zoning amendment 9-10-2012 Ch. 230
12-264Z Zoning amendment 10-22-2012 Ch. 230
12-265Z Zoning Map
amendment
10-22-2012 Ch. D257
12-266Z Zoning amendment 12-17-2012 Ch. 230
12-267 Alarm systems 3-11-2013 Ch. 56
12-268 Collection of
delinquent real
estate taxes
2-25-2013 Ch. 209, Art. VIII
13-269 Sewer use and
regulations
amendment
2-11-2013 Ch. 187, Part 1
13-270 Tax Collector's
salary amendment
2-11-2013 Ch. 43, Art. I
13-271 Increasing
indebtedness
2-25-2013 Ch. D253
13-272Z Zoning amendment 4-8-2013 Ch. 230
13-273Z Zoning amendment 4-8-2013 Ch. 230
13-274Z Zoning Map
amendment
10-28-2013 Ch. D257
13-275Z Zoning amendment 9-9-2013 Ch. 230
13-276S Subdivision and
land development
amendment; street
lighting amendment
11-25-2013 Ch. 205; Ch. A237
14-278 Stormwater
management
5-12-2014 Ch. 206
14-280 Sewer use and
regulations
amendment
7-14-2014 Ch. 187, Part 1
14-281 Comcast of
Pennsylvania, LLC,
cable franchise
agreement
9-8-2014 Ch. D252
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1042
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
14-282 Salaries and
compensation:
compensation for
Montgomery
Township Municipal
Sewer Authority
9-8-2014 Ch. 43, Art. III
14-284Z Zoning amendment 2-9-2015 Ch. 230
15-285 Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
1-5-2015 Ch. 166
14-286 PSATS
Unemployment
Compensation
Group Trust
12-15-2014 Ch. D252
15-287 Sewer use and
regulations
amendment
2-9-2015 Ch. 187, Part 1
15-288 Contractors
amendment
3-9-2015 Ch. 82
15-289 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
10-26-2015 Ch. 222
15-290 Increasing
indebtedness
11-23-2015 Ch. D253
15-291 Stormwater
management
1-4-2016 Ch. 206
15-293Z Zoning amendment 3-28-2016 Ch. 230
16-294 Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
2-8-2016 Ch. 166
16-295 Intergovernmental
Cooperative
Agreements:
Alternative TMDL
Plan for
Wissahickon Creek
Watershed
7-11-2016 Superseded by Ord.
No. 18-309
16-296Z Zoning amendment 7-25-2016 Ch. 230
16-297ZS Subdivision and
land development
amendment; zoning
amendment
9-26-2016 Ch. 205; Ch. 230
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D251-1
1:1043
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
16-298S Subdivision and
land development
amendment
9-26-2016 Ch. 205
16-299 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
9-12-2016 Ch. 222
16-300 Increasing
indebtedness
9-12-2016 Ch. D253
16-301 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
11-14-2016 Ch. 222
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition Supp. No.
16-302 12-19-2016 Planning Commission
Amendment
Ch. 34 9
17-303 1-3-2017 Taxation: Tax
Certifications
Amendment
Ch. 209,
Art. VI
9
17-304 4-24-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222 9
17-305Z 11-27-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230 9
18-306Z 6-25-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230 9
18-307 8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222 9
18-308 9-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 222 9
18-309 10-9-2018 Intergovernmental
Cooperative
Agreements:
Alternative TMDL
Plan for Wissahickon
Creek Watershed
Amendment
Ch. 21, Art.
VIII
9
19-310 3-11-2019 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Earned
Income Tax Credit
and Real Property
Tax Credit
Ch. 209,
Art. IX
9
§ D251-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D251-1
1:1044
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition Supp. No.
19-311ZS 11-11-2019 Subdivision and Land
Development
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 205;
Ch. 230
9
Chapter D252
CONTRACTS, FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
§ D252-1. List of ordinances.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
21 6-29-1964 Approving a contract between the North Wales
Water Authority and the Township of
Montgomery authorizing the Authority to
construct a water supply system in a certain
designated area of the Township of
Montgomery (Water District No. 1), authorizing
the execution of said contract by the Township
Board of Supervisors, approving the plans,
specifications and cost estimate of said water
supply system, creating a water district and
signifying the intention of the Township to
assess all properties abutting on the mains to
be installed.
23 1-18-1965 Approving a contract between the North Wales
Water Authority and the Township of
Montgomery authorizing the Authority to
construct a water supply system in a certain
designated area of the Township of
Montgomery (Water District No. 2), authorizing
the execution of said contract by the Township
Board of Supervisors, approving the plans,
specifications and cost estimate of said water
supply system, creating a water district and
signifying the intention of the Township to
assess all properties abutting on the mains to
be installed.
§ D251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D252-1
1:1045
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
28 5-11-1965 Authorizing and directing the execution and
delivery of a sewage system lease, dated as of
May 15, 1965, from the Montgomery Township
Municipal Sewer Authority; authorizing and
directing the execution and delivery of an
agreement dated as of May 15, 1965, for the
operation of said sewage system by said
Authority; approving the rentals set forth in
said lease; consenting to, approving and
acknowledging notice of the assignment of said
lease to Girard Trust Bank, as trustee;
authorizing incidental action to be taken by the
proper officers; and repealing inconsistent
ordinances.
35 4-16-1968 Approving a contract between the North Wales
Water Authority and the Township of
Montgomery authorizing the Authority to
construct a water supply system in a certain
designated area of the Township of
Montgomery (Water District No. 3), authorizing
the execution of said contract by the Township
Board of Supervisors, approving the plans,
specifications and cost estimate of said water
supply system, creating a water district and
signifying the intention of the Township to
assess all properties abutting on the mains to
be installed.
37 12-27-1968 Approving a contract between the North Wales
Water Authority and the Township of
Montgomery authorizing the Authority to
construct a water supply system in a certain
designated area of the Township of
Montgomery (Water District No. 4), authorizing
the execution of said contract by the Township
Board of Supervisors, approving the plans,
specifications and cost estimate of said water
supply system, creating a water district and
signifying the intention of the Township to
assess all properties abutting on the mains to
be installed.
§ D252-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D252-1
1:1046
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
40 4-6-1970 Authorizing and directing the execution and
delivery of a supplemental sewage system
lease, dated as of April 15, 1970, from the
Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer
Authority; approving of the rentals set forth in
said supplemental lease; consenting to,
approving and acknowledging notice of the
assignment of said supplemental lease to Girard
Trust Bank, as trustee; authorizing incidental
action to be taken by the proper officers; and
repealing inconsistent ordinances and
resolutions.
60 9-19-1977 Authorizing a contract between Montgomery
Township and the Philadelphia Electric
Company to establish a lighting district to serve
the Meadow Glen Subdivision, empowering the
officers of the Township to execute such a
contract creating Lighting District No. 1 and
providing for the Township to assess all
properties fronting on the roads and streets
being lighted and illuminated within Lighting
District No. 1 pursuant to the Second Class
Township Code.
28A 6-16-1986 Terminating the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28B 1-12-1987 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28C 4-6-1987 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28D 7-6-1987 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28E 9-28-1987 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28F 11-9-1987 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
§ D252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D252-1
1:1047
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
101 12-21-1987 Authorizing the Township of Montgomery to
create Lighting District No. 2 in the following
subdivisions: Woodbrook (aka "Meadow Glen IIA,
B and C), Gwynmont Farms (Phase I),
Victoria Wood (aka "Rosewood Estates'), Forest
Trail (Phases I and II) and Heatherknoll (Phases
I, II and III; aka "Greene Countrie"); authorizing
a contract between Montgomery Township and
the Philadelphia Electric Company to provide
the power for streetlights therein and providing
for the assessment by the Township of all real
property fronting on roads and streets within
the subdivisions, with a proportionate cost of
the expense of providing the electricity and
maintaining the facilities within the lighting
district.
28G 1-4-1988 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
101A 1-25-1988 Amending Ordinance No. 101 by which Lighting
District No. 2 was created, by adding to
Lighting District No. 2 the subdivision known as
"Tall Gables," developed by Deluca Enterprises,
Inc.; authorizing a contract between
Montgomery Township and the Philadelphia
Electric Co. to provide the power for
streetlights therein and providing for the
assessment by the Township of all real property
fronting on roads and streets within said
subdivision, with a proportionate cost of the
expense of providing the electricity and
maintaining the facilities within the lighting
district.
28H 3-7-1988 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28I 4-4-1988 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28J 7-11-1988 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
28K 9-12-1988 Extending the operating agreement with the
Sewer Authority.
§ D252-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D252-1
1:1048
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
113 2-28-1990 Authorizing the appropriate officials of this
municipality to approve and, where
appropriate, to execute the Intergovernmental
Agreement for Recycling, the Municipal
Recycling Program Grant Agreement and the
Schedule for North Penn Area Communities
1989 Population and Projected Expenditures.
60A 4-16-1990 Authorizing the Township of Montgomery to
change the assessment of streetlighting within
District No. 1 in the Meadow Glen, Section I,
Subdivision, from a proportionate percentage of
front footage to a uniform equal assessment by
the Township of each property benefited within
said subdivision, with an equal cost of the
expense of providing the electricity and
maintaining the facilities within the lighting
district.
101B 4-16-1990 Authorizing the Township of Montgomery to
delete the subdivisions known as "Woodbrook,"
"Gwynmont Farms," "Forest Trail (Phases I and
II)" and "Tall Gables" from Streetlighting
District No. 2.
101C 4-16-1990 Authorizing the Township of Montgomery to
change the assessment for streetlighting within
Lighting District No. 2 in the subdivisions
known as "Heatherknoll (Phases I, II and III)"
and "Victoria Woods," from a proportionate
percentage of front footage to a uniform equal
assessment by the Township of each property
benefited within said subdivisions, with an
equal cost of the expense of providing the
electricity and maintaining the facilities within
the lighting district.
§ D252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D252-1
1:1049
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
114 4-16-1990 Authorizing the Township of Montgomery to
create Lighting District No. 3 in the following
subdivisions: Montgomery Greene, Stone Ridge,
Gwynmere, Mallard Pond, Victoria Court,
Gwynedd Pointe, Montgomery Place, Gwynedd
Lea, Westgate, The Ridings of Montgomery,
Pinecrest Golf Club, Wethersfield, Canterbury
III, Fox Creek, Montgomery Ridge, Woodbrook
(aka "Meadow Glen II-A, B and C"), Gwynmont
Farms, Forest Trail and Tall Gables; authorizing
a contract between Montgomery Township and
the Philadelphia Electric Company to provide
the power for streetlights therein and providing
for the uniform annual assessment by the
Township of each property benefited within said
subdivisions, with an equal cost of the expense
of providing the electricity and maintaining the
facilities within the lighting district.
116 9-4-1990 Endorsing Articles of Agreement of the
Montgomery County Consortium of
Communities; authorizing the execution of said
agreement; and the participation in consortium
affairs by the appropriate officials of
Montgomery Township.
93-28 11-22-1993 Endorsing the amended Articles of Agreement
of the Montgomery County Consortium of
Communities.
97-82 7-28-1997 Authorizing the participation of Montgomery
Township in the Delaware Valley Municipal
Health Cooperative for the purpose of studying
the feasibility of creating a health insurance
trust pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law.
04-178 4-26-2004 Authorization for Delaware Valley Health
Insurance Trust Agreement
04-185 9-27-2004 Authorization for agreement to participate in
Line Street culvert reconstruction project
04-186 11-22-2004 Authorization for cable franchise agreement
renewal with Comcast
06-208 7-24-2006 Authorization for cable franchise agreement
with Verizon
14-281 9-8-2014 Authorization for cable franchise agreement
renewal with Comcast
§ D252-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D252-1
1:1050
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
14-286 12-15-2014 Authorization for participation in PSATS
Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
16-295 7-11-2016 Authorization for intermunicipal agreement for
development of alternative TMDL plan for
Wissahickon Creek Watershed
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description Supp. No.
18-309 10-9-2018 Authorization for
intermunicipal agreement to
continue the development of
an alternative TMDL plan for
Wissahickon Creek
Watershed
9
Chapter D253
INDEBTEDNESS
§ D252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1051
§ D253-1. List of ordinances.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1052
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
48 12-2-1974 Authorizing the incurring of nonelectoral debt
by the Township of Montgomery for the
purpose of providing funds for a project
consisting of the financing of street and
roadway improvements in the Township of
Montgomery, Montgomery County; determining
the amount of debt to be incurred in respect of
said project as six hundred seventy thousand
dollars ($670,000.); providing for the
evidencing of such debt in respect of such
project by general obligation bonds; directing
the issuance of general obligation bonds, series
of 1975, in the aggregate principal amount of
six hundred seventy thousand dollars
($670,000.); declaring the realistic estimated
life of said project to be fifteen (15) years;
authorizing and directing the preparation,
certification and filing with the Department of
Community Affairs of the debt statement
required by Section 410 of the Local
Government Unit Debt Act; authorizing and
directing the preparation and filing, if deemed
necessary, of any statements required by
Section 206 of the Local Government Unit Debt
Act to qualify that portion of the existing gross
lease rental debt of the Township evidenced by
outstanding authority sewer revenue bonds
which may be excluded from such gross lease
rental debt as self-liquidating debt for the
purposes of establishing the net lease rental
debt of the Township and determining its debt
limit; providing for the date, designation,
denomination, registration, place of payment,
numbers, maturity amounts and dates, rates of
interest and other terms in respect of said
bonds; adopting a form of bond and coupon;
authorizing the officers of the Township to
execute and the fiscal agent to authenticate
said bonds; establishing redemption features;
assuming and agreeing to pay certain taxes if
and as levied on the principal or interest of said
bonds; covenanting to pay the debt service on
the bonds and pledging the full faith, honor,
credit and taxing power of the Township for the
payment thereof; establishing a sinking fund in
respect of such bonds; providing for a paying
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1053
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
agent, registrar, fiscal agent and sinking fund
depositary; restricting investment of the
proceeds of said bonds; accepting the proposal
of Butcher and Singer for the purchase of the
bonds; setting forth the form of bond, coupon
and certificate of authentication; setting forth a
debt service schedule; and repealing
inconsistent ordinances.
51 9-2-1975 Setting forth the desire of the Township to
increase the debt with the assent of the
electors, calling an election for the purpose of
obtaining such assent and approving the
content and form of a notice of election for the
purpose of raising the necessary moneys and
capital with which to construct a building to
house the local Fire Department equipment and
to serve as an office and station for the police in
the Township of Montgomery and generally, the
construction of a public safety building.
55 12-13-1976 Increasing the indebtedness of Montgomery
Township, County of Montgomery,
Pennsylvania, by the issue of a general
obligation note in an amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.) for the purpose of
constructing a new police building, fixing the
form, number, date, interest and maturity
thereof; making a covenant for the payment of
the debt service on the note; providing for the
filing of the required document; providing for
the appointment of a sinking fund depository
for the note; and authorizing execution, sale
and delivery thereof.
55A 1-3-1977 Amending Ordinance No. 55 to establish the
term of the notes which are authorized by
Ordinance No. 55 to be a period of five (5)
years; to provide for payment of the principal
amount in equal annual installments; and to
revise the interest rates to be a maximum of
eight and one-half percent (8 1/2%) per
annum.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1054
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
65 5-22-1978 Increasing the indebtedness of Montgomery
Township, County of Montgomery,
Pennsylvania, by the issue of a series of general
obligation notes in an aggregate amount of up
to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.)
for the purpose of purchasing road
maintenance equipment, refinancing existing
debt and funding road repairs; fixing the form,
number, date, interest and maturity thereof;
making a covenant for the payment of the debt
service on the notes; providing for the filing of
the required documents; providing for the
appointment of a sinking fund depository for
the notes; and authorizing execution, sale and
delivery thereof.
90 7-15-1985 Increasing the indebtedness of the Township of
Montgomery, County of Montgomery,
Pennsylvania, by the issue of a series of the
Township's general obligation notes; face
amount of each note in the series shall be up to
sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.) with an
aggregate indebtedness of up to six hundred
thousand dollars ($600,000.) represented by up
to ten (10) notes for sundry purposes; fixing the
form, number, date, interest and maturity
thereof; making a covenant for the payment of
the debt service on the note; providing for the
filing of the required document; providing for
the appointment of a sinking fund depository
for the note; and authorizing execution, sale
and delivery thereof for the following purposes:
site improvement of the public park known as
"FMC Park" and purchase of real estate on
Kenas Road for public park use (referred to as
the "Windlestrae property").
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1055
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
104 3-14-1988 Declaring the refunding of 1985 bond
anticipation notes of the Montgomery Township
Municipal Sewer Authority to be a project of
the Township for which lease rental debt is to
be incurred; determining to incur lease rental
debt in the amount of two million nine hundred
forty thousand dollars ($2,940,000.) in respect
of the project, such debt to be evidenced by
bonds to be issued by the Authority and
secured by the Township's guaranty agreement
and rentals payable by the Township under a
lease of the Authority's sewage system; stating
the estimated remaining realistic useful lives of
the facilities involved in the system; authorizing
certain Township officers to prepare, certify
and file with the Department of Community
Affairs the debt statement required by Section
410 of the Local Government Unit Debt Act and
any statements required by Section 206 of such
Debt Act to qualify the debt incurred as selfliquidating
debt; authorizing the preparation of
a borrowing base certificate; specifically
approving amounts of fixed rent and other
payments to be made by the Township under
such lease; approving and acknowledging
notice of the Authority's assignment of such
rentals to the trustee in respect of the
Authority's bonds; authorizing incidental
action; repealing inconsistent prior ordinances;
and approving the form of and authorizing,
subject to receipt of necessary state approvals,
execution and delivery of the guaranty and
lease.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1056
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
110 8-14-1989 Providing for increasing the debt of the
Montgomery Township Board of Supervisors
(the "issuer"), County of Montgomery,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in the
aggregate principal amount of four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000.), without the
assent of the electors, for the purpose of
providing funds for and toward capital projects,
stating the estimated useful lives of such
projects; determining to evidence such debt by
the issuance of a general obligation promissory
note, series of 1989 (the "note"); fixing date,
interest rate and maturity or mandatory
redemption date of the note; providing for
prepayment of the note; approving the form of
the note and authorizing the issuance thereof;
designating the note as a "qualified tax-exempt
obligation"; covenanting to budget for debt
service on said note and to appropriate and pay
amounts for such debt service when due;
pledging the full faith, credit and taxing power
of the issuer for said obligation; appointing a
paying agent; establishing a sinking fund and
providing for payment of the note (therefrom);
directing the filing of a debt statement,
transcript of proceedings and application for
approval; accepting the negotiated note
purchase proposal (the "proposal") of the
Philadelphia National Bank (the "bank") to
purchase said note and awarding it to said
purchaser; authorizing the execution and
delivery of the note and of such other
documents as may be advisable in connection
with the sale and issuance of the note;
repealing and rescinding inconsistent
resolutions.
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1057
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
126 11-25-1991 Declaring a project of the Montgomery
Township Municipal Sewer Authority (the
"Authority") consisting of (1) the payment of a
portion of the costs of the construction of an
incinerator and laboratory to be owned by the
Hatfield Township Municipal Authority and (2)
the refunding of the Authority's guaranteed
sewer revenue bonds, series of 1988 to be a
project for which lease rental debt is to be
incurred by the Township; determining to incur
lease rental debt in an aggregate principal
amount not to exceed four million six hundred
twelve thousand eight hundred twenty-one
dollars ($4,612,821.) in respect of the project,
such debt to be evidenced by bonds to be
issued by the Authority and secured by the
Township's guaranty agreement and rentals
payable by the Township under a lease of the
Authority's sewage system; authorizing certain
Township officers to prepare, certify and file
with the Department of Community Affairs the
debt statement required by Section 410 of the
Local Government Unit Debt Act284 and any
statements required by Section 206 of such
Debt Act to qualify the debt incurred as selfliquidating
debt; authorizing the preparation of
a borrowing base certificate; stating the
realistic estimated useful lives of the facilities
relating to the 1991 bonds; specifically
approving amounts of fixed rent and other
payments to be made by the Township under
such lease; approving and acknowledging
notice of the Authority's assignment of such
rentals to the trustee in respect of the
Authority's 1991 bonds; providing for the
budgeting, appropriation and payment of
amounts due under the guaranty agreement
and pledging the Township's full faith, credit
and taxing power therefor; authorizing
incidental action; repealing inconsistent prior
ordinances; and approving the form of, and
authorizing, subject to receipt of necessary
state approvals, execution and delivery of the
guaranty agreement and lease; and repealing
inconsistent ordinances and resolutions.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1058
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
93-16 5-3-1993 Providing for refinancing the debt of
Montgomery Township (the "issuer"), County of
Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
in the aggregate amount of two hundred ninetyfive
thousand two hundred ninety-two dollars
and forty-seven cents ($295,292.47) without the
assent of the electors, for the purpose of
providing funds for and toward capital projects
(see Section 2), stating the estimated useful
lives of such projects; determining to evidence
such debt by the issuance of a general
obligation promissory note, series of 1993 (the
"note"); fixing date, interest rate and maturity
or mandatory redemption date of the note;
providing for prepayment of the note;
approving the form of the note and authorizing
the issuance thereof; designating the note as a
"qualified tax-exempt obligation"; covenanting
to budget for debt service on said note and to
appropriate and pay amounts for such debt
service when due; pledging the full faith, credit
and taxing power of the issuer for said
obligation; appointing a paying agent;
establishing a sinking fund and providing for
payment of the note (therefrom); directing the
filing of a debt statement, transcript of
proceedings and application for approval;
accepting the negotiated note purchase
proposal (the "proposal") of the Philadelphia
National Bank (the "bank") to purchase said
note and awarding it to said purchaser;
authorizing the execution and delivery of the
note and of such other documents as may be
advisable in connection with the sale and
issuance of the note; repealing and rescinding
inconsistent resolutions.
284. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6780-1 et seq.
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1059
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
93-30 12-8-1993 Authorizing and directing the incurring of
nonelectoral debt through the issuance of
general obligation bonds, Series of 1993, of the
Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, in the aggregate principal
amount of two million two hundred twenty-five
thousand dollars ($2,225,000.) for the purpose
of providing funds to pay the costs of
construction and equipping of a new Township
building and pay the cost of issuing the bonds,
or any or all of the same, stating that realistic
cost estimates have been made for the project
and authorizing the payment of costs of other
capital projects upon appropriate amendment
hereto; stating the realistic estimated useful life
of the project for which said bonds are issued;
directing the proper officers of the governing
body to prepare, certify and file the required
debt statement and borrowing base certificate;
covenanting that the Township shall include the
amount of annual debt service in its budget for
each fiscal year; providing for fully registered
bonds, date of the bonds, interest payment
dates, provisions for redemption and stated
principal maturity amounts and fixing the rates
of interest on such bonds; authorizing the
proper officers of the Township to contract with
a bank or bank and trust company for its
services as sinking fund depositary, paying
agent and registrar and stating a covenant as to
payment of principal and interest without
deduction for certain taxes; providing for the
registration, transfer and exchange of bonds;
providing for facsimile signatures and seal and
authentication; approving the form of the
bonds, paying agent's authentication certificate
and assignment and providing for CUSIP
numbers to be printed on the bonds; providing
for temporary bonds; awarding such bonds at
private invited sale and stating that such
private invited sale is in the best financial
interest of the Township; creating a sinking
fund; authorizing and directing the proper
officers of the Township to certify and to file
with the Pennsylvania Department of
Community Affairs certified copies of the
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1060
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
necessary proceedings; covenanting that the
proceeds of the bonds shall not be used in such
a manner as to cause the bonds to be arbitrage
bonds under Federal Tax Law provisions and
designating the bonds as "qualified tax-exempt
obligations;" approving the content and form of
a preliminary official statement and authorizing
the distribution thereof and authorizing the
preparation, execution and delivery of an
official statement; authorizing and directing the
proper officers of the Township to do all things
necessary to carry out the ordinance and to pay
financing costs; and repealing all inconsistent
ordinances.
99-115 8-9-1999 An ordinance increasing the nonelectoral
indebtedness of Township of Montgomery,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, by the
issuance of a $703,508 general obligation note,
series of 1999 for and toward financing certain
capital projects; fixing the form, date, interest
rate and maturity thereof; making a covenant
for the payment of the debt service on the note;
providing for the filing of the required
documents; providing for the appointment of a
sinking fund depositary for the note; and
authorizing the execution, sale and delivery of
the note and other necessary action.
99-116 9-13-1999 An ordinance increasing the indebtedness of
Montgomery Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, by the issue of a general
obligation note in the amount of $1,500,000 for
sundry purposes; fixing the form, number, date,
interest, and maturity thereof; making a
covenant for the payment of the debt service on
the note; providing for the filing of the required
document; and authorizing execution, sale and
delivery thereof.
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1061
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
99-120 10-25-1999 An ordinance amending Ordinance No. 99-116
which authorized increasing the indebtedness
of Montgomery Township by the issuance of a
general obligation note in the amount of
$1,500,000; such amendment shall authorize
the creation of a sinking fund, appointment of a
bank as a sinking fund depository, and
authorization of Township officials to contract
for the services of the sinking fund depository.
02-159-A 9-23-2002 An ordinance increasing the indebtedness of
Montgomery Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, by the issue of a general
obligation note in the amount of $725,000 for
sundry purposes; fixing the form, number, date,
interest, and maturity thereof; making a
covenant for the payment of the debt service on
the note; providing for the filing of the required
document; and authorizing execution, sale and
delivery thereof.
02-159-B 9-23-2002 An ordinance increasing the indebtedness of
Montgomery Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, by the issue of a general
obligation note in the amount of $175,000 for
sundry purposes; fixing the form, number, date,
interest, and maturity thereof; making a
covenant for the payment of the debt service on
the note; providing for the filing of the required
document; and authorizing execution, sale and
delivery thereof.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1062
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
10-246 11-8-2010 An ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, authorizing and approving a
project of the Authority (hereinafter defined);
authorizing and directing the incurrence of
lease rental debt, in the maximum aggregate
principal amount of $8,770,000 pursuant to the
Local Government Unit Debt Act 53 Pa.C.S.A. §
8001 et seq. (The “Debt Act”); determining that
such debt shall be incurred under the Debt Act
as lease rental debt to be evidenced by a
guaranty agreement of the Township securing
guaranteed sewer revenue bonds, series of
2010 (the “2010 bonds”), to be issued by
Montgomery Township Municipal Sewer
Authority (the “Authority”) to finance a project
of the Authority consisting of: (1) the refunding
of the Authority’s guaranteed sewer revenue
bonds, series of 2005; (2) the establishment of
necessary reserves and other funds under the
indenture (to the extent available); and (3) the
payment of the costs associated with the
issuance of the 2010 bonds; briefly describing
the project for which such debt is to be
incurred; authorizing and directing the proper
officers of this Township: (a) to prepare, to
certify and to file the debt statement and
borrowing base certificate required by Section
8110 of the Debt Act; (b) to the extent feasible,
to cause to be prepared and filed, statements
required by Section 8026 of the Debt Act which
are necessary to qualify all of such lease rental
debt for exclusion from the appropriate debt
limits as self-liquidating debt; (c) to execute, to
attest, to seal and to deliver, as appropriate, a
guaranty agreement, a sixth supplemental lease
and a continuing disclosure agreement;
specifying the amount of the guaranty
obligation of this Township pursuant to such
guaranty agreement and the sources of
payment of such guaranty obligations;
authorizing the proper officers of this Township
to take all other required, necessary or
desirable related action in connection with such
project and the execution and delivery of the
guaranty agreement, the sixth supplemental
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1063
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
lease and the continuing disclosure agreement;
providing for the effectiveness of this
ordinance; providing for the severability of
provisions of this ordinance; and providing for
the repeal of all inconsistent ordinances or
resolutions or parts of ordinances or
resolutions.
12-254 1-23-2012 An ordinance increasing the indebtedness of
Montgomery Township for open space and
recreation land acquisition, by authorizing the
issuance of a general obligation note in the
amount of $5,500,000 for sundry purposes at a
private sale; fixing the form, number, date,
interest, and maturity thereof; making a
covenant for the payment of the debt service on
the note; creating a sinking fund; providing for
the filing of the required document; and
authorizing execution, sale and delivery
thereof.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1064
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
13-271 2-25-2013 An ordinance authorizing the incurrence by the
Township of Montgomery of nonelectoral debt
by the issuance of general obligation bonds,
Series of 2013, in the aggregate principal
amount of $8,745,000 for the purpose of
providing funds to finance a capital project,
currently refund a portion of the Township's
general obligation note, Series of 2012, and to
pay the costs of issuing the bonds; authorizing
the preparation of a debt statement and other
documentation; providing for the current
refunding of the debt being refunded;
covenanting to create a sinking fund and to
budget, appropriate and pay debt service on
the bonds; pledging the full faith, credit and
taxing power of the Township for the prompt
and full payment of the bonds; setting forth the
substantial form of the bonds; setting forth the
stated principal maturity or sinking fund
redemption dates and amounts, interest rates
and interest payment dates, place of payment,
sinking fund provisions and other details of the
bonds; approving the content and form of a
preliminary official statement and authorizing
the distribution thereof and authorizing the
preparation, execution and delivery of an
official statement; authorizing the execution of
a paying agent agreement and a continuing
disclosure agreement or supplement; finding
that a private negotiated sale of the bonds is in
the best financial interest of the Township;
accepting a proposal for the purchase of the
bonds; appointing a paying agent and sinking
fund depository; and authorizing other
necessary action.
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1065
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
15-290 11-23-2015 An ordinance that approves certain capital
projects; authorizes a borrowing by
Montgomery Township from Montgomery
County and the issuance of a promissory
note, 2015 Series, in the maximum
principal amount of $536,651.72; approves
the substantial form of the 2015 note and
approves the execution of the 2015 note
and delivery of the 2015 note to the
county; authorizes execution and delivery
of all other necessary documents; states
the amortization schedule for the 2015
note; states that the Township is obligated
to make payments on the 2015 note only
from funds if and to the extent
appropriated for the then-current fiscal
year of the Township; authorizes any
payments made on the 2015 note to be
made as directed by the Delaware Valley
Regional Finance Authority which has been
appointed as collection agent for the
county; authorizes advertisement of
enactment; and repeals inconsistent
ordinances.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D253-1
1:1066
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
16-300 9-12-2016 An ordinance authorizing the incurrence by
the Township of Montgomery of
nonelectoral debt by the issuance of
general obligation bonds, Series of 2016 in
an aggregate principal amount not to
exceed $10,000,000 for the purpose of
providing funds for and towards financing
a refinancing program relating to the
Township's general obligation bonds,
Series of 2013 and paying the costs of
issuing the bonds; authorizing the
preparation of a debt statement and other
documentation; providing for the advance
refunding of the identified refunded bonds
and authorizing one of more escrow
agreements for such purpose; covenanting
to create a sinking fund and to budget,
appropriate and pay debt service on the
bonds; pledging full faith, credit and taxing
power of the Township for the prompt and
full payment of the bonds; setting forth the
substantial form of the bonds; setting forth
the stated principal maturity or sinking
fund redemption dates and maximum
principal maturity amounts, maximum
interest rates and interest payment dates,
place of payment, sinking fund provisions
and other details of the bonds; approving
the content and form of one or more
preliminary official statements and
authorizing the distribution thereof and
authorizing the preparation, execution and
delivery of one or more official statements;
authorizing the execution of one or more
paying agent agreements and continuing
disclosure agreements or supplements;
finding that a private negotiated sale of the
bonds is in the best financial interest of the
Township; accepting a proposal for the
purchase of the bonds within certain
parameters; appointing a paying agent and
sinking fund depository; and authorizing
other necessary action.
Chapter D254
§ D253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D253-1
1:1067
STREET ACCEPTANCES AND IMPROVEMENTS
§ D254-1. List of ordinances.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
31 3-7-1966 Laying out a portion of East Thomas Road,
between Cowpath Road and Vilsmeier Road,
Montgomery Township, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania.
54 9-27-1976 Authorizing approximately one hundred
seventy thousand dollars ($170,000.) of
remaining Project 1975 funds for 1976 road
improvement.
63 5-8-1978 Authorizing approximately twenty-seven
thousand dollars ($27,000.) of remaining
Project 1975 funds for 1978 road
improvement.
74 7-13-1981 Laying out and ordaining a portion of Pine
Street, plan street within the Township of
Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, and for a public street.
78 12-7-1981 Classifying all roadways within the
Township of Montgomery as Township roads
or state and county roads, in accordance
with an attached map.
Chapter D255
STREET VACATIONS
§ D255-1. List of ordinances.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
32 3-7-1966 Vacating a portion of East Thomas Road
between Cowpath Road and Vilsmeier Road,
Montgomery Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
75 7-13-1981 Vacating a portion of Pine Street, a plan
street within the Township of Montgomery,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as and for
a public street.
§ D253-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D255-1
1:1068
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Description
108 6-27-1988 Providing for the vacating of portions of
McLaughlin Road and authorizing the filing
of required petitions with the Court of
Common Pleas of Montgomery County to
secure approval for the vacating and
authorizing the approval of an agreement of
sale wherein and whereby portions of
McLaughlin Road be sold to Montgomeryville
Golf and Country Club, Inc., its successors
and assigns.
108A 12-4-1989 Providing for the vacating of the portion of
McLaughlin Road at the intersection of
McLaughlin Road and Doylestown Road and
authorizing the filing of required petitions
with the Court of Common Pleas of
Montgomery County to secure approval for
the vacating and authorizing the approval of
an agreement of sale wherein and whereby
portions of McLaughlin Road be sold and
transferred to Pinecrest Golf Club, Inc., its
successors and assigns, and to Charles M.
Cramer and Dawn D. Cramer.
00-132 1-22-2001 An ordinance vacating a portion of the
original Stump Road before its relocation
extending in a southerly direction from its
intersection with Horsham Road (State Route
463).
01-145 11-12-2001 An ordinance vacating Evans Road located in
Montgomery Township between Welsh Road
(Route 63) and Bethlehem Pike (Route 309).
Chapter D256
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES
§ D256-1. Disposition list.
The list that follows accounts for the disposition of each subdivision
ordinance adopted by the Township of Montgomery after the general repeal
of legislation prior to Ordinance No. 1 in 1962. Within this list, ordinances
included in Chapter 205, Subdivision and Land Development, are noted by
reference to the section and/or article where they may be found. Legislation
omitted from the chapter is noted as to the reason for its deletion. An
asterisk (*) indicates legislation that is not general or permanent in nature.
§ D255-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D256-1
1:1069
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 18 Subdivision and
Land Development
Ordinance
10-1-1962 Repealed
3-2-1964 by Ord.
No. 18
Ord. No. 18 Subdivision and
Land Development
Ordinance
3-2-1964 Ch. 205
Ord. No. 18A-1 Subdivision
amendment
5-1-1972 No copy found
Ord. No. 18A Add general
provisions (title,
purpose,
interpretation, etc.),
definition of
"subdivision and
land development"
3-3-1975 Art. I, § 205-6
Ord. No. 18C Mobile Home
Regulations
7-26-1977 Art. VII
Ord. No. 18D Stormwater
retention
amendment
11-22-1982 § 205-18D
Ord. No. 18E Grading permit fees
amendment, filing
fee and inspections
amendments
12-5-1983 §§ 205-28C;
205-80A and B(4)
Ord. No. 18F Definitions
amendment
("building";
"construction";
"development";
"various "flood
terms"; "start of
construction";
78B(1) and
"substantial
improvement");
flood damage
prevention
requirements
4-23-1984 § 205-6; Art. V;
§§ 205-78B(1) and
(2), C(2) and D(2)
and (3);
205-79B(2)(i) and
(j); 205-87B(20),
M, N, O and P
Ord. No. 18H Streetlighting
amendment
6-8-1987 § 205-24
§ D256-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D256-1
1:1070
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 18G Repealing treereplacement
requirements;
landscaping
requirements;
recommended plant
list
8-3-1987 Art. VI; § 205-63;
[Trees; original
Sec. 210G, note
following
§ 205-29C(4)(k)]
Ord. No. 18I Paving and curbing
amendment
1-25-1988 § 205-17
Ord. No. 18J Landscaping
requirements;
recommended plant
lists amendments
1-25-1988 Art. VI, § 205-63
Ord. No. 18K Requiring landscape
plan for R-6 District;
minimum planting
requirements;
screen buffer
requirements
1-9-1989 § 205-49I; Table
1; Table 2; Tables
1 and 2 appear at
the end of the
chapter
Ord. No. 18L Escrow fund
amendment
4-10-1989 § 205-31
Ord. No. 18M Definitions
amendment
("topsoil"). grading
inspections, topsoil
standards
amendments
4-10-1989 §§ 205-6,
205-28B;
205-28D
Ord. No. 18N Definitions
amendment ("plan,
sketch"); sketch plan
requirements
4-10-1989 §§ 205-6; 205-77;
Art. XII
Ord. No. 18O Enforcement
amendment
6-26-1989 Art. XI
Ord. No. 18P Definitions
amendment
("subdivision"; "land
development")
6-26-1989 § 205-6
Ord. No. 18Q Buffer planting
location amendment
5-14-1990 § 205-52B
Ord. No. 18R Paving and curbing
amendment; curing
sidewalks
11-19-1990 §§ 205-17;
205-22C
§ D256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D256-1
1:1071
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 18S Stormwater
management
amendments
4-22-1991 § 205-18A(9) and
D(4)(b) and (d)
Ord. No. 18T Design standards
and stormwater
retention
amendments
7-15-1991 §§ 205-8B and
205-18D(3)(d), (e)
and (f)
Ord. No. 18V Design standards
amendment
11-25-1991 § 205-15
Ord. No. 18W Streets and roads,
paving and curbing
and sidewalks
amendment
3-9-1992 §§ 205-10D(2)(b),
205-17D(4),
205-22D and E
and Appendix A
Ord. No. 18X Grading permit
amendment
3-23-1992 § 205-28D(3)
Ord. No. 93-9S Compliance and
guaranty,
construction of
facilities, grading
permit and final plan
amendment
4-19-1993 §§ 205-3C,
205-8B;
205-28A(4) and
C; 205-79B(2)(k)
Ord. No. 93-23 Traffic management
study
8-23-1993 Art. XVI
Ord. No. 93-24 Streets and roads
amendment
8-23-1993 §§ 205-10D(1)(a);
205-10G and H
Ord. No. 93-29 Escrow fund
amendment
12-6-1993 § 205-31B
Ord. No. 94-31 Storm and surface
drainage
amendment
1-10-1994 § 205-18D(1)(d)
and Appendix B
Ord. No. 94-34 Development
disclosure
7-18-1994 Art. XVII
Ord. No. 94-36 Paving and curbing
amendment
8-8-1994 § 205-17A and B
Ord. No. 94-37 Storm and surface
drainage
amendment
8-8-1994 § 205-18D(3)(d)
Ord. No. 95-46 Definitions
amendment
3-13-1995 § 205-6
Ord. No. 95-48 Landscaping
amendment
9-25-1995 Article VI
§ D256-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D256-1
1:1072
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 96-60 Design standards for
shopping centers
and development
regulations
9-30-1996 Superseded by
Ord. No. 96-68
Ord. No. 96-63 Landscaping
amendment
10-21-1996 §§ 205-51A(1)-(7);
205-52; 205-53B
and C; 205-56
Ord. No. 96-68 Shopping centers;
development
regulations;
Illustration of
Shopping Center
Design Standards
2-3-1997 §§ 205-25;
205-25.1; Table
205-25
Ord. No. 97-71S Sidewalk
construction design
standards
amendment
3-10-1997 § 205-22B and C
Ord. No. 97-72S Standards and
criteria for
stormwater
management in the
Neshaminy Creek
Watershed and the
Little Neshaminy
Creek Watershed
3-10-1997 Appendix B
Ord. No. 97-84S Pavement
construction
amendment
10-27-1997 § 205-17A
Ord. No. 98-95S Record plan
amendment
5-11-1998 § 205-82B
Ord. No.
98-103S
Escrow fund
amendment
1-25-1999 § 205-31B
Ord. No.
01-155S
Dedication of land
suitable for park and
recreational use or
payment of fees in
lieu thereof
3-25-2002 Art. XVIII
Ord. No.
02-160S
Tree preservation
requirements
amendment
10-28-2002 §§ 205-53C and
205-54A and E
§ D256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D256-1
1:1073
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
03-169ZS
Dedication of land
suitable for park and
recreational use or
payment of fees in
lieu thereof
amendment
5-27-2003 Art. XVIII
Ord. No.
04-177S
Stormwater
management
4-12-2004 Art. II and §§
205-18; 205-18.1;
205-27.1 and
Appendix B
Ord. No. 04-180 Additional standards
for Appendix A
concrete curbs,
sidewalks and
driveways
6-14-2004 Appendix A
Ord. No.
06-207S
Pavement
construction
standards
amendment
3-27-2006 § 205-17A(1)
through A(5)
Ord. No.
06-211S
Readoption of
subdivision and land
development
2-12-2007 Ch. 205 history
only
Ord. No.
07-220ZS
Storm and surface
drainage
amendment
11-12-2007 § 205-18D(4)(d)
Ord. No.
10-241S
Landscaping
amendment
6-28-2010 §§ 205-48
through 205-63;
Table 1; Appendix
C
Ord. No.
13-276S
Streetlighting
amendment
11-25-2013 § 205-24
Ord. No.
16-197ZS
Floodplain
Conservation
District amendment
9-26-2016 §§ 265-6;
205-17A(3), (4),
(5)(b);
205-18A(3);
205-18D and E;
205-18.1,
repealer only;
205-27.1; 205-41,
repealer only;
Appendix B,
repealer only
§ D256-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D256-1
1:1074
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
16-298S
Shade trees and
residential street
trees
9-26-2016 §§ 205-49J;
205-52A; 205-56
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
19-311ZS
Design Standards
Amendment
11-11-2019 § 205-17A(7) 9
Chapter D257
ZONING ORDINANCES
§ D257-1. Disposition list.
The list that follows accounts for the disposition of each zoning ordinance
adopted by the Township of Montgomery after the general repeal of
legislation prior to Ordinance No. 1 in 1962. Within this list, ordinances
included in Chapter 230, Zoning, are noted by reference to the section and/
or article where they may be found. Legislation omitted from the chapter is
noted as to the reason for its deletion. An asterisk (*) indicates that is not
general or permanent in nature.
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17 Zoning
Ordinance of
1952
10-1-1962 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17A Map amendment 1-7-1963 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17B Map amendment 5-6-1963 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17C Map amendment 5-6-1963 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1075
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17D Lot area and
width in R-2
District
amendment
(Sec. 502-A)
3-1-1965 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17E Front yard depth
amendment;
permit and
variance
expiration (Secs.
502B, 1409)
11-1-1965 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17F Map amendment 4-4-1966 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17H Map amendment 7-24-1967 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17G Map amendment 11-6-1967 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17I -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 17J LI Limited
Industrial
District
amendment (Art.
VIII)
12-4-1967 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17K Off-street
parking
amendment, plus
definitions (Arts.
II,. X)
12-4-1967 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17L Map amendment 7-7-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-7-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17R Map amendment 11-3-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1076
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17M Map amendment 12-1-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17O Map amendment 12-1-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17P Map amendment 12-1-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17Q Map amendment 12-8-1969 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17S Add RS District
(Art. VII-A)
9-8-1970 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17U Map amendment 9-8-1970 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17W Map amendment 2-1-1971 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17T Add R-3 District,
plus definitions
(Arts. II, V-A)
11-1-1971 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17V Map amendment 11-1-1971 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17N Add Cluster
Development
District plus
definitions (Art.
V-B)
12-6-1971 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1077
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17X Statement of
community
development
standards (Sec.
101A)
12-6-1971 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17Z Add FP District
(Art. IV,
renumbering
ordinance after)
12-15-1971 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17Y Floor area ratio
in LI District
amendment
(Sec. 814C)
12-27-1971 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17CC Map amendment 9-26-1973 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17FF Deleting "house
trailer" as
prohibited use
(Sec. 1209)
12-27-1973 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17GG Map amendment 2-11-1974 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17AA Required
parking
amendment
(Secs. 1100,
1104, 803G)
7-1-1974 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17HH
R-3 District
amendment (Art.
VI-A)
7-1-1974 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17BB Registration of
nonconforming
uses and
structures (Art.
XII)
4-7-1975 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17DD Zoning Hearing
Board
amendment (Art.
XV)
7-21-1975 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1078
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17EE -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 17II Map amendment 6-7-1976 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No
17-014
Ord. No. 17JJ R-3 District
amendment,
permitting
townhouses and
garden
apartments, plus
definitions (Arts.
II, VI-A)
8-30-1976 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17LL Add R-3A
District plus
definitions (Art.
VI-C)
3-15-1977 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17MM
Map amendment 3-15-1977 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17OO Map amendment 7-25-1977 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17PP Map amendment 7-25-1977 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17KK Add R-4 District,
plus definitions
(Arts. II, VI-C)
7-26-1977 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17NN
Townhouse unit
and lot area
amendment
(Sec. A601)
8-1-1977 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17QQ Map amendment 9-27-1977 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1079
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 17RR Permitting use
by Township in
all zones (Sec.
303)
11-28-1977 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17SS -- -- No ordinance
Ord. No. 17TT Map amendment 4-10-1978 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17WW
Required
parking in S
District
amendment
(Sec. 802.1)
9-25-1978 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17XX Required
parking
amendment
(Sec. 802.1)
10-16-1978 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17YY Map amendment 4-25-1979 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17W Add BP District
(Art. VII-A)
7-9-1979 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17ZZ Map amendment 7-23-1979 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17AAA
Map amendment 9-4-1979 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No. 17UU Add R-5 District
(Art. VI-E)
9-4-1979 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-001
Deleting rental
of rooms as
accessory use to
dwelling (Sec.
1308-B-5)
11-19-1979 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1080
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
17-003
Map amendment 1-14-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-002
Lot area, storage
and parking
requirement
amendments in
LI District (Secs.
914A, 910, 915)
3-3-1980 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17BBB
Map amendment 3-20-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-004
-- -- No ordinance
Ord. No.
17-005
Setback
amendments in
MHP District
(Art. VI-C)
3-24-1980 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-006
Map amendment 3-24-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-007
Permitting
personal service
shops, e.g. tailor,
barber, etc. (Sec.
801.1)
8-25-1980 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-009
Required rear
yard for LI
District (Sec.
914B)
10-27-1980 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-008
Map amendment 11-24-1980 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1081
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
17-010
Permitted uses
in R-3, R-3A
Districts; use
regulations and
development
standards in C
District;
impervious
material
coverage in LI
District; change
"Board of
Adjustment" to
"Zoning Hearing
Board" (Secs.
200, A-600,
A-601, C-600,
700, 703, 914,
1400, 1407)
2-23-1981 Reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-011
Map amendment 2-23-1981 *Map change only;
reenacted and ratified
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-012
Zoning 3-16-1981 Reenact zoning; repealed
7-6-1981 by Ord. No.
17-014
Ord. No.
17-013
-- -- No ordinance
Ord. No.
17-014
Zoning
Ordinance of
1981
7-6-1981 Ch. 230; Reenacted and
ratified Ord. No. 17, as
amended
Ord. No.
17-015G
Street
improvements in
BP District
7-27-1981 § 230-83F, and H
Ord. No.
17-016
Map amendment 2-22-1982 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-017
Map amendment 3-22-1982 *Map change only
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1082
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
17-018
Definitions
amendment
("building
setback line";
"ultimate rightof-
way" "yard,
front")
9-13-1982 § 230-5B
Ord. No.
17-019
Density
standards
amendment
6-13-1983 § 230-44; No copy found,
but exists in ordinance
copy published by
Township in 1989
Ord. No.
17-020
Map amendment 1-9-1984 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-021
Definitions
amendment
("building";
"construction";
"development";
"flood"; "flood
base elevation";
"flood, onehundred
year";
"floodplain";
"flood-proofing";
"mobile home";
"start of
construction");
FP Floodplain
Conservation
District
4-23-1984 § 230-5B; Art. IV
Ord. No.
17-022
Map amendment 11-19-1984 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-023
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
Ord. No.
17-024
Map amendment 8-19-1985 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-026
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
Ord. No.
17-027
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1083
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
17-028
Impervious
material
coverage,
outdoor storage
and waste
disposal in C, BP,
S, RS Districts
11-18-1985 §§ 230-77F; 230-78E and
F; 230-83I and J;
230-88D; 230-91; 230-95
Ord. No.
17-025
Airport Hazard
Area (AHA)
2-10-1986 Not desired by governing
body
Ord. No.
17-030
-- -- No ordinance
Ord. No.
17-032
Special
exceptions
amendment
3-17-1986 § 230-185
Ord. No.
17-034
Definitions
amendment
("parking
space"); R-3A
District area,
height and bulk
regulations
amendment
4-14-1986 §§ 230-5B; 230-50
Ord. No.
17-029
Definitions
amendment
("green area";
"impervious
materials");
impervious
material and
green area
coverage in C, S,
LI, BP, RS
Districts; lot
area in RS
District
6-2-1986 §§ 230-5B; 230-77G;
230-82E and F; 230-88E;
230-95C, Q and R;
230-116B(5)
Ord. No.
17-035
Map amendment 7-7-1986 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-031
Map amendment 7-14-1986 *Map change only
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1084
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
17-037
Referral to
miscellaneous
provisions of Art.
XXI for R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-3A, MHP,
R-5 Districts;
road
improvements in
C, S, RS, LI
Districts
7-28-1986 §§ 230-29; 230-34;
230-40; 230-53; 230-62;
230-68; 230-78C;
239-89E; 230-95H;
230-120; 230-156
Ord. No.
17-038
Penalties
amendment
10-27-1986 Art. XXV
Ord. No.
17-039
Map amendment 3-24-1987 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-033
Landscaping and
screening
amendments for
R-1, R-2, R-2,
Cluster
Development,
MHP, R-5, C, BP,
S, RS, LI
Districts and for
certain districts
in compliance
with subdivision
regulations (Ch.
205)
8-3-1987 §§ 230-28F; 230-33F;
230-38I; 230-43H;
230-57L; 230-66H;
230-67B(9); 230-78A;
230-83; 230-89I;
230-95B; 230-119;
230-155
Ord. No.
17-036
Theater parking 8-3-1987 § 230-134C(3) and (4)
Ord. No.
17-040
-- -- No ordinance
Ord. No.
17-042
Map amendment 2-22-1988 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-041
Definitions
amendment
("patio home";
"lot"); add R-6
Golf Course
District
4-18-1988 §§ 230-5B; 230-6A; Art.
XII
Ord. No.
17-043
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1085
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
17-044
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
Ord. No.
17-045
Signs
amendment
6-27-1988 Art. XVIII
Ord. No.
17-046
Side yard
requirement in C
District
8-22-1988 § 230-77C(4)
Ord. No.
17-047
Map amendment 8-22-1988 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-048
Definitions
amendment ("lot
area"; "lot line";
"lot line, front")
8-22-1988 § 230-5B
Ord. No.
17-049
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
Ord. No.
17-050
Parallel and
awning signs in
S, C, BP and LI
Districts;
nonconforming
signs and
amortization in
all districts
11-7-1988 § 230-127A(2); 230-132
Ord. No.
17-054
Zoning Hearing
Board
amendment
5-8-1989 §§ 230-165; 230-166;
230-171; 230-177;
230-178; 230-182;
230-183; 230-186
Ord. No.
17-051
Map amendment 5-15-1989 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-052
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
Ord. No.
17-053
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
Ord. No.
17-056
Map amendment 6-12-1989 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-055
Enforcement
amendment
6-26-1989 Art. XXV
Ord. No.
17-057
Zoning
amendment
-- Not adopted
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1086
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
17-058
Uses accessory
to dwellings,
setbacks
amendment
7-24-1989 § 230-149A(2)(a)[1] and
B
Ord. No.
17-059
-- -- No ordinance
Ord. No.
17-060
-- -- No ordinance
Ord. No.
17-061
Map amendment 9-17-1990 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-062
Map amendment 5-6-1991 *Map change only
Ord. No.
17-063
Day-care
facilities
7-1-1991 §§ 230-5; 230-26E(6) and
H; 230-36A(4);
230-49A(4); 230-64A(4)
and B(7); 234-75M;
230-80G; 230-86C;
230-94K; 230-103C;
230-156.1
Ord. No.
17-066
Nonconforming
uses amendment
3-9-1992 § 230-139E
Ord. No. 92-3Z Fencing
amendment
9-21-1992 §§ 230-5 and 230-148
Ord. No. 92-5Z Outdoor storage
and retail sale of
Christmas trees
and cuttings
amendment
11-9-1992 §§ 230-78E, 230-91A and
230-95N
Ord. No. 93-8Z Accessory uses
amendment
4-12-1993 §§ 230-5;
230-149A(2)(a)[4]
Ord. No.
93-10Z
Definitions
amendment
("family")
4-19-1993 § 230-5
Ord. No.
93-11Z
Conditional use
approval
4-19-1993 §§ 230-5B; 230-156.2
Ord. No.
93-13Z
Limited
Industrial
District
amendment
4-26-1993 Superseded by Ord. No.
93-15Z
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1087
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
93-14Z
Off-street
parking
amendment
5-17-1993 §§ 230-134C(11) and
(12); 230-138.1
Ord. No.
93-15Z
Limited
Industrial
District
amendment
5-17-1993 §§ 230-5B; 230-101;
230-103A, C and D
Ord. No.
93-17Z
Registration of
nonconforming
buildings,
structures and
uses amendment
7-26-1993 § 230-139F
Ord. No. 94-39 Signs
amendment
11-28-1994 Article XVIII
Ord. No. 94-40 Zoning Hearing
Board
amendment
10-17-1994 § 230-181
Ord. No. 94-42 Fences and walls
amendment
11-28-1994 § 230-148B(2)(c)
Ord. No.
95-49Z
Map amendment 3-11-1996 *Map change only
Ord. No.
95-52Z
R-2 Residential
District
amendment
10-16-1995 Article VI
Ord. No. 96-60 Expressway
Corridor
Preservation
Overlay District
and retail center
regulations; Map
amendment
9-30-1996 Superseded by Ord. No.
96-68
Ord. No.
96-66Z
Map amendment 10-21-1996 *Map change only
Ord. No. 96-68 Expressway
Corridor
Preservation
Overlay District
and retail center
regulations
amendments;
Map amendment
2-3-1997 § 230-6A; Arts. XXVII and
XXVIII; Table of Overlay
Options; Exhibits A and B
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1088
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
96-69Z
Map amendment 12-16-1996 *Map change only
Ord. No. 97-77 Criteria for open
space areas
amendment
12-22-1997 § 230-200D(1)
Ord. No. 97-83 Map amendment 9-2-1997 *Map change only
Ord. No.
97-86Z
HLI Highway
Limited
Industrial
Overlay District
11-24-1997 Article XXIX
Ord. No.
97-87Z
Map amendment 11-24-1997 *Map change only
Ord. No.
97-89Z
Map amendment 1-26-1998 *Map change only
Ord. No.
98-91Z
Setbacks for
uses accessory
to dwellings
amendment
1-26-1998 § 230-149B(3)
Ord. No.
98-97Z
Wireless
telecommunications
facilities
1-11-1999 §§ 230-5, 230-26I,
230-31I, 230-36D,
230-49A(5), 230-55D,
230-64A(5) 230-70A(5),
230-75N, 230-80H,
230-86D, 230-94,
230-103A(5), 230-199,
Art. XXX, Wireless
Communications Table
Ord. No.
99-107Z
Adult-oriented
establishments
amendment
5-10-1999 §§ 230-5B, 230-75O
Ord. No.
99-108Z
Definitions
amendment
("front yard")
5-24-1999 § 230-5B
Ord. No.
99-109Z
Minimum yard
regulations in
Cluster
Development
District
amendment
5-24-1999 § 230-46
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1089
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
99-110Z
Wireless
telecommunications
facilities
amendment
6-14-1999 § 230-223C(7)
Ord. No.
99-111Z
Family day-care
homes in R-3
and R-3A
Residential
Districts
amendment
6-28-1999 §§ 230-36A(4),
230-49A(4),
230-156.1B(1)
Ord. No.
99-114Z
Map amendment 8-9-1999 *Map change only
Ord. No.
99-118Z
Use and
occupancy
permit
requirements
amendment
10-25-1999 § 230-161
Ord. No.
99-119Z
Chart 1,
Accessory Use
Setbacks
amendment
10-25-1999 Chart 1, Accessory Use
Setbacks
Ord. No.
00-121Z
Home
occupations
amendment
3-27-2000 § 230-149A(2)(a)[4]
Ord. No.
00-123Z
HLI-II Highway
Limited
Industrial
Overlay District
6-12-2000 Art. XXXI
Ord. No.
00-124Z
Map amendment 6-12-2000 *Map change only
Ord. No.
00-125Z
Map amendment 6-12-2000 *Map change only
Ord. No.
00-126Z
Amendment to
dimensional
requirements in
C and S Districts
6-5-2000 §§ 230-75, 230-76,
230-86A and 230-95C
and D
Ord. No.
00-129Z
ECPOD District
permitted uses
amendment
1-27-2003 § 230-199A(5)
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1090
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
00-130Z
HLI-II Highway
Limited
Industrial
Overlay District
amendment
9-25-2000 Art. XXXI
Ord. No.
01-137Z
ECPOD District
permitted uses
and dimensional
requirements
amendment
6-25-2001 §§ 230-199E and
230-205D
Ord. No.
01-139Z
Historic
Preservation
Cluster District
9-24-2001 Art. XXXII
Ord. No.
01-140Z
Definitions and
parking
requirements
amendment;
adding Table
230-A and
regulations for
satellite uses
1-28-2002 §§ 230-5; 230-75; 230-78;
230-78.1; 230-80;
230-83B(2); 230-86;
230-89G; 230-91.1;
230-94; 230-95F;
230-100.1; 230-134C, D
and E; 230-138;
230-138.2; 230-138.3;
230-156.3; and Table
230-A
Ord. No.
01-141Z
Map amendment 8-27-2001 *Map change only
Ord. No.
01-143Z
Cluster
Development
District
amendment
9-24-2001 §§ 230-42 and 230-43D
Ord. No.
01-144Z
Map amendment 10-9-2001 *Map change only
Ord. No.
01-147Z
ECPOD District
setback
amendment
11-26-2001 § 230-205I(4) and (5)
Ord. No.
01-152Z
Definitions
amendment; HLI
District
amendment
2-11-2002 §§ 230-5, 230-214F,
230-215G, 230-217H and
230-219F
Ord. No.
01-153Z
Map amendment 1-28-2002 *Map change only
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1091
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
02-158Z
Amending Ord.
Nos. 01-147Z
and 01-152Z;
swimming pools
amendment
6-10-2002 § 230-149B(1)(b) and (c)
Ord. No.
02-161Z
BLI Billboard
Limited
Industrial
District
4-14-2003 Art. XXXIII
Ord. No.
03-166Z
No-impact homebased
business
amendment
3-10-2003 §§ 230-5 and
230-149A(2)(a)[5]
Ord. No.
03-167Z
Restaurant,
outdoor
customer dining
area amendment
3-10-2003 §§ 230-5 and 230-156.4
Ord. No.
03-169ZS
Major home
occupations
amendment
5-27-2003 § 230-149A(2)(a)[4][a][ii]
and [ii][B]
Ord. No.
04-179Z
R-5 Residential
District
amendment
6-14-2004 §§ 230-64 and 230-66
Ord. No.
04-184Z
HLH-II Highway
Limited
Industrial
Overlay
amendment
7-26-2004 § 230-229A(2)
Ord. No.
04-187Z
Map amendment 11-22-2004 *Map change only
Ord. No.
04-189Z
Map amendment 1-24-2005 *Map change only
Ord. No.
04-190Z
Residential
Zoning Districts
amendment
2-28-2005 §§ 230-25; 230-26;
230-30; 230-31; 230-36;
230-43; 230-49; 230-64;
230-66; 230-141
Ord. No.
04-191Z
Mobile Home
Park and
Residential Golf
Course Districts
amendment
1-24-2005 Art. II and §§ 230-55B;
230-70; 230-71; 230-72L
Ord. No.
05-194Z
Map amendment 2-28-2005 *Map change only
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1092
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No. 195Z R-3B Age-
Qualified
Residential
District
10-11-2005 New Art. IX-A
Ord. No.
05-196Z
Map amendment 10-11-2005 *Map change only
Ord. No.
05-198Z
Map amendment 9-12-2005 *Map change only
Ord. No.
05-199Z
Map amendment 10-11-2005 *Map change only
Ord. No.
05-200Z
Banner signs
amendment
11-7-2005 § 230-125
Ord. No.
05-201Z
Map amendment 11-28-2005 *Map change only
Ord. No.
05-203Z
Flag lots
amendment
11-28-2005 Art. II and § 230-156.5
Ord. No.
06-209Z
Map amendment 9-25-2006 *Map change only
Ord. No.
06-211Z
Readoption of
zoning and
Zoning Map
2-12-2007 Chapter history only
Ord. No.
07-216Z
Relative quarters
in single-family
detached
dwelling
amendment
6-25-2007 § 230-149C
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1093
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
07-219Z
Definitions
amendment
("building
coverage";
"impervious
materials";
"impervious
surface ratio");
impervious
surface ratio in
R-1, R-2, Cluster
Development,
R-3A, R-5 and
R-6 Districts
amendment;
nonconforming
signs and
amortization
repealed;
conversion of
dwellings
repealed;
compliance with
code
requirements in
Billboard
Limited
Industrial
District
amendment;
special
conveyancing in
Highway Limited
Overlay District
amendment;
yard and
impervious
surface coverage
regulations in
Historic
Preservation
Cluster District
amendment
7-23-2007 §§ 230-5; 230-28G,
230-33H, 230-46, 230-50,
230-66I, 230-71A and
C(5); 230-132; 230-151;
230-246A and B;
230-233B; 230-240 title
and 230-240G
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1094
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
07-220ZS
Definitions
amendment
("special
events"); special
events; signs
amendment;
accessory uses
amendment;
11-12-2007 §§ 230-5; 230-132;
230-123A, 230-125A(2),
(10) and (11), 230-126C,
230-127A, 230-129;
230-149;
Ord. No.
07-222Z
Use and special
regulations in BP
District
amendment
11-26-2007 §§ 230-80A(1) and
230-83K
Ord. No.
07-223Z
Maximum
impervious
surface coverage
for institution
and nonretail
uses in ECPOD
District
amendment
11-12-2007 § 230-205I(8)
Ord. No.
07-225Z
Map amendment 12-3-2007 *Map change only
Ord. No.
07-226Z
Definitions
amendment
("agriculture I";
"agriculture II");
agriculture I
uses in R-1
District
amendment;
agriculture II
uses in LI
district
amendment;
accessory uses
amendment;
prohibited uses
amendment
12-17-2007 §§ 230-5; 230-26C;
230-103A(2);
230-149A(1); 230-150B
Ord. No.
07-227Z
HLI District use
regulations
amendment and
dimensional
standards
amendment
12-17-2007 §§ 230-215H and 230-217
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1095
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
08-230Z
Use and special
regulations in BP
District
amendment
5-27-2008 §§ 230-80C and 230-83C
and K
Ord. No.
08-231Z
Map amendment 5-27-2008 *Map change only
Ord. No.
09-236Z
RS Regional
Shopping Center
District
development
standards
amendment;
signs
amendment;
Zoning Hearing
Board special
exceptions
amendment;
freestanding
signs table
amendment;
permitted land
use categories
amendment
4-27-2009 §§ 230-95L; 230-123A;
230-124A, B and D;
230-127A, 230-128B, D,
G and H; 230-130;
230-185C; freestanding
signs table;
230-199B(2)(e)[1]
Ord. No.
09-237Z
R-3B Age
Qualified
Residential
District
amendment;
Table of
Permitted Uses
amendment
6-8-2009 §§ 230-53.1;
230-53.2A(6); 230-53.9;
230-53.11; Table 230-A
Ord. No.
09-239Z
Uses accessory
to a dwelling
amendment
(home
occupations)
6-22-2009 §§ 230-149A(2)(a)[4][i]
and [ii];
230-149A(2)(a)[4][b][v],
[xii] and [xiii];
230-149A(2)(a)[5]
Ord. No.
10-240Z
FP Floodplain
Conservation
District
establishment
and special
exception
amendment
6-28-2010 §§ 230-12A(2) and (3);
230-18A(3)(c)
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1096
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
10-243Z
R-3B Age
Qualified
Residential
District
comprehensive
development
alternative
amendment
6-28-2010 § 230-53.11D(2) and (3)
Ord. No.
12-251Z
Definitions
amendment
("changeable
copy sign"); BLI
Billboard
Limited
Industrial
District
amendment
3-26-2012 §§ 230-123; 230-243B;
230-246B
Ord. No.
12-252Z
Map amendment 3-26-2012 *Map change only
Ord. No.
12-257Z
BLI Billboard
Limited
Industrial
District
amendment
7-23-2012 § 230-246D(1)(b)
Ord. No.
12-258Z
Map amendment 6-25-2012 *Map change only
Ord. No.
12-259Z
RS Regional
Shopping Center
District
amendment; offstreet
parking
amendment;
special
regulations for
outdoor dining
amendment;
Table of
Permitted Uses
amendment
6-25-2012 §§ 230-95C and F;
230-134C(10)(b);
230-156.4A; Table 230-A
Ord. No.
12-262Z
Uses by
Township
amendment
9-10-2012 § 230-9
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1097
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
12-263Z
R-3B Age
Qualified
Residential
District
amendment
9-10-2012 §§ 230-53.2A(1);
230-53.3A and C;
230-53.11E(3)
Ord. No.
12-264Z
R-1 Residential
District open
space design
overlay option
amendment
10-22-2012 § 230-26J
Ord. No.
12-265Z
Map amendment 10-22-2012 *Map change only
Ord. No.
12-266Z
Regional
Shopping Center
(RS) regulations
amendment
12-17-2012 § 230-128
Ord. No.
13-272Z
Off-street
parking and
loading
amendment
4-8-2013 § 230-134
Ord. No.
13-273Z
R-1 Residential
District open
space design
overlay option
amendment
4-8-2013 § 230-26J
Ord. No.
13-274Z
Map amendment 10-28-2013 *Map change only
Ord. No.
13-275Z
Definitions
amendment
("family")
9-9-2013 § 230-5
Ord. No.
14-284Z
R-3B Age-
Qualified
Residential
District
regulations
amendment
2-9-2015 §§ 230-53.3C;
230-53.11E(3)(c)
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1098
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition
Ord. No.
15-293Z
Definitions
amendment; BP
Business Office
and Professional
District
regulations
amendment;
Table of
Permitted uses
amendment
3-28-2016 §§ 230-5; 230-81; 230-82;
230-83; Table 230-A
Ord. No.
16-296Z
BP Business
Office and
Professional
District
regulations
amendment
7-25-2016 § 230-83E
Ord. No.
16-297ZS
FP Floodplain
Conservation
District
amendment
9-26-2016 Article IV
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
17-305Z
HLI Highway
Limited Industrial
Overlay District
Amendment
11-27-2017 §§ 230-217I(1);
230-218B; 230-219F
9
Ord. No.
18-306Z
C - Commercial
District
Amendment; S -
Shopping Centers
Amendment; RS -
Regional Shopping
Center District
Amendment;
Wireless
Telecommunications
Facilities
Amendment
6-25-2018 §§ 230-78A;
230-89I;
230-95B;
230-223A(5)(c)
9
§ D257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § D257-1
1:1099
Legislation Subject
Adoption
Date Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
19-311ZS
Off-Street Parking
and Loading
Amendment
11-11-2019 § 230-134F 9
§ D257-1 MONTGOMERY CODE § D257-1
1:1100