Municipal Code
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
1:1

Part 1
NORTH STRABANE TOWNSHIP MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
§ 101. Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. 40, 5/25/1966, § 2]
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the said Authority in full are as
follows:
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 40, 5/25/1966, § 3]
The said Authority shall be for the purpose of acquiring, holding,
constructing, improving, maintaining and operating, owning, leasing, either
in the capacity of lessor or lessee, projects of the following kind and
character: buildings and structures to be devoted wholly or partially for
public use and for revenue purposes; water and water works projects;
sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof; sewage treatment works, including
works for treating and disposing of industrial waste; facilities and
equipment for the collection, removal or disposal of ashes, garbage, rubbish
and other refuse materials by incineration, landfill or other methods; and
all facilities in any way used, useful, necessary, convenient or incidental
to the furtherance and operation of such projects; and any other system,
structure or operation which may be lawfully authorized under the Act of
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
§ 103. Authorization to Proceed. [Ord. 40, 5/25/1966, § 4]
The several officers of the said Township are hereby authorized and
directed to do and perform every lawful, requisite and convenient thing for
the organization of the said Authority which is provided and authorized by
said Act of 1945.
1. The name of the said Authority shall be the "North Strabane Township
Municipal Authority."
2. This Authority is formed under the Act of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth which was approved the 2nd day of May, 1945, P.L. 382,
as amended.
3. No other Authority organized under the said Act or under the Act
approved the 28th day of June, 1935, P.L. 463, is in existence in or for
the said incorporating municipality.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is North Strabane
Township, and its address is [the address of the Municipal Secretary].
The names and address of its municipal authorities are: (Here followed
the names and addresses of the Township officials.)
5. The names, address and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of said Authority are: (Here followed the names, addresses and
terms of office of the first Authority Board members.)
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:3

Part 2
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 201. Creation of Department.1 [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The creation of a Police Department in and for the Township of North
Strabane and the appointment of policemen by the Board of Supervisors,
subject to any applicable civil service provisions in the law, is hereby
approved.
§ 202. Composition. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The Police Department shall be composed of a Chief of Police and any other
officers and patrolmen as have been or may be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors from time to time, subject to applicable civil service provisions
in the law.
§ 203. Conduct. [Ord. No. 382, 6/25/2019]
1. The North Strabane Supervisors hereby promulgate the following
guidelines to be followed by the Township police officers when making a
warrantless arrest under § 8902 of Title 42 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902:
A. Prior to making a warrantless arrest under § 8902 of Title 42 of the
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, the
officer shall ensure that the following requirements set forth in the
statute are satisfied:
(1) The officer has probable cause to believe that one of the four
listed offenses under § 8902 of Title 42 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, particularly
identified as the following:
(a) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 relating to disorderly conduct;
(b) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 relating to public drunkenness;
(c) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 relating to obstructing highways and
other public passages;
(d) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 relating to the purchase, consumption,
possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed
beverages.
(2) The defendant's conduct is ongoing;
(3) The conduct constituting the offense is within the officer's
view; and
1. Editor's Note: Although formerly enacted by the adopting ordinance, this Part is based on
a Petition of October 31, 1956 for the formation of a police force.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:5
(4) The conduct imperils the personal security of any person or
endangers public or private property.
B. After making a warrantless arrest pursuant to § 8902 of the
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902, the
officer should follow Rules 400 and 441 procedures for arrest
without warrant as set forth in the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure.
§ 203 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 203
1:6
Part 3
TOWNSHIP MANAGER
§ 301. Creation of Office. [Ord. 87, 12/29/1975, § 1]
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of North
Strabane.
§ 302. Appointment and Removal. [Ord. 87, 12/29/1975, § 2; as
amended by Ord. 140, 6/17/1984]
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of the
Board of Township Supervisors. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of
the Township Supervisors and may be removed at any time by a majority
vote of the Board of Township Supervisors.
§ 303. Qualifications. [Ord. 87, 12/29/1975, § 3; as amended by Ord.
140, 6/17/1984]
Solely on the basis of executive and administrative abilities, with special
reference to actual experience and knowledge of accepted practices in
respect to the duties of office as herein outlined, the Manager shall be
chosen. The Manager need not be a resident of the Township or of the State
of Pennsylvania at the time of appointment, but the Board of Supervisors
may require that, within 30 days after appointment, the Manager shall
become and during the tenure of the office shall remain a resident of the
Township.
§ 304. Manager's Bond. [Ord. 87, 12/29/1975, § 4; as amended by
Ord. 140, 6/17/1984]
Before entering upon the duties of Manager, the Manager shall give a bond
to the Township, with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the
Township, in the sum of $100,000, conditioned for the faithful performance
of Manager duties. The premium shall be paid by the Township.
§ 305. Manager's Compensation. [Ord. 87, 12/29/1975, § 5; as
amended by Ord. 140, 6/17/1984]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution.
§ 306. Powers and Duties of Manager. [Ord. 87, 12/29/1975, § 6; as
amended by Ord. 140, 6/17/1984]
The Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Township and
shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for the proper
and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The powers and
duties shall relate to the general management of all Township business not
expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon other Township officers.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 306
1:7
Subject to recall by ordinance of the Township Supervisors, the powers and
duties of the Township Manager shall include the following:
1. The Manager shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments as so delegated by the Board of Supervisors by
resolution.
2. The Manager shall recommend to the Board of Supervisors the
employment or discharge of any municipal employee; however, the
authority to employ or discharge the same shall be vested in the Board
of Supervisors of North Strabane Township.
3. The Manager shall prepare and submit to Township Supervisors, before
the close of the fiscal year, or on such alternative date as Township
Supervisors shall determine, a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager, or
an official designated by the Manager, shall obtain from the head of
each department, agency, board, or office estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as the Manager requests. The
Manager shall review such estimates and may review them before
submitting the budget to Township Supervisors; provided, however,
that the Manager concommitently submit to the Board a written
explanation of his revisions and the reason(s) therefor.
4. The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the budget
after its adoption by the Township Supervisors.
5. The Manager shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or
more of the municipal departments as the Township Supervisors may
from time to time direct.
6. The Manager shall attend all meetings of the Township Supervisors and
its committees, with the right to take part in the discussion, and shall
give notice of all special meetings of its committees.
7. The Manager shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Township
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
8. The Manager shall keep the Township Supervisors informed as to the
conduct of Township affairs, submit periodic reports on the condition of
Township finances and such other reports as the Township Supervisors
request, and make such recommendations to the Township Supervisors
as the Manager deems necessary.
9. The Manager shall submit to the Township Supervisors, as soon as
possible after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the
financial and administrative activities of the Township for the preceding
year.
10. Unless the duties are imposed elsewhere by law, ordinance or
resolution, the Manager, when directed by the Board of Supervisors,
§ 306 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 306
1:8
§ 307. Disability or Absence of Manager. [Ord. 87, 12/29/1975, § 7;
as amended by Ord. 140, 6/17/1984]
If the Manager shall, in the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors,
become ill, disabled or for some other reason must be absent from the
Township, the Board of Supervisors shall designate one qualified person to
perform the duties of the Manager during the illness, disability or absence
of the Manager. The person so designated shall not perform the Manager's
shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits, licenses,
privileges and agreements granted by the Township are observed.
11. The Manager may employ, by and with the approval of the majority of
the Board of Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and
to advise the Manager in connection with any of the functions of the
Township.
12. The Manager shall attend to the letting of contracts duly approved by
the Board of Supervisors and the Township Solicitor and shall supervise
the performance and faithful execution of the same, except insofar as
such duties are expressly imposed upon some other Township officer by
statute.
13. Unless the duties are imposed elsewhere by law, ordinance or
resolution, the Manager shall see that all monies owed the Township
are promptly paid and that, subject to approval by the Township
Solicitor and the Board of Supervisors, that proper proceedings are
taken for the security and collection of all the Township's claims.
14. The Manager shall be the purchasing officer of the Township and shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Second Class
Township Code, any applicable ordinances and resolutions of the Board
of Supervisors, all supplies and equipment for the various agencies,
boards, departments, and other offices of the Township. The Manager
shall keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time to time,
when directed by Township Supervisors, make a full written report
thereof. The Manager shall also issue rules and regulations, subject to
the approval of Township Supervisors, governing the requisition and
purchasing of all municipal supplies and equipment.
15. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township shall be
referred to the office of the Manager, except those pertaining to the
Manager, which shall be referred to one or more members of the Board
of Supervisors. The Manager shall make a report of complaints
regarding services or personnel of the Township to the Board of
Supervisors, which may authorize the Manager to investigate further
and report the results of his investigation to the Board for such
disposition as the Board may deem necessary, or, alternatively, the
Board may authorize the Manager to dispose of such complaints and
report as to the final disposition to the Township Supervisors.
§ 306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 307
1:9
duties for a period longer than three weeks without approval of the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 307 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 307
1:10
Part 4
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 401. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association. [Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
The North Strabane Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of North
Strabane Township is recognized as an organization formed for the purpose
of maintaining an association for beneficial and protective purposes for
its members and their families, in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident, from the funds collected therein.
§ 402. Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Monies Received. [Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
The North Strabane Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of North
Strabane Township is designated the proper association to receive such
funds as are due and payable to the Township Treasurer by the Treasurer
of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire
insurance companies.
§ 403. Annual Appropriation. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
There is annually appropriated from the Township Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Township Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 72 P.S. § 2262
(1982), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:11

Part 5
POLICE PENSION2
2. Note: The Police Pension Plan Ordinances Are Listed In Appendix C Of This Code. Copies
Of The Current Plans, And Amendments, Are On File For Review At The Township Office.
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:13

Part 6
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 601. Amendment of Plan. [Ord. 359, 4/28/2015]
North Strabane Township (the Township), being a member municipality
of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby
elects to amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 602. Administration and Benefits. [Ord. 359, 4/28/2015]
As part of this Part 6, the Township agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Township effective January 1, 2015 (the contract).
§ 603. Acceptance of Contract. [Ord. 359, 4/28/2015]
The passage and adoption of this Part by the Township is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 604. Payment for Obligations. [Ord. 359, 4/28/2015]
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this Part and the
contract shall be made by the Township in accordance with the Retirement
Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act.
The Township hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created due
to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 605. Complete Authorization; Repealer; Effective Date. [Ord. 359,
4/28/2015]
The Township intends this Part to be the complete authorization of the
contract, and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance
Number 328 and specifically repeal ab initio Ordinance Number 357, either
immediately or on January 1, 2015, which is the effective date of the
contract, whichever is later.
§ 606. Filing of Copies. [Ord. 359, 4/28/2015]
A duly certified copy of this Part and an executed contract shall be filed with
the System.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 606
1:15

Part 7
FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW PROCEDURES
§ 701. Township Official to Enforce. [Ord. 273, 11/28/2000]
The Code Enforcement Officer, or such official designee, is hereby
appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all
responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 702. Municipal Certificate Required. [Ord. 273, 11/28/2000]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for the fire damage to a structure located within
North Strabane Township (hereinafter the "Township") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$5,000 unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished by the
Township Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(B)
of Act 98 of 1992 and unless there is compliance with Section 508(C) and
(D) of Act 98 of 1992 and the provisions of this Part 7.
§ 703. Fire Insurance Escrow. [Ord. 273, 11/28/2000]
Where, pursuant to Section 508(B)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, the Township
Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the insuring
agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however, that
if the loss as agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building restructure, the following procedures must be
followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the Township in the aggregate of $1,000 for
$20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, this
section to be applied such that, if the claim is $20,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the municipality shall be $1,000; or
B. If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer from the
Township from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associates or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 703
1:17
§ 704. Adoption of Procedures and Regulations; Fee for Certificate.
[Ord. 273, 11/28/2000]
the funds transferred to the Township in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the Township has not commenced to remove, repair
or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Township shall do the
following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the Township. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Township
in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent, when transferring the
proceeds, to provide the Township with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the name insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the Township and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure has been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Township and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
Township has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
Township has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing the
building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund;
and if excess funds remain, the Township shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured.
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Township pursuant to this section and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the Township. To the extent
that the proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest
earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured
at the time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Township to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Township and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 703 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 704
1:18
§ 705. Collection of Fees. [Ord. 273, 11/28/2000; as added by Ord.
285, 5/28/2002, § 1]
1. The Board of Supervisors of North Strabane Township may, by
resolution, adopt procedures and regulations to implement Act 98 of
1992 and this Part 7 and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be
charged for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98
of 1992 and this Part, including but not limited to issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate
fund accounts.
2. Any person or entity requesting a certificate that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property shall submit a written request along with a certificate fee of
$20.
3. Penalties. Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring
agent who violates this Part 7 shall be subject to a penalty of up to
$1,000.
1. Within 30 days of the date of providing fire prevention and protection
services, the Chief of the North Strabane Township Volunteer Fire
Company or his designated representative shall submit an invoice for
all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to the provision of such
services in the minimum amounts set forth in the schedule. All such
bills shall be paid in full within 30 days of the receipt thereof, and
interest shall accumulate thereafter on any unpaid balance at the rate
of 10% per annum until paid.
2. In addition, any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to
cleanup costs, fees or expenses that are imposed upon the Township or
its Volunteer Fire Company by any local, state or federal agency and
related to the same situation or occurrence for which the Township or
its Volunteer Fire Company, may be included in the billing or may be
billed separately within 30 days of receipt and shall be paid as provided
in this section.
3. Such fees may include and encompass all equipment, materials,
maintenance and overhead expenses and costs of whatever nature
which shall constitute full reimbursement to North Strabane Township
Volunteer Fire Department for such services actually rendered and as
hereinafter authorized.
4. Fees Authorized. The following fees are hereby authorized:
A. Residential fire response: $500.
B. Apartment fire response (per apartment): $500.
C. Commercial or business fire response: $1,000.
D. Industrial fire response: $5,000.
§ 704 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 705
1:19
E. Other structure response: $1,000.
F. Vehicle, rubbish, trash or other fire response: $250.
G. Hazardous material spill response: $500.
H. Standby response for utility service interruptions: $100.
These fees may be adjusted from time to time as desired by the
North Strabane Township Board of Supervisors by resolution.
5. Enforcement. The Township may enforce the provisions of this section
by civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of
any amounts due hereunder, plus attorneys' fees, costs and expenses
and any other relief that may be appropriate.
§ 705 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 705
1:20
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
§ 705 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 705
1:21

Part 1
DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 101]
As used in this Part, the following terms have the meaning indicated, unless
a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
DOG CONTROL — The apprehending, holding and disposing of stray or
unwanted dogs or activities that reduce the number of dog related
problems.
DOG LAW — The Act of December 7, 1982, P.L. 784, No. 225, as amended,
3 P.S. §§ 459-101 et seq.
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having
custody of any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain
on or about any premises occupied by him.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any other public land or upon property of another person other than the
owner's and not being accompanied by or under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said dog.
§ 102. Unlawful to Allow Dogs to Run at Large. [Ord. 148, 1/13/
1987, § 102]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such
dog or dogs to run at large in the Township of North Strabane.
§ 103. Seizure of Dogs. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 103]
Any Township police officer may seize any dog found running at large in the
Township. Any animal control officer may seize any unlicensed dog running
at large in the Township but any such animal control officer may seize
licensed dogs running at large in the Township only under the supervision
and control of a Township police officer. Any dog thus seized is to be
impounded in a licensed kennel or in a kennel maintained by the Township.
§ 104. Licensed Dogs. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 104]
Owners of licensed dogs must be notified by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, that the dog is impounded and will be disposed
of in five days if not claimed. Five days after the return receipt has been
received, and the dog has not been claimed, the dog may be sold or
destroyed in accordance with the Dog Law.
§ 105. Unlicensed Dogs. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 105]
Unlicensed dogs that are seized are to be held in such kennel for 48 hours
and if not claimed may be destroyed in accordance with the Dog Law.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:23
§ 106. Dogs that Threaten. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 106]
Every Township police officer may kill any dog which is found running
at large and is deemed, after due consideration by the police officer, to
constitute a threat to the public health and welfare.
§ 107. Penalties. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 107; as amended by Ord.
240, 10/28/1997]
1. The owner or claimant of the dog detained by the Township or its
animal control officer shall pay a penalty of $15) to the Township plus
all reasonable expenses incurred by reason of the dog's detention
before the dog is returned to the owner or claimant. The Board of
Supervisors may fix and amend by resolution a fixed and reasonable fee
for detaining the animal in the Township kennel (hereinafter referred to
as "kennel fees").
2. The Township's animal control officer is authorized to collect said
penalties and kennel fees on behalf of the Township and shall promptly
remit such collected monies to the Township.
3. Any person found in violation of any provision of Article II through
Article VIII, inclusive, of the Dog Law and/or this Part, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a district justice in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this
Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 106 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 107
1:24
Part 2
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
§ 201. Appointment or Hiring. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 201]
An animal control officer shall either be appointed or retained as an
independent contractor by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 202. Duties of Officer. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 202]
1. Such officer shall have the power and responsibility for the
enforcement of dog control as defined in §§ 101 et seq. of this Chapter
and as defined in the Dog Law; provided, that he or she shall not have
the power to make arrests under this Code or any Act of Assembly.
2. The said officer shall learn and carry out the provisions of this Chapter
2 and the Dog Law.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:25

Part 3
ANIMAL DISTURBANCES
§ 301. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 301]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Strabane, finding that
excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social
well-being of the people as well as to their comfort, living conditions,
general welfare and safety and being therefor a public health and welfare
hazard, hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater control
and more effective regulation of excessive sound and the sources of
excessive sound within the Township.
§ 302. Noise Disturbance. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 302]
It shall be illegal within the Township for any person or persons to own,
possess, harbor, or control any animal or bird which makes any noise
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes such
noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person
any time of the day or night regardless of whether the animal or bird is
physically situated in or upon private property, said noise being a nuisance;
provided, that at the time the animal or bird is making such noise no person
is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon
which the animal or bird is situated nor is there any other legitimate cause
which justifiably provoked the animal or bird.
§ 303. Exceptions. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 303]
This Part shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare unlawful any
agricultural operations protected from nuisance suits by Act No. 1982-133.
§ 304. Penalties. [Ord. 148, 1/13/1987, § 304; as amended by Ord.
240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304
1:27

Part 4
KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS
§ 401. Definitions. [Ord. 286, 6/25/2002, § 1]
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any animal that is not normally domesticated in the
United States or is wild by nature. Exotic animals include, but are not
limited to, any or all of the following orders and families, whether bred in
the wild or in captivity, and also any or all of their hybrids with domestic
species. The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act as examples
and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of
each group of animals, unless otherwise specified.
§ 402. Keeping of Exotic Animals Prohibited. [Ord. 286, 6/25/2002,
§ 2]
Non-human primates and prosimians (monkeys, chimpanzees,
baboons).
A.
Felidae (lions, tigers, bobcats, cougars, leopards, jaguars, mountain
lions and non-domesticated cats).
B.
C. Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, not domesticated dogs).
D. Ursidae (all bears).
E. Reptilia (all venomous snakes and all constricting snakes).
F. Crocodilia (alligators, crocodiles).
G. Proboscidae (elephants).
H. Hyaenidae (hyenas).
Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, but not cattle, swine,
sheep or goats).
I.
J. Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis).
K. Marsupialia (kangaroos, opossums).
L. Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, but not horses, donkeys or mules).
M. Edentata (anteaters, sloths, armadillos).
N. Viverridae (mongooses, civets and genets).
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor, bring
or have in one's possession an exotic animal(s) within Township limits.
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor or any other person in
control of a lot, tract or parcel of land within Township limits or any
residence or business premises situated thereon to knowingly permit
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:29
§ 403. Violations, Penalties, Seizing and Injunctive Relief. [Ord.
286, 6/25/2002, § 3]
§ 404. Exemptions. [Ord. 286, 6/25/2002, § 4]
The provisions of this Part shall not apply to:
any other person to be in possession of an exotic animal upon the
property, residence or premises.
3. No animal located in the Township prior to the enactment of this Part
shall be exempt from the provisions of this Part.
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part upon conviction thereof, in an action brought before a district
justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part continues or
each section of this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
2. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may, at its sole discretion,
cause to be seized any animal which is located in North Strabane
Township in violation of this Part. Furthermore, the Township may seek
injunctive relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Washington County
requiring any animal located in North Strabane Township, in violation
of this Part, be removed. These remedies available to the Township are
not mutually exclusive and the Township may, at its sole discretion, fine
any person, cause to be seized any animal and/or request injunctive
relief regarding the same for violations of this Part.
1. Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association.
2. Licensed humane societies.
3. Animal control officers.
4. Licensed veterinary hospitals or clinics.
§ 402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 404
1:30
Chapter 3
BICYCLES
Chapter 4
BUILDINGS
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:31

Part 1
(RESERVED)3
§ 101. (Reserved)
3. Editor's Note: Former Part 1, Dangerous Structures, Adopted 11/26/1985 By Ord. 147, Was
Superseded In Part By Ord. 312, And The Remainder Was Repealed 8/23/2016 By Ord. 369.
See Now International Property Maintenance Code § 108.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:33

Part 2
ADDRESSES
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 198, 4/26/1994, § 1]
STRUCTURE — Any home, house, residence, trailer, business, building or
structure deemed by the Supervisors of North Strabane to require a
designated number to effectuate the purpose of this Part.
§ 202. Street Names. [Ord. 198, 4/26/1994, § 2]
The Supervisors of North Strabane Township, pursuant to the Second Class
Township Code, are hereby authorized and empowered to name and/or
provide the names of any and all unnamed streets, roadways, alleys,
thoroughfares or the like within North Strabane Township, be it or they
private, Township or State. Furthermore, the Supervisors of North Strabane
Township shall have the power and authority to name and/or designate
the name of any unnamed street, roadway, thoroughfare or the like which
should hereinafter come into existence, be it private, State or Township.
Furthermore, the Supervisors of North Strabane Township shall have the
power and authority to assign numbers to any unnumbered structure which
currently exists or may come into existence in the future.
§ 203. through § 206. (Reserved)4
4. Editor's Note: Former §§ 203 to 206, regarding street numbering, were repealed 8/23/2016
by Ord. 369. See now International Property Maintenance Code § 304.3.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:35
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 203 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 203
1:36
Part 1
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 101. Title, Purpose and Scope. [Ord. 208, 3/28/1995, § 1]
§ 102. Establishment of the Department of Code Enforcement. [Ord.
208, 3/28/1995, § 2]
1. Title. This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Code
Enforcement Ordinance of North Strabane Township."
2. Purpose. The purpose of this Part is to provide for the administration
and enforcement of this Part, the technical codes and any other codes
and ordinances adopted by North Strabane Township.
3. Scope. The provisions of this Part shall serve as the administrative,
organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical
codes which regulate the site preparation and construction, alteration,
moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures
and building service equipment and any other codes and ordinances
within North Strabane Township.5
1. Creation of the Department of Code Enforcement. There is hereby
created by the Board of Supervisors a Department of North Strabane
Township to be known as the "Department of Code Enforcement,"
which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
responsibility for administrating and enforcing the provisions of this
Part, the technical codes and those other codes and/or ordinances of
the Township, herein referred to as the "applicable codes and
ordinances," which designate said Department of Code Enforcement as
their official administrative and enforcement authority.
2. General. Whenever the term or title "administrative authority,"
"responsible officer," "officer," "building official," "code official," "chief
inspector," "code enforcement officer," or other similar designation is
used herein or in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed to
mean the Code Enforcement Officer appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of North Strabane Township.
3. Department Records. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the Department of Code Enforcement, and all such records
shall be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate times,
except that no individual, owner, operator, occupant or other person
shall be subject to unwarranted invasion of privacy, and except that all
evidence or information obtained in the course of any inspection shall
be considered privileged information and shall be kept confidential in
5. Editor’s Note: Former Subsections 4 and 5 of § 101 were repealed 8/23/2016 by Ord. 369,
as the Uniform Construction Code and International Property Maintenance Code now
control.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:37
§ 103. Enforcement Authority. [Ord. 208, 3/28/1995, § 3]
order to maintain the integrity and security of such records. Such
evidence or information shall not be disclosed except as may be
necessary in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer for the
proper and effective administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this Part and shall not otherwise be made public without the consent
of the owner, occupant, operator or other person in charge of the unit,
structure or premises inspected. Such records shall be retained in the
official records so long as the building or structure to which they relate
remains in existence unless otherwise provided by other regulations.
4. Annual Report. At least annually, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
submit to the Board of Supervisors a written statement of operations in
the form and content as shall be prescribed by the Board.
1. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer. There shall be appointed, by
the Board of Supervisors of North Strabane Township, a Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall be in charge of the Department of Code
Enforcement of North Strabane Township. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall supervise such other employees or assistants as shall be
necessary for the administration and execution of the responsibilities of
said Department, as appointed and approved by the Board of
Supervisors of North Strabane Township. Said Code Enforcement
Officer and other personnel shall consist of employees directly hired
and compensated by North Strabane Township. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall not be removed from office, except for cause and after full
opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before
the Board of Supervisors.
2. Relief From Personal Liability. The Code Enforcement Officer, or other
official or employee, charged with the administration and enforcement
of this Part and technical codes and those other codes and/or
ordinances of the Township who acts in good faith and without malice in
the discharge of duties shall not thereby be rendered liable personally
and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against
the Code Enforcement Officer or employee because of an act performed
by that Code Enforcement Officer or employee in the lawful discharge
of duties and under the provisions of this Part shall be defended by the
legal representative of North Strabane Township until the final
termination of the proceedings. The Code Enforcement Officer or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding
that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Part, the
technical codes and those other codes and/or ordinances which
designate said Department of Code Enforcement as their official
administration and enforcement authority. Any officer of the
Department of Code Enforcement, acting in good faith and without
malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
§ 102 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 103
1:38
§ 104. Duties and Powers of Code Enforcement Officer. [Ord. 208, 3/
28/1995, § 4]
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of
official duties in connection therewith.
3. Deputy. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to designate an
employee as deputy who shall exercise all the powers of the Code
Enforcement Officer during the temporary absence or disability of the
Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with prescribed procedures
and with the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
4. Restriction of Employees. An official or employee with the Department
of Code Enforcement shall not be engaged in or directly or indirectly
connected with the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the
construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, or the
preparation of plans or of specifications thereof, unless that person is
the owner of the building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in
any work which conflicts with official duties or with interests in the
Department.
5. Fire Marshal. In accordance with the Fire Prevention Code of North
Strabane Township, the Fire Marshal of the Township has been
established as the authorized representative from the Department of
Code Enforcement of North Strabane Township having all of the duties
of enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code of the Township provided
for in this Part. The Fire Marshal shall continue to serve in that capacity
until such time as the Board of Supervisors declares otherwise.
1. Enforcement of Codes. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce and
administer all of the provisions of this Part and of those other applicable
technical codes and ordinances which establish the Department of Code
Enforcement as their official administration and enforcement authority.
For such purposes, he shall have the powers of a law enforcement
officer.
2. Duties. The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include: the
receipt of application and issuance of permits for the construction,
erection, addition to, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, installation
of service equipment (plumbing, electrical, mechanical), and the
location, use, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and
structures located within or moved into North Strabane Township; the
issuance of all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe
conditions to ensure compliance with this Part for the safety, health and
general welfare of the public; the making of inspections to determine
compliance with the applicable codes and ordinances; the undertaking
of investigations; and such other activities as may be required.
3. Credentials. The Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
representative shall disclose proper credentials of their respective
department for the purpose of inspecting any and all buildings and
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:39
premises in the performance of duties under the applicable technical
code and/or ordinance where requested.
4. Coordination of Enforcement. Whenever, in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, initiating an inspection under the applicable
technical codes and/or ordinances, it is deemed necessary or desirable
to have inspections by any other department, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of
such inspections so as to minimize the number of visitors by Township
officials and to confer with the other departments for the purpose of
eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. The assistance and
cooperation of all other officials, including Police and Fire Departments,
shall be available to the Code Enforcement Officer to assist in the
performance of his duties.
5. Right of Entry. Except in case of an emergency or a mutually convenient
time agreed to by the Code Enforcement Officer and the owner, if the
Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative in
discharging his duties has reasonable cause to believe that there exists
in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation
which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous
to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or the public, upon
showing proper identification where requested, is hereby authorized to
enter and inspect between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., any
structure or premises in North Strabane Township to enforce the
provisions of this Part and of those other applicable codes and
ordinances. Every occupant, owner or operator of a structure or
premises, or their agent or employee, shall give access to any part of
such structure or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are
necessary to comply with the provisions of this Part.
6. Access Entry Refused. If any owner, operator, occupant or other person
in charge of a structure refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts or obstructs entry and free access to the structure or premises
under his control or to any part thereof, with respect to any authorized
inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon showing that
probable cause exists for the inspection, file a complaint and may
petition for and obtain an order directing compliance with the
inspection requirements of this Part from a court of competent
jurisdiction. Any person who refuses to comply with such an order
issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to such penalties as may
be authorized by law for violation of a court order.
7. Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of the technical codes, the Code
Enforcement Officer may grant modifications for individual cases,
provided he shall first find that a special individual reason makes the
strict letter of the technical code impractical and the modification is in
conformity with the intent and purpose of the technical code, and that
such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety
§ 104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 104
1:40
requirements or any degree of structural integrity. The details of
actions grading modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
files of the Code Enforcement Department. If additional nonconforming
conditions are encountered during the course of any approved
alteration or repair which were not considered or known initially, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require
compliance with the ordinance and other technical codes and/or
ordinances of the Township.
8. Tests.
A. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any of
the provisions of the technical codes or evidence that materials or
construction do not conform to the requirements of the technical
codes, the Code Enforcement Officer may require tests as evidence
of compliance to be made at no expense to North Strabane
Township.
B. Test methods shall be as specified by the technical codes or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and
accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine test procedures.
C. All tests shall be made by an approved agency. Reports of such tests
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer for the period
required for the retention of public records.
9. Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction.
A. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent
the use of any material or method of construction not specifically
prescribed by the technical codes, provided any alternate has been
approved and its use authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer may approve any alternate,
provided he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the provisions of the technical codes and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in
suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety
and sanitation.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require that sufficient evidence
or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made
regarding its use. The details of any action grading approval of an
alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Code
Enforcement Department.
10. Approved Inspection Agencies. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
make all the required inspections or may accept reports of inspections
by authoritative and recognized services or individuals, which satisfy
requirements as to qualifications and reliability. All inspection reports
§ 104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:41
§ 105. through § 107. (Reserved)6
§ 108. Permit Fees. [Ord. 208, 3/28/1995, § 8]
shall be in writing and shall be certified by the approved authority
or responsible office of the agency or the individual when expert
inspection services are accepted. The Code Enforcement Officer may
engage such expert opinion as may be deemed necessary to report upon
unusual technical issues that may arise subject to the approval of the
appointing authority. When required by the provisions of the code or by
the approved rules, materials or assemblies shall be inspected at the
point of manufacture or fabrication.
1. Required Fees.
A. Applicants for permits required by any of the applicable codes and
ordinances of the Township shall pay at the time of application to
the Code Enforcement Officer for use by the Township, permit fees,
as designated from time to time by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors of North Strabane Township.
B. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions
of these codes shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
value to be used in computing the permit or permits shall be the
total value of all construction work for which the permit or permits
are issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical,
plumbing, heating, airconditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing
systems and any other permanent equipment.
2. Special Inspection Fees and Costs. All fees and costs related to the
performance of special professional services in accordance with the
special inspections section of the Township's Building Code shall be
borne by the owner.
3. Double Fees.
A. Any persons, firms or corporations who shall commence any work
for which a permit is required by the applicable codes and
ordinances, without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if
subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit
fee required by Subsection 1 of this section for such work, provided
that this provision shall not apply to emergency work and first-time
offenders.
B. The payment of such double fee shall not exempt any person from
compliance with all other provisions of either this Part or the
technical codes, nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
6. Editor’s Note: Former §§ 105 through 107 were repealed 8/23/2016 by Ord. 369, as the
Uniform Construction Code and International Property Maintenance Code now control.
§ 104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 108
1:42
4. Renewals. Before work suspended or abandoned can be resumed, a
new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be
1/2 the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no
changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for such work; and, provided further, that such
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded 180 days. In order to
review action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a
new full permit fee. If required, any bond posted by the applicant for
demolition work not completed shall be forfeited.
5. Other Fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition for all work done in connection with or
concurrently with the work contemplated by a building permit shall not
relieve the applicant or holder of the permit form the payment of other
fees that are prescribed by law or ordinance for zoning permits, sewer
connections, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention permits, erection
of signs and display structures, marquees or other appurtenant
structures, or fees of inspections, certificates of use and occupancy or
other privileges or requirements, both within and without the
jurisdiction of the Code Enforcement Department.
6. Fee Refunds. Refunds of any permit fees paid may be authorized by the
Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the following:
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize the refunding of any
fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize the refunding of not
more than 50% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
under a permit issued to defray costs incurred by the Code
Enforcement Officer in reviewing and processing the application
and plans, including the preliminary review of the site location
identified in the application and issuing and processing the permit.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize the refunding of not
more than 80% of the fee paid when an application for permit for
which a fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan
reviewing is done.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not authorize the refunding of
any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original
permittee not later than 30 days after the date of fee payment.
7. Reinspection Fee. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which
inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are
not made.
8. Accounting. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep an accurate
account of all fees collected; and such collected fees shall be deposited
in the Township Treasury or otherwise disposed of as required by law.
§ 108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:43
§ 109. through § 116. (Reserved)7
§ 117. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 208, 3/28/1995, § 17; as
amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
1. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, fail
to maintain, provide, fail to provide, use or occupy, let to another for use
or occupy or permit another person to use or occupy any structure or
equipment regulated by this Part or the technical codes, or cause same
to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this Part and the technical codes, or to fail to obey a lawful
order of the Code Enforcement Officer, or to remove or deface a placard
or notice posted under the provisions of this Part.
2. Occupancy Violations. Whenever any building or structure or building
service equipment therein regulated by this Part and the technical
codes is being used contrary to the provisions of such codes, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall order such use discontinued by written notice
served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person
shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the Code
Enforcement Officer after receipt of such notice to make the structure,
or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of such code.
3. Occupancy Without Use and Occupancy Certificate. Any new building
hereafter erected for which a building permit was issued shall not be
used or occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of use and
occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Failure to secure a use and occupancy certificate before use or
occupancy of a building is subject to immediate fine and costs as
prescribed in this Part. No further notification as required under § 112
Subsection 1, et seq. of this Part shall be required. The building owner,
by signing the building permit and acknowledgement agrees not to
violate any provision of the Township's codes and/or ordinances and is
so notified. The use and occupancy certificate is a "license" to occupy
and use the building.
4. Failure to Comply. Whenever an order to vacate, secure, repair and/or
demolish a structure which is a public nuisance because its unsafe,
dangerous or unfit for human habitation has not been complied with,
the Code Enforcement Officer may, in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, proceed to cause the structure to be
vacated, closed-up and secured, repaired and/or demolished or take
such other action as is necessary to abate the nuisance. Abatement
under this subsection shall not commence until at least 10 days after
the service of the order, except that the Code Enforcement Officer may
determine that more-immediate action is required because of the
special emergency or dangerous conditions which exist.
7. Editor’s Note: Former §§ 109 through 116 were repealed 8/23/2016 by Ord. 369, as the
Uniform Construction Code and International Property Maintenance Code now control.
§ 109 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 117
1:44
5. Recover of Expenses. The expenses incurred pursuant to Subsection 4
of this section, and other applicable codes and ordinances, shall be paid
by the responsible owner, operator or occupant or by the person who
caused or maintained such a public nuisance. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall file on his records an affidavit stating with fairness and
accuracy the items and date of the expenses incurred. The Board of
Supervisors of North Strabane Township may institute a suit to recover
such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien.
6. Transfer of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the
compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or
until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee
or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the Code
Enforcement Officer a signed and notarized statement for the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation.
7. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part or the technical codes or fail to correct a violation
or institute a remedial action as ordered by the Code Enforcement
Officer, or who shall erect, construct, install, alter or repair a building/
structure or any plumbing, electrical and mechanical equipment or
system in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code
Enforcement Officer or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the Township's codes, upon conviction thereof in an action
brought before a District Justice in the manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation
of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
8. Prosecution. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Solicitor representing the Township from initiating, and he
is hereby ordered to initiate, appropriate actions or proceedings at law
or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the
purpose of ordering that person:
A. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work.
B. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, maintenance,
repair or alteration of such structure.
C. To require the removal of work in violation.
§ 117 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 117
1:45
D. To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof
erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in
compliance with, the provisions of this Part and the technical
codes, or in violation of a plan or specification under which an
approval, permit or certificate was issued.
9. Additional Remedies. In addition to the remedies and procedures
(contained in this Part) available for violations hereof, the Township
shall have the following remedies available: [Added by Ord. 369, 8/
23/2016]
A. Abatement of the Blighted Property Violations. In the event a
property is found to be in violation of a state or Township code by a
Magistrate and the owner has failed to remedy the problem or
appeal the decision, the Township shall have the right to repair,
tear down, abate, or otherwise remove the violations occurring on
the property, with the costs thereof being charged against the
owner. Failure of the owner to pay the costs may result in a lien
being placed against the property.
B. Conservatorship. The Township may initiate court proceedings
against an owner of a blighted property who is unable or unwilling
to abate the problems for the court to appoint a conservator to take
possession of the property and take the necessary actions to bring
it out of violation. Possession can be restored by the property
owner upon reimbursement for all of the accrued costs and fees.
C. Asset Attachment. A property owner found guilty of substantial
violations shall have six months to remedy the violations. Upon
reinspection by the Code Enforcement Officer confirming a failure
to remedy the violations, the Township may file an action in the
Court of Common Pleas against the owner to secure a judgment
against the owner. Upon failure by the owner to satisfy said
judgment, the Township may submit a writ of attachment to collect
the judgment, requesting the court issue a levy of attachment
directing the Sheriff to serve copy of the order on the owner and to
seize property equal in value to the writ.
D. Extradition. A person who lives or has a principal place of
residence outside this commonwealth, who owns real estate
property in this commonwealth against which code violations have
been cited under 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7510 (relating to municipal housing
code avoidance) and the person is charged under 18 Pa.C.S.A.
(relating to crimes and offenses) and who has been been properly
notified of the violations may be extradited to this commonwealth
to face criminal prosecution to the full extent allowed by law and in
the manner authorized by the Criminal Code.
E. Permit Denial.
§ 117 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 117
1:46
(1) A municipality, its agent or a designated board may deny
issuing to an applicant a municipal permit if the applicant owns
real property in the commonwealth for which there exists on
the real property:
(a) A final and unappealable tax, water, sewer or refuse
collection delinquency on account of the actions of the
owner; or
(b) A serious violation of state law or a code and the owner has
taken no substantial steps to correct the violation within
six months following notification of the violation and for
which fines or other penalties or a judgment to abate or
correct were imposed by a Magisterial District Judge or
municipal court, or a judgment at law or in equity was
imposed by a Court of Common Pleas. However, no denial
shall be permitted on the basis of a property for which the
judgment, order or decree is subject to a stay or
supersedeas by an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction or automatically allowed by statute or rule of
court until the stay or supersedeas is lifted by the court or
a higher court or the stay or supersedeas expires as
otherwise provided by law. Where a stay or supersedeas is
in effect, the property owner shall so advise the
municipality seeking to deny a municipal permit.
(2) A municipality or board shall not deny a municipal permit to an
applicant if the municipal permit is necessary to correct a
violation of state law or a code.
(3) The municipal permit denial shall not apply to an applicant's
delinquency on taxes, water, sewer or refuse collection charges
that are under appeal or otherwise contested through a court
or administrative process.
(4) In issuing a denial of a permit based on an applicant's
delinquency in real property taxes or municipal charges or for
failure to abate a serious violation of state law or a code on real
property that the applicant owns in this commonwealth, the
municipality or board shall indicate the street address,
municipal corporation and county in which the property is
located and the court and docket number for each parcel cited
as a basis for the denial. The denial shall also state that the
applicant may request a letter of compliance from the
appropriate state agency, municipality or school district, in a
form specified by such entity, as provided in this section.
(5) All municipal permits denied in accordance with this
subsection may be withheld until an applicant obtains a letter
from the appropriate state agency, municipality or school
district indicating the following:
§ 117 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 117
1:47
(a) The property in question has no final and unappealable
tax, water, sewer or refuse delinquencies;
(b) The property in question is now in state law and code
compliance; or
(c) The owner of the property has presented and the
appropriate state agency or municipality has accepted a
plan to begin remediation of a serious violation of state law
or a code. Acceptance of the plan may be contingent on:
(i) Beginning the remediation plan within no fewer than
30 days following acceptance of the plan or sooner, if
mutually agreeable to both the property owner and
the municipality.
(ii) Completing the remediation plan within no fewer than
90 days following commencement of the plan or
sooner, if mutually agreeable to both the property
owner and the municipality.
(6) In the event that the appropriate state agency, municipality or
school district fails to issue a letter indicating tax, water,
sewer, refuse, state law or code compliance or noncompliance,
as the case may be, within 45 days of the request, the property
in question shall be deemed to be in compliance for the
purpose of this section. The appropriate state agency,
municipality or school district shall specify the form in which
the request for a compliance letter shall be made.
(7) Letters required under this section shall be verified by the
appropriate municipal officials before issuing to the applicant a
municipal permit.
(8) Municipal permits may be denied by a board in accordance
with the requirements of this section to the extent that
approval of the municipal permit is within the jurisdiction of
the board. For purposes of this section, "board" shall mean a
zoning hearing board or other body granted jurisdiction to
render decisions in accordance with the Act of July 31, 1968
(P.L. 805, No. 247), known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,"8 or a similar board in municipalities not
subject to that Act.
(a) In any proceeding before a board other than the governing
body of the municipality, the municipality may appear to
present evidence that the applicant is subject to a denial
by the board in accordance with this section.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 117 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 117
1:48
(b) For purposes of this subsection, a municipal permit may
only be denied to an applicant other than an owner if:
(i) The applicant is acting under the direction or with the
permission of an owner; and
(ii) The owner owns real property satisfying the
conditions of Subsection 9E(8)(a)1). Applicability of
other law — A denial of a permit shall be subject to the
provisions of 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter B
(relating to practice and procedure of local agencies)
and Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating to judicial
review of local agency action), or the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, for denials subject to
the Act.
F. Failure to Comply with a Code Requirement. See 18 P.S. § 6115.
The owner of real property commits the offense of failure to comply
with a code requirement if all of the following apply:
(1) The owner of real property has been convicted of a second or
subsequent serious violation of the same provision of a
municipal code for the same property.
(2) The violation poses a threat to the public's health, safety or
property, and the owner has not taken a substantial step to
correct the violation.
(3) The violation is considered a public nuisance, and the owner
has not made a reasonable attempt to correct the violation.
(4) Grading:
(a) Misdemeanor of the second degree if the offense is a
second conviction of a serious violation of the same
provision of a municipal code relating to the same
property.
(b) Misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense is based on
three or more convictions of serious violation of the same
provision of a municipal code relating to the same
property.
G. Corporations, Companies, Associations, etc. Where, after
reasonable efforts, service of process for a notice or citation for any
code violation for any real property owned by a corporation or
business association, association or trust cannot be accomplished
by handing a copy of the notice or citation to an executive officer,
partner or trustee of the corporation or business association or
trust or to the manager, trustee or clerk in charge of the property,
the delivery of the notice or citation may occur by registered,
§ 117 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 117
1:49
§ 118. (Reserved)9
§ 119. General Provisions. [Ord. 208, 3/28/1995, § 19]
certified or United States first-class mail, accompanied by a
delivery confirmation:
(1) To the registered office of the corporation or business
association or trust.
(2) Where a corporation or business association, association or
trust does not have a registered office, to the mailing address
used for real estate tax collection purposes, if accompanied by
the posting of a conspicuous notice to the property and by
handing a copy of the notice or citation to any adult in
possession of the property and/or the person in charge of the
property at that time.
1. Conflicting Provisions.
A. Whenever conflicting provisions or requirements occur between
this Part, the technical codes and any other codes or laws, the most
restrictive shall govern.
B. Where conflicts occur between the technical codes, those
provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern. In other
conflicts where sanitation, life safety or fire safety are not involved,
the most-restrictive provisions shall govern.
C. Where in any specific case different sections within any of the
technical codes specify different materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement
and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
D. Where conflicts occur between any specific provisions of this Part
and any administrative provisions in any technical code which is
then applicable within North Strabane Township, those provisions
are hereby repealed to the extent of any such conflict.
2. Partial Validity. In the event any part or provision of this Part is held to
be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal
any of the other parts or provisions thereof, which are determined to be
legal; and it shall be presumed that this Part would have been passed
without such illegal or invalid parts or provisions.
9. Editor’s Note: Former § 118 was repealed 8/23/2016 by Ord. 369, as the Uniform
Construction Code and International Property Maintenance Code now control.
§ 117 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 119
1:50
3. Segregation of Invalid Provisions. Any invalid part of this Part shall be
segregated from the remainder of this Part by the court holding such
part invalid, and the remainder shall remain effective.
4. Saving Clause. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding now pending in any court, any rights acquired, liability
incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any
act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character
shall be lost, impaired or affected by this Part.
§ 119 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 119
1:51

Part 2
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 201. Adoption of Code. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
§ 202. Plan Review, Inspections and Enforcement. [Ord. 369, 8/23/
2016]
§ 203. Board of Appeals. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
A Board of Appeals is established by resolution of the governing body of this
municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions
of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set
forth therein. If, at any time, enforcement and administration is undertaken
jointly or by intermunicipal agreement with one or more other
municipalities, said Board of Appeals may be established by joint action of
the participating municipalities or by the individual municipality.
§ 204. Modifications. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
1. North Strabane Township has elected to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
2. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of this
North Strabane Township.
1. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures:
A. Administration and enforcement of the code within this
municipality shall be undertaken as prescribed in Chapter 5, Part 1,
Code Enforcement.
B. The municipality may enter into agreement with other
municipalities and act as the administrator of the code.
1. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, having been
approved and listed by the Department of Labor and Industry, shall
continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to
equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended
from time to time, as follows:
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:53
§ 205. Fees. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this Part and the code shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
§ 206. When Effective. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
This Part shall be effective five days after the date of passage of this Part.
A. North Strabane Township Code: Chapter 7, Part 5, Subpart A,
Suppression Systems, § 502, Findings and Purpose, is incorporated
and states:
"The Board of Supervisors finds that there is a greater likelihood
of serious bodily injury, loss of life and loss of property in multiplefamily
residential buildings having two or more dwelling units
which are not equipped with residential water sprinkler firesuppression
systems. The Board of Supervisors further finds that
it is in the best interests and general welfare of the citizens
of the Township to require all newly constructed multiple-family
residential buildings having two or more dwelling units which are
located within the Township to be equipped with a residential
water sprinkler fire-suppression system. . ."
B. Uniform Construction Code § 403.1, Scope, (b), Exclusions, (3), is
amended to read "[S]tructures having a building area of less than
500 square feet."
C. North Strabane Township Code: Chapter 5, Part 2, Uniform
Construction Code, § 204(3),10 is incorporated and states:
"On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements but
not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper
level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level, provided that the
lower level is less than one full story below the upper level."
2. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this Part and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
3. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
10.Editor's Note: Refers to former Part 2 of this chapter.
§ 204 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 207
1:54
§ 207. Severability. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this Part is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this Part.
§ 207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 207
1:55

Part 3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 301. Adoption and Scope of Code. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
§ 302. Modifications. [Ord. 369, 8/23/2016]
1. Adoption of Code. The North Strabane Township Board of Supervisors
hereby adopts in its entirety, except as hereinafter modified in § 302,
the International Property Maintenance Code ("IPMC") of 2015,
published by the International Code Council, copyright 2015. Copies of
the IPMC are available for review at the North Strabane Township
Municipal Building currently located at 1929 Route 519 South,
Canonsburg, Pennsylvania 15317.
2. Scope of Code. The provisions of the IPMC (as amended by the
Township from time to time) shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises and shall constitute
minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating,
sanitation, protection from the elements, a reasonable level of safety
from fire and other hazards and for a reasonable level of sanitary
maintenance; the responsibility of owners, an owner's authorized
agent, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures
and premises; and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
1. The International Property Maintenance Code of 2015 is hereby
modified as follows:
A. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, Section 101, General, Article
101.1, shall read:
Title. These regulations shall be known as the "International
Property Maintenance Code of North Strabane Township,"
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
B. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, Section 103, Department of
Property Maintenance, Article 103.1, shall read:
General. The department of property maintenance inspection is
hereby created, and the executive official in charge thereof shall
be the Township-appointed Building Code Official of the Township,
hereinafter referred to as the "code official."
C. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, Section 109, Emergency
Measures, Article 109.6, Hearing, is deleted.
D. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, Section 111, Means of
Appeal, is hereby repealed in its entirety, and any appeals section
contained in a future edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code (IPMC) shall be void unless specifically adopted
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:57
by the Township hereinafter. Violations of the Township Code and
International Property Maintenance Code that are not adequately
remedied as determined by the Township Code Official and/or done
so in a timely manner as detailed in the notice of violation shall
result in a citation being filed with the local Magisterial District
Court. Any aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal the
Magistrate's decision to the Court of Common Pleas.
E. Chapter 2, General Definitions, is hereby amended by adding the
following definitions:
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — As defined in 35 P.S. § 1712.1(c), a
blighted property must meet one of the following criteria:
(1) Any premises which, because of physical condition or use, is
regarded as a public nuisance at common law or has been
declared a public nuisance in accordance with the local
housing, building, plumbing, fire and related codes.
(2) Any premises which, because of physical condition, use or
occupancy, is considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts,
basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures.
(3) Any dwelling which, because it is dilapidated, unsanitary,
unsafe, vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities and
equipment required by the housing code of the municipality,
has been designated by the department responsible for
enforcement of the code as unfit for human habitation.
(4) Any structure which is a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous
to the safety of persons or property.
(5) Any structure from which the sewerage has been
disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective so
that the property is unfit for its intended use.
(6) Any vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a
predominantly built-up neighborhood which, by reason of
neglect or lack of maintenance, has become a place for
accumulation of trash and debris or a haven for rodents or
other vermin.
(7) Any unoccupied property which has been tax-delinquent for a
period of two years prior to the effective date of this Part, and
those in the future having a two-year tax delinquency.
(8) Any property which is vacant but not tax-delinquent, which
has not been rehabilitated within one year of the receipt of
notice to rehabilitate from the appropriate code enforcement
agency.
(9) Any abandoned property. A property shall be considered
abandoned if:
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:58
(i) It is a vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground on
which a municipal lien for the cost of demolition of any
structure located on the property remains unpaid for a
period of six months;
(ii) It is a vacant property or vacant or unimproved lot or
parcel of ground on which the total of municipal liens
on the property for tax or any other type of claim of
the municipality is in excess of 150% of the fair market
value of the property as established by the Board of
Revisions of Taxes or other body with legal authority to
determine the taxable value of the property; or
(iii) The property has been declared abandoned by the
owner, including an estate that is in possession of the
property.
CODE REQUIREMENT — A building, housing or property
maintenance code or ordinance of the Township.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled, except an
electric personal assistive mobility device or a vehicle which is
propelled solely by human power.
SERIOUS VIOLATION — A violation of a state law or Township
code or other applicable code that poses an imminent threat to
the health and safety of the dwelling occupant, occupants in
surrounding structures or passersby. Property found to be a public
nuisance or blighted is also considered to be a serious violation.
SUBSTANTIAL STEP — An affirmative action as determined by
a Township official or officer of the court on the part of the
property owner or managing agent to remedy a serious violation of
state law or Township code, including, but not limited to, physical
improvements or repairs to the property.
THE ACT — Act 90 of 2010, the Neighborhood Blight, Reclamation
and Revitalization Act.11
F. Chapter 3, General Requirements, Section 302, Exterior Property
Areas, the following article is added:
302.2.1 Directing of Water. Rain leaders, foundation drains, sump
pump discharge or other forms of drainage or water runoff shall
not be directed onto neighboring properties or in a manner as to
cause a nuisance or hazard.
G. Chapter 3, General Requirements, Section 302, Exterior Property
Areas, Article 302.4, is amended to read:
11.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq.
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:59
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from noxious weeds and grass in excess of eight
inches and shall be enforced from April 15 until November 15 of
each year.
i) Land(s) subject to this regulation:
- Lots in a platted subdivision with a structure.
- Vacant lots in platted subdivisions in which buildings have
been erected on 60% or more of the lots.
- Parcels of land along improved streets in common usage
(properties with 125 feet or more of frontage having
developed lots with homes on each side) shall be maintained
to a depth of 150 feet or the depth of ownership, whichever is
greater.
ii) Land(s) not subject to this regulation (as long as the health,
safety and general welfare of the public is not being negatively
impacted):
- Land used for agricultural purposes (active farming
operations).
- The areas of lots currently used in an active garden for
vegetables, fruit, flowers, etc. (Only the area involved in active
gardening shall be exempt.)
- Naturally wooded areas, wetlands, meadows and fields.
- Undeveloped open space.
- Conservation easements.
H. Chapter 3, Section 302, Exterior Property Areas, Article 302.8,
shall read:
302.8 Motor Vehicles. Except as provided for by use or right,
no more than one unregistered or uninspected vehicle shall be
parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at
any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles, with
automotive spray guns/devices, is prohibited unless conducted
inside an approved spray booth.
Exceptions:
i) A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work, provided that such work is performed
inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed to limit
exposure to the adjoining property owner(s).
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:60
ii) This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the
registered owner of a motor vehicle or part thereof from
performing minor repair of said vehicle in the driveway or
other area of a residence, provided that the vehicle is
registered to someone living in the residence and done so in
accordance with all other Township, state or federal laws.
I. Chapter 3, Section 302, Exterior Property Areas, the following
article is added:
§302.10. Deposits on public streets, sidewalks and other public
rights-of-way.
No property owner shall, through action or inaction, cause or
allow water, mud, snow, soil, stone, sand, yard debris, refuse, litter
or other substances to accumulate on streets, alleys, or sidewalks.
Inaction shall include, but is not limited to, allowing erosion of
materials from properties due to water, wind, subsidence, or other.
J. Chapter 3, § 304.2, "Protective Treatment," is hereby eliminated in
its entirety.
K. Chapter 3, § 304.13, "Window, Skylight and Door Frames," is
hereby eliminated in its entirety.
L. Chapter 3, § 304.13.1, "Glazing," is hereby eliminated in its
entirety.
M. Chapter 3, § 304.13.2, "Openable Windows," is hereby eliminated
in its entirety.
N. Chapter 3, § 304.14, "Insect Screens," is hereby eliminated in its
entirety.
O. Chapter 3, § 304.15, "Doors," is hereby eliminated in its entirety.
P. Chapter 3, § 304.16, "Basement Hatchways," is hereby eliminated
in its entirety.
Q. Chapter 3, § 304.18.1, "Doors," is hereby eliminated in its entirety.
R. Chapter 3, § 304.18.2, "Windows," is hereby eliminated in its
entirety.
S. Chapter 3, § 304.18.3, "Basement Hatchways," is hereby
eliminated in its entirety.
T. Chapter 3, Section 305, Interior Structure, is hereby eliminated in
its entirety and replaced with the following language:
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:61
§305.1. Interior General.
Interior of structures must be maintained in a manner that does
not create a condition on the property that is reasonably likely
to negatively impact the peace, health, safety and welfare of any
residents and/or the public at large.
U. Chapter 3, Section 308.3.1, "Garbage Facilities," is hereby
eliminated in its entirety.
V. Chapter 5, Part 3, Section 304, of the Township Code, "Future
Editions," is hereby repealed and replaced with the following:
§304. Future Editions.
No future editions of and amendments to the IPMC promulgated
by the International Code Council shall be made a part of the
North Strabane Township Code of Ordinances until adopted
pursuant to official action by the North Strabane Township Board
of Supervisors.
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:62
Chapter 6
CONDUCT
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:63

Part 1
POSSESSION/CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or phrases shall
be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 102. Consumption. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare, or other public
property within the Township of North Strabane, nor shall any person
consume any alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or
thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway or other private property
open to public view without the express or implied permission of the owner,
his agent or other party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 103. Possession. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage whether
wrapped or unwrapped which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property within the Township, nor shall any person possess
any container or alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or
thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway, or other private property
open to public view without the express or implied permission of the owner,
his agent, or other person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 104. Exceptions. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Provided however, that the provisions of §§ 102 and 103 above shall not
apply to interior portions of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor
to the consumption or possession by persons in the areas herein designated
of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content
as set forth in § 101 hereof; and provided further that the provisions of
said §§ 102 and 103 above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and to persons then and there patrons
of said licensee.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:65
§ 105. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 105 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 105
1:66
Part 2
CURFEW
§ 201. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MINOR — Person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, as herein defined, or a guardian,
or any adult person responsible for the care and custody of a minor. When
used in this Part, "parent" shall mean one or both parents.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot in the Township of North Strabane.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets, for emergencies or ordinary purposes such as mere
passage of going home.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include
the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 202. Purposes. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
This is a Curfew Ordinance prescribing, in accordance with prevailing
community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at
night, for the protection of younger children in the Township from each
other and from other persons on the streets during nighttime hours, for
the enforcement of parental control and responsibility for their children,
for the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by minors and for
the reduction of the incident of juvenile criminal activity, all for the good of
minors, for the furtherance of family responsibility, and for the public good,
safety and welfare.
§ 203. Curfew; Exceptions. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977; as revised by Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or upon any public
highway, park or other public place within the Township of North Strabane,
or in any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in close proximity to any such
public place within the Township, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. in winter
(11:00 p.m. in summer) and sunrise on the following day. Exceptions to the
above are the following:
1. Minor accompanied by parent, guardian, or other person having legal
care or custody of such minor.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:67
§ 204. Parents not to Permit Violation. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian, or the person having
the legal care or custody of a minor to allow or permit such minor to violate
any of the provisions of this Part without legal justification therefor.
§ 205. Procedure Upon Violation. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977; as revised by
Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any minor found upon the streets, alleys, parks or public places within the
Township in violation of § 202 shall be taken into custody by the Township
police or legally deputized individual, be delivered to his parent(s),
guardian, or person having the legal custody of said minor, and be given a
copy of this Part. A report shall be filed and kept in a book for that specific
purpose. If said parent, guardian or person having the legal custody of said
minor shall again allow him to be on the streets, alleys, parks or public
places in violation of § 202, said parent, guardian, or person having the
legal custody of said minor so offending shall, upon the second offense, be
called along with offender and be so advised once again as to the penalty
provisions contained in this Part. Upon the third violation, said parent,
guardian or person will be remanded to the district justice for disposition.
§ 206. Penalties. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985; as amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
2. Minor possessing a written statement dated that day and signed by
parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care or custody of
such minor, which statement specifies the time, place, purpose and
necessity of the minor being in a public place contrary to this Part.
3. Minor lawfully employed making it necessary to be on or in highways,
streets, parks, etc., as stated above and possessing a current letter
certifying the same and signed by employer, parent or guardian.
4. Minor on an emergency errand.
5. Minor traveling to and from church, school or municipal activity with
parental permission statement as in subsection 2 above.
§ 203 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 207
1:68
§ 207. Procedure in Case of Repeated Violations or Other Factors
Interfering with Enforcement. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977; as revised by
Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any minor who shall violate this Part more than three times may, at the
discretion of the proper Township officials, be reported to a society or
organization the purpose of which is to take charge of incorrigibles and
delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken in the proper court for
the permanent welfare of such minor and a like procedure may be taken in
cases where the arrest of the parent is not effective, or where for any other
reason the provisions of § 202 of this Part cannot be made effective by the
imposition of fines and penalties.
§ 208. Police Discretion in Age Determination. [Ord. 96, 9/26/1977;
as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The police officers of the Township of North Strabane in taking minors into
custody shall use their discretion in determining age and in doubtful cases
may require positive proof of age. Until such proof is furnished, the officer's
judgment shall prevail.
§ 207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 208
1:69

Part 3
NOISE NUISANCES
§ 301. Unnecessary Noise Prohibited. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to make or cause or suffer or permit to be made
or cause, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or it
or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in the Township of North
Strabane, any unnecessary noises or sounds by means of the human voice
or by any other means or methods which are physically annoying to the
comfort of any person or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or
unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort, or
which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants
of said Township or any member thereof.
§ 302. Phonographs, Radios and Other Sound Producing Devices.
[Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
No person, persons, firm or corporation shall play, use or operate or
knowingly permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, sound amplifier, loudspeaker, or other
machine, or device for the reproduction of sound upon property (real or
personal) or premises owned, occupied or used by him, them or it, which
is not measured and regulated by decibels, so that the sound coming from
such machine can be audibly heard at a distance greater than 100 feet
from the property or premises wherein such machine or device is located.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the playing of
a band or orchestra in any concert hall, auditorium, or public park, nor
the utilization of such sound producing devices by charitable or nonprofit
groups for the general purpose of public announcements or public events.
§ 303. Permit Required For Sound Trucks and Loudspeakers. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
1. No person shall operate a sound truck or loudspeaker on the streets or
public places of the Township of North Strabane without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the Township Manager. Such permit shall not be
transferrable from person to person or from sound truck to sound truck
and may not be extended as to the date it shall be used, nor shall any
permit for the operation of such sound truck be issued for use earlier
than 8:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. of the prevailing local time. Every
application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee as
determined by the Board of Supervisors of the Township pursuant to
resolution and no such permit shall be issued until the prescribed fee
shall have been paid.
2. The application for such permit shall be filed in duplicate with the
Township Manager, and the permit issued shall be limited in
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:71
§ 304. Horns. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sound any horn or
warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except
when required by law or to give timely warning of impending danger to
persons driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street. No person
shall sound any horn or warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus
or other vehicle which shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or
for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
§ 305. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
accordance with the information contained in such application, which
shall set forth the following:
A. Name and home address of the applicant.
B. Business address of applicant.
C. Name and address of owner of sound truck.
D. Make and license number of sound truck.
E. Name and address of person operating sound truck.
F. Name and address of person operating sound equipment.
G. The purpose for which sound truck will be used.
H. The proposed hours of operation of sound truck.
I. A certificate from an engineer that such amplifying machine is so
equipped and regulated by decibels that the sound coming from
such machine cannot be audibly heard at a distance greater than
100 feet from the sound truck or amplifying machine.
3. After the issuance of the said permit, the Township Manager shall
return one certified copy of the application to the permittee, together
with the permit, which must be in the possession of the operator of the
sound truck during such time as the sound-amplifying equipment is in
operation. Such certified application and permit shall, upon request, be
promptly exhibited to any police officer of the Township.
4. No permit, so issued, may be used which attracts the attention of
motorists or pedestrians, causing the blocking of streets and thereby
creating a traffic congestion and hazard.
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 305
1:72
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:73

Part 4
UNLAWFUL BEHAVIOR
§ 401. Prohibited Behavior. [Ord. 204, 9/22/1994, § 1]
No person shall, within the boundaries of North Strabane Township, engage
in tumultuous conduct, loitering, begging or unlawful occupancy of
property.
§ 402. Definitions. [Ord. 204, 9/26/1994, § 2]
TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT — Conduct which disturbs, tends to disturb or
aids in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or
obstreperous conduct and any person knowingly permitting such conduct
upon any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control.
LOITERING — Any conduct or activity including, but not limited to, sitting,
standing, walking or strolling in, about or upon any street, alley or other
public way or public place, or at any other public gathering or assembly or
around any store, shop, restaurant, business or commercial establishment,
or any private property or place such that such conduct or actions, after
warning to cease such conduct or actions, hinders or obstructs
unreasonably the free passage of patrons, pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
UNLAWFUL OCCUPANCY — Any person occupying, lodging or sleeping
in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other building
or structure, or in any automobile, truck or other vehicle, without owning
the same or without permission of the owner or person entitled to the
possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during the hours of
darkness.
BEGGING — Any person wandering about and begging or requesting for
monies or other consideration by going about from door to door to private
homes or commercial or business establishments or places in itself in or
upon any public way or public place requesting the same.
§ 403. Penalties. [Ord. 205, 9/27/1994, § 3; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:75
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 403
1:76
Part 1
OPEN BURNING
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 33, 10/28/1959; as amended by Ord. 147,
11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 169, 10/10/1989, § 1; and by Ord.
224, 5/28/1996, § 1]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR — A mechanical device which forcefully
projects a curtain of air across a pit in which open burning is being
conducted so that combustion efficiency is increased and smoke and other
particulate matter are contained.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township.
CLEARING AND GRUBBING WASTE — Trees, shrubs and other native
vegetation which are cleared from land during or prior to the process of
construction. The term does not include demolition wastes and dirt-laden
roots.
FURNACE — Any enclosed device specifically designed for burning any
material for the production of heat.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR — Any device specifically designed for the destruction by
burning (NFC Vol. 7, Sec. 82, Chap. 2) of refuse, sewage sludge, or any
other combustible material.
NONPUTRESCIBLE MATERIAL — Any material of an organic matter which
can decompose.
OPEN FIRE — A fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a
receptacle other than a furnace or incinerator.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
department, bureau, agency or other legal entity.
RECEPTACLE — A container in which all materials to be burned are placed.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — A fire which has been preapproved by
representatives of North Strabane Township as set forth in this Part for
purposes of limited outdoor recreational use such as a cookout and scouting
activities.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, yard trimmings,
furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:77
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole
or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including but
not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials, provided that "trade waste" shall
not include any coal refuse associated with the mining or preparation of
coal.
§ 102. Enforcement. [Ord. 33, 10/28/1959; as amended by Ord. 147,
11/26/1985; by Ord. 169, 10/10/1989, § 2; and by Ord. 224, 5/28/
1996, § 2]
The North Strabane Township Manager, Code Enforcement Officer or
designated Township Fire Official shall have the power and duty to enforce
the provisions of this Part.
§ 103. Regulations. [Ord. 33, 10/28/1959; as amended by Ord. 147,
11/26/1985; by Ord. 169, 10/10/1989, §§ 3, 4, 5; by Ord. 224, 5/28/
1996, § 3; and by Ord. 307, 4/18/2006]
1. All open burning in North Strabane Township shall comply with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Code, Department of
Environmental Protection, Title 25, Open Burning Operations; where
there are any conflicts with this Part, the strictest regulations of either
Title 25 or this Part shall apply in order to best serve the interests of
citizens of North Strabane Township regarding health, safety and
protection from the annoyance of open burning. In addition, all open
burning shall comply with the following:
A. Requests for open burning.
(1) Requests for open burning for commercial/industrial clearing
and grubbing shall be submitted, in writing, to the Board of
Supervisors at least five days prior to a regular nonlegislative
meeting so that the Supervisors can act on the request at their
legislative meeting. The written request shall contain
information regarding the purpose of the proposed burning,
the type and quantity of the material, the location of the
burning and the date(s) and time of burning. All commercial/
industrial burning for the purpose of clearing shall be
performed with the use of an air curtain destructor if the
request is approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) If the air curtain destructor is not used properly and the
Township responds to complaints confirming the improper use
of the air curtain destructor, the approval will be revoked
immediately by the Township Manager or the Township Code
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 103
1:78
Enforcement Officer. If the approval of an air curtain
destructor is either revoked or denied, the alternate methods
of clearing shall be to grind/shred, haul the material out, or
pre-log the area to be cleared. In this regard, the Manager or
the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to coordinate the
alternate methods of clearing.
B. No person shall ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of
refuse, destruction of any structure (as defined by North Strabane
Township Ordinances) or in the conduct of a salvage operation, or
the destruction of trade waste in any public or private place outside
any building.
C. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the maintenance of
any open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the conduct of a
salvage operation or the destruction of trade waste on any property
under his control outside of any building.
2. Exceptions. Open fires may be set, provided:
A. Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of the
Code Enforcement Officer, Manager or designated fire official if the
fire is necessary for:
(1) The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by
other means.
(2) The protection of public health.
B. Open fires may be set, provided:
(1) All fires must be confined to a burning receptacle, furnace or
incinerator.
(2) Branches and other nonputrescible vegetable matter only are
burned and that the fire is constantly attended by a competent
adult person 18 years or older, until such fire is completely
extinguished.
(3) No hazardous or other objectionable condition will be created
by such burning.
(4) No such burning is allowed on any street or sidewalk within the
Township.
(5) All such burning shall be permitted only during the hours of
7:00 a.m. until 7:30 p.m., at which time said burning shall be
completely extinguished.
(6) Such burning is not conducted on Sundays or holidays (except
for recreational fires).
3. Exceptions. Recreational fires may be allowed upon a verbal or written
request submitted to the Township at least 24 hours in advance of the
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:79
§ 104. Incinerators. [Added by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
In all nonagricultural areas of the Township, open burning may be
conducted only in incinerators.
§ 105. Transportation. [Added by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
No materials may be transported from one location to another into or within
the Township to be burned.
§ 106. Prohibition of Open Burning. [Ord. 33, 10/28/1959; as
amended by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; by Ord. 169, 10/10/1989, § 6; and
by Ord. 224, 5/28/1996, §§ 4, 6]
§ 107. Penalties. [Ord. 33, 10/28/1959; as amended by Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985; by Ord. 169, 10/10/1989, § 7; by Ord. 224, 5/28/1996, § 5;
and by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $600 nor more than $1,000, plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
scheduled time of the anticipated start time of the recreational fire. Any
such approval shall be at the sole discretion of the Township Manager,
Code Enforcement Officer or designated Township fire official.
1. Grant of power. The Board of Supervisors is authorized to prohibit open
fires or fires in incinerators when, in the sole discretion of the Board,
the public health, safety and/or welfare will be aided by such
prohibition. In addition, the Township Manager, after consulting with
the Board of Supervisors, shall have the power to prohibit open burning
in emergency situations until the Board of Supervisors can formally act
on the prohibitions.
2. Procedure.
A. Upon motion at any regular or special meeting of the Board, the
Board may prohibit open fires or fires in incinerators either for a
period of time specified in the motion or until further motion of the
Board either modifying or revoking the prohibition.
B. Any person violating the prohibition shall be first informed by the
Township Manager, Code Enforcement Officer or designated
Township fire official or his designee of the prohibition and directed
to completely extinguish the illegal burning forthwith. Only upon
failure to comply with said directive and/or upon the ignition of
another fire shall the penalties of this Part become applicable to
said person or failure to comply with the prohibition.
§ 103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 107
1:80
90 days. Whenever any person violating any of the provisions of this Part
is notified of such violation, in writing, by the Township Manager or Code
Enforcement Officer, each day that a violation of this Part continues or
each section of this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 108. Effective Date. [Ord. 33, 10/28/1959; as amended by Ord.
147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 169, 10/10/1989, § 8]
This Part shall become effective five days after its enactment and adoption.
§ 107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 108
1:81

Part 2
EMERGENCY ALARMS
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 173, 11/28/1989, § 1; as amended by Ord.
277, 3/27/2001, § 1]
ALARM — A communication to any police, fire department, control center
or "911" system indicating a situation warranting immediate action by
the Fire or Police Department has occurred or is occurring, whether
communicated verbally or automatically through the use of an alarm device.
ALARM DEVICE — A mechanical device designed to automatically transmit
an emergency alarm by wire, telephone, radio, or other means to the control
center.
CONTROL CENTER — The "911" or centralized communication center
or centers, including "911" system, for the geographical area of and
surrounding North Strabane Township for purposes of transmitting an
emergency communication or alarm device.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the Fire or Police Department
responds, resulting from a communication to the control center or from
the activation of an alarm device when no fire, crime or other emergency
warranting immediate action or response by either the Fire or Police
Department has occurred.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Department of North Strabane Township
or any mutual aid fire department responding within North Strabane
Township.
INDIRECT ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device that transmits an alarm to a
private agency that, in turn, notifies the control center of the alarm.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — A false alarm that results from the
intentional activation of an alarm device by an individual under
circumstances where said person has no reasonable basis to believe that a
fire, crime or other emergency warranting immediate action by the Fire or
Police Department has occurred or is occurring.
PERSON — Any individual, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, trust, estate, institution, agency, authority or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of North Strabane
Township or any assisting police department responding within North
Strabane Township.
§ 202. Indirect Alarm Application. [Ord. 173, 11/28/1989, § 2]
1. It shall be unlawful for any real property owner, lessee of real property
or a person otherwise occupying a premises within North Strabane
Township to install an indirect alarm system on his or her premises
without first completing an indirect alarm system application at the
Township Building. The application form shall be prepared and
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:83
§ 203. False Alarms. [Ord. 173, 11/28/1989, § 3; as amended by Ord.
240, 10/28/1997; and by Ord. 277, 3/27/2001, § 2]
§ 204. Findings. [Ord. 173, 11/28/1989, § 4]
This Part is enacted and adopted based on findings by the Board of
Supervisors that the Police Department and the North Strabane Volunteer
Fire Department are called to sites having alarm devices when, in fact, the
alarm is false or accidental, this unnecessarily involving the expenditure of
manpower and Township funds.
furnished by the Township. Upon completion by the applicant, the
application will be forwarded to the IGCO Control Center and
maintained as part of their records.
1. False alarm fees. Any persons who cause or allow to occur an accidental
or intentional false alarm for any reason shall pay to North Strabane
Township, in addition to any fees or costs that may be assessed by
another governmental entity, for each and every false alarm to which
the Police and/or Fire Department responds in each calendar year, a fee
or fees established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The Board
of Supervisors may, by resolution, change from time to time the fees
authorized by this section. If it is determined by the Fire Chief or Chief
of Police that such false alarm was set off by an unavoidable cause, the
fee shall not be imposed.
2. Fines and penalties.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
District Justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Whenever any person
violating any of the provisions of this Part is notified of such
violation, in writing, by the Township Manager, each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. In addition to and not in lieu of the foregoing, the Township may
seek equitable and legal relief to compel compliance with this Part.
§ 202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 204
1:84
Part 3
FIRE LANES
§ 301. Definitions. [Ord. 143, 4/9/1985, § 1]
§ 302. Prohibition. [Ord. 143, 4/9/1985, § 2]
No person at any time shall place an impediment on or park or leave
standing any vehicle (whether the driver remains in the vehicle or not) or
otherwise obstruct any fire lane established pursuant to this Part.
§ 303. Official Signs. [Ord. 143, 4/9/1985, § 3; as amended by Ord.
170, 10/10/1989, § 1]
Official signs shall be placed along the said fire lane, which signs shall read:
"FIRE LANE — PARKING OR STOPPING OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED"
(hereinafter referred to as "designation"). Said designations shall be placed
at intervals no greater than 50 feet. In lieu of signs as defined herein, the
aforesaid designation may be painted on the curb or roadway. The occupant
of the property or, in the case of unoccupied property, the owner of the
unoccupied property is hereby required to and is responsible for the proper
posting of the aforesaid designations.
§ 304. Designation of Fire Lanes. [Ord. 143, 4/9/1985, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 170, 10/10/1989, § 2]
The North Strabane Township Volunteer Fire Department or its designated
official shall have the power to designate fire lanes anywhere within the
Township, on public or private property, where it deems that vehicles or
impediments may impede the free movement of firefighting and other
emergency equipment.
1. The following definitions are established and apply to this Part 3:
FIRE LANE — That portion of any land posted with an official sign
or designated as defined in § 303 of this Part. A fire lane shall be 20
feet in width, measured from the place at which the official sign or
designation is placed; and where any such sign or designation is placed
at, near or alongside a highway, road, street, accessway, alley or the
like (hereinafter referred to as "roadway"), the fire lane shall extend 20
feet therefrom onto and into the roadway.
IMPEDIMENT — Any object that may obstruct firefighting equipment.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or personal
property is or may be transported or drawn upon land, except devices
used exclusively upon rails or tracks, including, but without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and
bicycles.
2. As used herein, the singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the
singular.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:85
§ 305. Penalties. [Ord. 143, 4/9/1985, § 5; as amended by Ord. 147,
11/26/1985; by Ord. 170, 10/10/1989, § 3; and by Ord. 240, 10/28/
1997]
§ 306. Enforcement. [Ord. 143, 4/9/1985, § 6]
This Part 3 shall be enforced by any member of the Township Police
Department or the Fire Officers of the North Strabane Township Volunteer
Fire Department or the Township Manager or any other person designated
by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors at any public meeting
(hereinafter referred to as "enforcement officers").
§ 307. Right of Entry and Inspection. [Ord. 143, 4/9/1985, § 7; as
amended by Ord. 170, 10/10/1989, § 4]
Any enforcement officer may, upon presenting proper credentials, at all
reasonable hours, enter any private property for the purpose of making
any inspection or investigation which he deems necessary to be made
to determine conformity to the provisions of this Part or to instruct the
occupant of the property or, if the property is unoccupied, the owner of
the unoccupied property to place, erect or paint designations referred
to in § 303 or to investigate conditions liable to interfere with the free
movement of firefighting and other emergency equipment or endanger
life or property (hereinafter generally referred to as "entry"), provided
permission is obtained from the occupant or, in the case of unoccupied
property, from the owner, lessee or his agent. If such permission is refused
or is otherwise unobtainable, a search warrant shall be obtained prior to
entry or inspections, except in the case of an existing emergency deemed
immediately necessary to protect life or property.
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District
Justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days. Whenever any person violating any of the provisions
of this Part is notified of such violation, in writing, by the Township
Manager, each day that a violation of this Part continues or each section
of this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
2. In addition to and not in lieu of the foregoing, the Township may seek
equitable and legal relief to compel compliance with this Part.
§ 305 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 307
1:86
Part 4
(RESERVED)12
12.Editor's Note: Former Part 4, Residential Smoke Detectors, Adopted By Ord. 171, 10/10/
1989, As Amended, Was Superseded By Ord. 300. See Now Ch. 5, Part 2, Uniform
Construction Code.
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 307
1:87

Part 5
RESIDENTIAL WATER SPRINKLER FIRE-SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS
ARTICLE A.
Suppression Systems.
§ 501. Short Title. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989]
This Part may be known and cited as the "Residential Water Sprinkler
Ordinance."
§ 502. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989; as amended by
Ord. 313, 6/27/2006; and by Ord. 316, 1/23/2007]
The Board of Supervisors finds that there is a greater likelihood of serious
bodily injury, loss of life and loss of property in multiple-family residential
buildings having two or more dwelling units which are not equipped with
residential water sprinkler fire-suppression systems. The Board of
Supervisors further finds that it is in the best interests and general welfare
of the citizens of the Township to require all newly constructed multiplefamily
residential buildings having two or more dwelling units which are
located within the Township to be equipped with a residential water
sprinkler fire-suppression system. The Board of Supervisors also finds that
the procedures, fees and penalties provided herein are necessary to achieve
the purposes of this Part.
§ 503. Definitions. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989; as amended by Ord. 241,
1/27/1998, § 1; by Ord. 313, 6/27/2006; and by Ord. 316, 1/23/2007]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of the terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A written document from the Township
stating that a newly constructed multiple-family residential building is in
compliance with the requirements of this Part regarding the installation of
a residential water sprinkler fire-suppression system.
CODE — The North Strabane Township Code of Ordinances, as the same
may be from time to time amended.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — All buildings and
structures, or parts thereof, in which two or more families or households
live or in which sleeping accommodations are provided for individuals,
with or without dining facilities. For purposes of this Part, multiple-family
residential buildings shall include: all hotels, motels, boardinghouses and
similar buildings arranged for shelter and sleeping accommodations; all
multiple-family dwellings having two or more dwelling units, including but
not limited to all apartment buildings, condominiums, townhouses,
dormitories, boardinghouses, carriage houses (duplex), and similar
buildings arranged for shelter and sleeping accommodations in which the
occupants are primarily not transient in nature.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 503
1:89
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A certificate of use and occupancy issued by the
Township pursuant to Section 119.1 of Article 1 of the BOCA Basic Building
Code, 1984 Edition, as adopted by the Township as the Township Building
Code under Part 1 of Chapter 5 of the Township Code, or the permit
issued by the Township pursuant to § 16.2 et seq. of the Township's Zoning
Ordinance.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, trust, estate, institution, agency, authority or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PRE-ENGINEERED SYSTEM — A packaged system of components designed
to be installed according to pretested limitations as listed by a nationally
recognized testing laboratory.
SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An integrated system of piping connected to a
water supply, including a control valve and a device for actuating an alarm
when the system operates, with listed sprinklers which will be automatically
activated to discharge water over a fire area.
TOWNSHIP — North Strabane Township.
WET SYSTEM — A system employing automatic sprinklers attached to a
piping system containing water and connected to a water supply which is
automatically actuated by fire to discharge water over a fire area.
§ 504. Occupancy of Newly Constructed Multiple-Family Residential
Buildings Without Certificate of Compliance Prohibited. [Ord. 172,
10/10/1989]
After the effective date of this Part, it shall be unlawful for any person to
offer for occupancy to members of the public and/or to occupy any newly
constructed multiple-family residential building without first obtaining a
certificate of compliance from the Township.
§ 505. Water Sprinkler Installation Requirements. [Ord. 172, 10/10/
1989; as amended by Ord. 241, 1/27/1998, § 2; by Ord. 313, 6/27/
2006; and by Ord. 316, 1/23/2007]
After the effective date of this Part, all newly constructed multiple-family
residential buildings shall be equipped with a functional sprinkler system
limited to a pre-engineered system which meets the standard Chapter 13
requirements (13A, 13D, 74) of the National Fire Protection Association
(hereinafter referred to as "NFPA") for a wet system style and designation.
It is recommended that the sprinkler system be installed during the course
of building construction by either the owner, developer and/or contractor;
provided, however, that in no event will a certificate of compliance or
occupancy permit be issued by the Township until the required sprinkler
system is installed and is functional. In addition, an annual sprinkler
inspection will be required pursuant to NFPA regulations. This inspection
will be performed by the North Strabane Township Volunteer Fire
Department or the North Strabane Township Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 503 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 506
1:90
§ 506. Certificate of Compliance Application. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989;
as amended by Ord. 313, 6/27/2006; and by Ord. 316, 1/23/2007]
Any person offering for occupancy any newly constructed multiple-family
residential building within the Township (herein referred to as "applicant")
shall make application on a form furnished by the Township at least 21 days
before the anticipated date of occupancy. The applicant shall then have a
qualified individual, either a certified plumber or a certified water sprinkler
fire-suppression system contractor, approved by the Township (hereinafter
referred to as "inspector"), inspect the sprinkler system in the multiplefamily
residential building to be occupied. Such inspector shall complete
the appropriate portions on the form and certify that the sprinkler system
has been inspected and is properly connected to a source of water supply.
The inspector's certification will be delivered to the Township Manager
or his designee (hereinafter referred to as "Township official"), who shall
then inspect the sprinkler system in the multiple-family residential building
to be occupied to determine whether the sprinkler system satisfies the
requirements of the NFPA. The Township official shall complete the
appropriate portions on the form and certify that the sprinkler system has
been inspected and is in compliance with the NFPA requirements. In the
event that the sprinkler system is properly certified by both the inspector
and the Township official, the Township Manager or his designate shall
issue a certificate of compliance upon payment of such fees as may be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. If either inspection
discloses the nonexistence, misplacement, malfunctioning or failure to
comply with the NFPA requirements for the sprinkler system, no certificate
of compliance will be issued until a properly placed and functioning
sprinkler system is installed and certification of such installation by the
inspector and Township official is received.
§ 507. Regulations. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989]
The Township Manager is hereby empowered to undertake the duties
imposed by this Part, including, but not limited to, establishing the form of
applications and inspector and Township official certifications.
§ 508. Adjustment of Fees. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989]
The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, change from time to time the
fees authorized in this Part.
§ 509. Conflict with General Police Powers. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989]
Nothing in this Part shall limit in any fashion whatsoever the Township's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the commonwealth. Nothing
in this Part shall be a defense to any citation issued by any municipal
corporation of the commonwealth pursuant to any other law or ordinance.
§ 510. Penalties and Enforcement. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989; as
amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997; and by Ord. 241, 1/27/1998, § 3]
§ 506 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 510
1:91
§ 511. Effective Date. [Ord. 172, 10/10/1989]
This Part shall become effective 60 days after its enactment and adoption.
1. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Part may be
charged with such violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not less than $50 and not more than $1,000 for
each violation or, alternatively, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
the maximum permitted under Pennsylvania law, as the same may be
from time to time amended and in effect as of the date of conviction. In
default of payment of imposed fines or penalties, the offender may be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days.
2. In addition to and not in lieu of the foregoing, the Township may seek
equitable and legal relief to compel compliance with this Part.
§ 510 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 511
1:92
ARTICLE B.
Inspection of Sprinkler Systems.
§ 521. Inspection Upon Certain Occurrences. [Ord. 247, 6/4/1998,
§ 1; as amended by Ord. 313, 6/27/2006]
All sprinkler systems required to be installed in certain residential
structures situate in North Strabane Township shall be inspected upon the
following occurrences:
§ 522. Registration of Sprinkler Systems. [Ord. 247, 6/4/1998, § 2]
It shall be the obligation of the owner of all property situate in North
Strabane Township in which is located a fire-suppression or sprinkler
system to register with the Township the existence of the same and to
provide notice to the Township of a change in occupancy, leasehold or
otherwise, or change in ownership.
§ 523. Forms. [Ord. 247, 6/4/1998, § 3]
North Strabane Township shall provide forms for the purposes set forth
in this Part 5B, and the Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, by
resolution, promulgate the rules, regulations and the adoption of said forms
for purposes of this Part 5B.
§ 524. Required Inspection. [Ord. 247, 6/4/1998, § 4]
No owner or occupant of any real property located in North Strabane
Township, leasehold or otherwise, shall obtain an occupancy permit, zoning
permit or municipal lien letter without first obtaining a required inspection
as set forth herein and thereby paying all applicable fees associated with
the same.
§ 525. Notice to Take Corrective Measures. [Ord. 247, 6/4/1998, § 5]
Should any sprinkler or fire-suppression system, having been inspected as
set forth herein, be deemed inoperative or defective, the Township shall
A. Upon any change in interest from and after the effective date of this
Part 5B, leasehold or ownership, the initial inspection being at no cost
to the owner of the premises.
B. Every two years, for which there shall be a fee of $10 to cover
administrative costs and expenses for said inspection. Furthermore, the
Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, by resolution, adjust the
aforesaid inspection fee.
C. The Chief of Police of the North Strabane Township Volunteer Fire
Department is the designated official by the North Strabane Township
Board of Supervisors to conduct the inspections required by this Part
5B. In his absence, the Chief shall designate a qualified individual to
conduct said inspections.
§ 521 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 525
1:93
issue a notice to take corrective measures. All corrective measures shall
be applied to any occupancy or use of the premises. The Fire Chief and
the Township Manager shall make the determination as to any corrective
measures which are necessary. The same shall be provided, in writing, to
the owner of the premises within five days of the date of inspection.
§ 526. Penalties. [Ord. 247, 6/4/1998, § 6]
Any person, firm, corporation, business entity, or any other owner or
occupant of whatever nature, of real property who violates any provision of
this Part 5B shall be fined a sum of $100 per day, each day constituting a
separate offense under this Part 5B. Without limiting the foregoing, North
Strabane Township shall have all powers vested in it by the Second Class
Township Code or any other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
in law or in equity to seek any and all relief, including but not limited to
injunctive relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Washington County, in
order to prevent occupancy of any building or structure when the owners of
occupants of which have not complied with this Part 5B.
§ 525 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 526
1:94
Chapter 8
FLOOD PLAINS
§ 526 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 526
1:95

Part 1
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
§ 101. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. 365, 9/22/201513]
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,14 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North
Strabane does hereby order as follows.
13.Editor's Note: This chapter superseded former Ch. 8, Floodplains, adopted 9/24/1985 by
Ord. 144, as amended.
14.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:97

Part 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 201. Intent. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
§ 202. Applicability. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
§ 203. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 204. Severability. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 205. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
1. The intent of this chapter is to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Township of North Strabane unless a
permit has been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
2. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
1. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 205
1:99
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur, or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
2. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
North Strabane or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 205 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 205
1:100
Part 3
ADMINISTRATION
§ 301. Designation of floodplain administrator. [Ord. 365, 9/22/
2015]
§ 302. Permit Required. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township of North Strabane.
§ 303. Duties and Responsibilities of floodplain administrator. [Ord.
365, 9/22/2015]
1. The Township Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "floodplain administrator."
The floodplain administrator may:
A. Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
B. Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
C. Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private-sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
2. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the floodplain
administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Engineer.
1. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
2. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);15 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);16 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);17 and the United States
15.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:101
§ 304. Application Procedures and Requirements. [Ord. 365, 9/22/
2015]
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
3. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive-loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
4. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
5. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
6. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
7. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
8. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
9. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the floodplain administrator/manager.
10. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
1. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by the Township of North Strabane.
Such application shall contain the following:
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 304
1:102
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
C. Name and address of contractor.
D. Site location, including address.
E. Listing of other permits required.
F. Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
G. A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
2. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
B. All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
D. Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
E. Building materials are flood-resistant;
F. Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
G. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
3. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
A. A completed permit application form.
B. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
§ 304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304
1:103
(1) North arrow, scale, and date;
(2) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(3) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
C. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at a suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(2) The elevation of the base flood;
(3) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
D. The following data and documentation:
(1) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(2) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(3) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see § 401),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not cause any increase in the base flood
elevation. AE Areas adjacent to Floodways are exempt.
(4) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
§ 304 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 304
1:104
§ 305. Review of Application by Others. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 306. Changes. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 307. Placards. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the floodplain
administrator.
(5) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 503, Subsection 1F, Storage, and § 504, Development Which
May Endanger Human Life, including:
(a) The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 503, Subsection 1F, and § 504
which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
(b) A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 504
during a base flood.
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan, meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
4. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 308
1:105
§ 308. Start of Construction. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
§ 309. Enforcement. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
1. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of a
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
2. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
3. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with this chapter and the FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
1. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
C. Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
§ 308 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 309
1:106
§ 310. Appeals. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
E. Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a
fine to the Township of North Strabane of not less than $25 nor more
than $600, plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties,
all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for
the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or
penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall
not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
2. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code18 and
any other local ordinance.
3. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 309 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 310
1:107

Part 4
IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 401. Identification. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
§ 402. Description and Special Requirements of identified
floodplain areas. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
1. The identified floodplain area shall be:
A. Any areas of Township of North Strabane classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated
September 30, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most-recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
2. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Township of North Strabane
and declared to be a part of this chapter.
1. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and
the FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term
shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in
other available studies or sources of information for those special
flood hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS
and FIRM.
(1) Within any Floodway Area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development, shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any Floodway Area, no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:109
§ 403. Changes in Identification of Area. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 501, Subsection 2, for
situations where FEMA notification is required.
§ 404. Boundary Disputes. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the floodplain administrator; and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board
of Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted
in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
municipality.
§ 402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 405
1:110
§ 405. Jurisdictional Boundary Changes. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:111

Part 5
TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
§ 501. General Requirements. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
1. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse.
A. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
B. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
C. In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
2. When the Township of North Strabane proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including, but not limited to, installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
A. Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
B. Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
C. Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
3. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:113
§ 502. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements. [Ord. 365, 9/22/
2015]
1. Residential Structures.
A. In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
B. In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 402, Subsection 1C, of this chapter.
C. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be utilized, where
they are more restrictive.
2. Nonresidential Structures.
A. In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(1) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(2) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
B. In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 402, Subsection 1C, of this
chapter.
C. Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
§ 502 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 502
1:114
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
D. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be utilized, where
they are more restrictive.
3. Space Below the Lowest Floor.
A. Basements are prohibited.
B. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
C. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Historic Structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all chapter requirements that
do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure. Documentation that a specific chapter requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from chapter requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
5. Accessory Structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
§ 502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:115
§ 503. Design and Construction Standards. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
A. The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
B. Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
C. The structure will have a low damage potential.
D. The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
E. Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
F. Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
G. Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
H. The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
1. The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in Part 8, then the following provisions apply:
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line
from all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted;
§ 502 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 503
1:116
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet,
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to, and approved by, the floodplain
administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located
within any identified floodplain area except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so
as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
No. 348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages,"
and the "International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be
utilized.
D. Other Utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 504, Development Which May Endanger Human
Life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
§ 503 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 503
1:117
G. Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
I. Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing
structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
J. Paints and Adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical Components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
§ 503 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 503
1:118
§ 504. Development Which May Endanger Human Life. [Ord. 365, 9/
22/2015]
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
M. Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to
the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the
extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Sections 801,
1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the
latest edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania:
Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix
J.
1. Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind
described in Subsection 1A below, shall be prohibited. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Part 8, then the following
provisions apply (§ 504, Subsection 1B, C and D):
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to
the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
§ 503 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 504
1:119
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection 1A above
shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection 1A above shall be prohibited. Where permitted within
any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
residential structure of the kind described in Subsection 1A above
shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above base flood elevation and built in accordance with §§ 501, 502
and 503.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in Subsection 1A above shall be built in accordance with
§§ 501, 502 and 503, including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed, to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
§ 504 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 504
1:120
§ 505. Special Requirements for Subdivisions and Development.
[Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least five
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 506. Special Requirements for Manufactured Homes. [Ord. 365, 9/
22/2015]
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" United States Army Corps of Engineers, June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other
equivalent watertight standard.
1. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Part 8, then the following provisions apply.
2. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
3. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
4. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall:
A. Be placed on a permanent foundation;
B. Be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
C. Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
D. Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
5. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
§ 504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 506
1:121
§ 507. Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles. [Ord. 365, 9/
22/2015]
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401-405 shall apply.
6. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest edition thereto adopted by the
State of Pennsylvania, and, 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where
appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers
standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for
the proposed unit's(s') installation.
1. Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Part 8, then the following provisions apply:
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
(3) Be removed from the floodplain when a flood warning is issued.
§ 506 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 507
1:122
Part 6
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
§ 601. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
1. In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities
shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 601
1:123

Part 7
EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 701. Existing Structures. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 702 shall apply.
§ 702. Improvements. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
1. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is
made to an existing structure located within any identified floodplain
area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any identified floodplain area that would cause any
increase in the BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined
using the methodology in § 402, Subsection 1C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or mostrecent
revision thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:125

Part 8
VARIANCES
§ 801. General Provisions. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Township of North Strabane may, upon request, grant relief from the
strict application of the requirements.
§ 802. Variance Procedures and Conditions. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
1. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township of North
Strabane in accordance with the procedures contained in § 310 and the
following:
A. No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in the BFE. In an A Area/District,
BFEs are determined using the methodology in § 402, Subsection
1C.
B. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by development which may endanger human life (§ 504).
C. No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Part 6).
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Township of North Strabane shall
attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of North Strabane
shall notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of North
Strabane shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
§ 801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 802
1:127
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township of North Strabane. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report to FEMA.
2. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 802 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 802
1:128
Part 9
DEFINITIONS
§ 901. Interpretation. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 902. Specific Definitions. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
§ 901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 902
1:129
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
D.
§ 902 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 902
1:130
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 401 and 402 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 30, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after February
15, 1980, and before September 30, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in
effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction
was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 902 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 902
1:131
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated February
15, 1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated February 15,
1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension is granted,
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 902 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 902
1:132
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable to state floodplain
§ 902 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 902
1:133
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 902 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 902
1:134
Part 10
ENACTMENT
§ 1001. Adoption; When Effective. [Ord. 365, 9/22/2015]
This chapter shall be effective on September 30, 2015, and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by Township of North Strabane,
Washington County, Pennsylvania.
§ 1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1001
1:135
Chapter 9
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
§ 1001 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 1001
1:136
Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 9-101. Purpose. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. I, § 101; Ord. No. 81,
11/27/2018]
The purpose of this Chapter is:
§ 9-102. Scope. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. I, § 102; Ord. No. 381, 11/
27/2018]
1. To provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, protect property
and promote the general welfare by preventing excess erosion,
hazardous rock and soil slippage, sediment production and other soil
and water management problems by regulating and controlling the
design, construction, quality of materials, use location, and
maintenance of grading, excavations and fills.
2. To establish performance standards which insure land use practices
respectful of the natural topography and capabilities of the land.
3. To encourage maximum retention of natural topography and vegetative
features on hillsides.
4. To prevent earthflow and rockfall landslides.
5. To encourage imaginative and innovative site development and building
design that adapts to, and takes advantage of the best use of the natural
terrain.
1. This Part concerns new grading, excavation and fills; and changes,
additions or alterations made in existing excavations, fills and
embankments which shall conform to the provisions of this Part.
2. The Township Board of Supervisors shall designate an Administrator for
review, approval and granting of grading permits and to make
inspections of the grading work.
3. A separate grading permit shall be required for each site. One permit
shall cover all grading, excavation, and any fills made on the same site.
4. Only one permit shall be required for the grading of a large continuous
parcel of land for a major planned development, such as a planned
subdivision development or a planned commercial development, when
the standards for grading of the entire parcel are satisfactory to and
approved by the Administrator.
5. An approved site plan, a building permit or both are prerequisite to the
granting of any grading permit.
6. All grading, excavation and fills, whether or not a grading permit is
required, shall conform to the provisions of this Part.
§ 9-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-103
1:137
§ 9-103. Exceptions. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. I, § 103; Ord. No.
381, 11/27/2018]
1. A grading permit shall not be required for any of the following:
A. An excavation which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at
its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface and
cover a surface area of less than 5,000 square feet, provided that
the surfaces of such excavation do not have slope at any point
steeper than four horizontal to one vertical. However, this
subsection shall not be deemed to nullify the application of this
Part, or any requirement for obtaining a grading permit, with
respect to any fill made with material from such an excavation,
unless otherwise excepted by Subsections B and C of this section.
B. A fill which does not exceed 500 cubic yards of material on any one
site.
C. Fill which is not intended to support structures and does not
exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured
from the natural ground surface and does not cover an area of more
than 5,000 square feet, provided that the surface of such fills do not
have a slope at any point steeper than four horizontal to one
vertical and does not obstruct a drainage course.
D. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, swimming pool, or underground structure authorized by a
building permit and an excavation of a driveway between a building
site and the street. However, this Subsection D shall not be deemed
to nullify the application of this Part, or any requirement for
obtaining a grading permit, with respect to any fill made with the
material from such an excavation unless otherwise excused by
Subsections B and C of this section.
E. Soil excavated under the authorization of a properly issued
building permit which is temporarily stockpiled on the same site as
the excavation. If, however, excavated material is stockpiled on a
site for a period of longer than 120 days, then a permit shall be
necessary when disposing of the fill material.
F. A building site improved under authorization of a properly issued
building permit where the maximum natural gradient between
property lines or the maximum excavation or fill, exclusive of the
situations referred to in Subsection D above, do not exceed the
grades or quantities set forth in the following table:
§ 9-103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-103
1:138
§ 9-104. Definitions. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988. Art. II, § 202; Ord. No.
381, 11/27/2018]
One-Family House
Site
Maximum
Gradient Without
Permit
Maximum
Excavation or Fill
Without Permit,
Exclusive of
Basements and
Foundations
Less than 10,000
square feet
15 in 100 feet 100 cubic yards
10,000 to 24,000
square feet
15 in 100 feet 200 cubic yards
24,000 to 44,000
square feet
15 in 100 feet 250 cubic yards
Over 44,000 square
feet
20 in 100 feet 250 cubic yards
G. Exploratory excavations under the direction of a soils engineer or
engineering geologist.
H. Excavations for wells, tunnels, public utilities or cemetery graves.
I. A permit shall not be required for work performed by the Township,
or of contractors employed by the Township in a public street or
alley, Township park, playground or recreation area or on other
Township property.
J. Landscaping for single-family homes, accepted agricultural land
management practices such as plowing, nursery operations,
removal and/or transplanting of cultivated sod, shrubs and trees
cutting at or above existing ground and logging operations leaving
the stump, ground cover and root mat intact.
1. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms and words shall, for the
purpose of this Part, have the meaning herein indicated. Words used in
the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural include
the singular; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; and the word "building" includes the word "structure" and the
word "structure" includes the word "building."
ADMINISTRATOR — The person qualified and officially appointed by
Board of Supervisors to manage this Part, or his authorized
representative.
APPLICANT — Any landowner or agent of a landowner who proposes
to make or cause to be made any excavation, fill or any combination
thereof pursuant to the provisions of this Part.
§ 9-103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-104
1:139
ARCHITECT — A registered architect licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BEDROCK — Natural rocklayer, hard or soft, in place at ground surface
or beneath unconsolidated surficial deposits.
BUILDING CODE — Township of North Stabane Code of Ordinances
Chapter 5, Part 1, "Building Code," as amended.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity, including such processes as gravitational
creep.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FILL AND EMBANKMENT — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock
or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported or moved to a new location including the condition
resulting therefrom.
FLOODPLAIN — Areas designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Administration and other areas known to be subject to
flooding.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING REPORT — A report in conformance
with applicable geotechnical standards prepared by a professional
engineer.
GRADE — The elevation of the existing or proposed ground surface at
the location of any proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, including
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required pursuant to the provisions
of this Part.
GRADING, ENGINEERED — A grading operation in excess of 5,000
cubic yards and performed in conformance with a grading plan
prepared by a professional engineer.
GRADING, REGULAR — A grading operation of less than 5,000 cubic
yards. Where the site conditions warrant, the Administrator may
require the submission of a report on the site as prepared by
professional engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist.
HAZARD — Any danger or potential danger to life, limb or health,
or any adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use or
stability of property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and
storm sewers, including stream pollution.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 9-104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-104
1:140
LANDSLIDE-PRONE SOILS — Those soil formations whose
characteristics are classified as being landslide-prone or otherwise
sensitive in the Soil Survey of Greene and Washington Counties.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any landowner, agent of said landowner, or tenant
with the permission of said landowner who has been granted a grading
permit pursuant to the provisions of this Part.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and knowledgeable in civil and
geotechnical engineering.
RETAINING WALL — A structure composed of concrete, steel or other
approved building material constructed for the purpose of supporting a
cut or filled embankment which would otherwise not comply with the
requirements of standards set forth in this Part, and which is more than
two feet in height as measured on the exposed vertical surface of the
wall.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land, but may be a series of lots,
tracts or parcels of land which are adjoining and with respect to which
grading work is to be continuous and performed at the same time.
SLOPE — The angle of the existing or proposed ground surface plane
to the horizontal expressed as the ratio of the horizontal to the vertical,
or in percentage of slope (rise or fall per 100 feet).
SLOPE STABILITY ANALYSIS — The slope stability analysis will be
limit-equilibrium analysis, with appropriate drainage conditions and
shear strengths, performed by a professional engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SOIL SURVEY — The Soil Survey of Greene and Washington Counties,
Pennsylvania, as prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service et al,
and accompanying text, issued September 1983.
SOILS ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania having training and experience in soils
engineering.
SOLID WASTE — Any and all parts or combination of ashes, garbage,
refuse, radioactive material, combustible demolition materials and
industrial wastes such as food processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal
scrap, and other such materials whose disposal is regulated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
STEEP SLOPES — Or excessive slopes can be defined as slopes where,
in a 100-foot horizontal distance, the average slope exceeds 25%.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The control of surface water run-off
as regulated by Chapter 26 of the Township of North Strabane Code of
Ordinances.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE — The Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance as amended, being Chapter 22 of the Township of North
Strabane Code of Ordinances.
§ 9-104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-104
1:141
§ 9-105. Application Procedure. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 301,
Ord. No. 381; 11/27/2018]
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Zoning Ordinance, as amended, being
Chapter 27 of the Township of North Strabane Code of Ordinances.
1. Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application,
plans, specifications and a soil conservation report therefor with the
Administrator in a form prescribed by the Administrator. The
application shall indicate that the proposed grading is to be regular
grading or engineered grading and shall:
A. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract and street address, or similar description which will
readily identify and definitively locate the proposed work.
B. State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of
grading work.
C. State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
D. State whether or not a building, structure or other improvement,
the construction of which will require a building permit pursuant to
the provisions of the Building Code, is intended to be erected on the
land on which the grading is to be done.
2. The plans and specification shall accurately portray and describe the
site and proposed soil erosion controls. Plans shall be submitted in
triplicate, one set of which shall be of a reproducable nature, and shall
include:
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The name of the owner of the land.
C. The permission and approval of the owner of the property if the
applicant is an agent or tenant.
D. Accurate location by lot, block, tract, street address, a location map
or other similar information.
E. A contour map showing the present contours of the land and the
proposed contours after completion of the proposed grading at twofoot
intervals where the average slope is 10% or less and at fivefoot
intervals where the average slope exceeds 10%.
F. Cross-sections of the proposed cut or fill on fifty-foot intervals
which show the method of benching, both cut and/or fill; provided,
however, that there shall be not less than two cross-sections for
each site.
G. A plot plan showing the location of the grading boundaries, lot
lines, neighboring streets, or ways, buildings, surface and
§ 9-104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-105
1:142
subsurface utilities and waterways, drainage patterns, and
sufficient dimensions and other data to show all work.
H. A description of the type and classification of the soil from the Soil
Survey, other standard surveys, or from other methods.
I. Details and location of any proposed drainage, stormwater
management structures and pipes, walls and cribbing.
J. Seeding locations and schedules, debris basins, diversion channels.
K. The nature of fill material and such other information as the
Administrator may require to carry out the purpose of this Part.
L. The name and seal of the professional engineer who prepared said
plans.
M. Slope Stability Analysis. The slope stability analysis shall include
but is not limited to the following basic data.
(1) An assessment of geologic characteristics and engineering
properties of soils, sediments, and/or rock present within the
project area.
(2) Accurate cross sections and slope geometry derived from
topographic surveys and design plans for natural and
constructed slopes.
(3) Soil and groundwater conditions including:
(a) Soil unit profiles;
(b) Unit weight and strength parameters
or Su (depending on soil type and drainage and loading
conditions) for each soil unit;
(c) Location of the water table and flow characteristics.
(4) An assessment of the effect that the proposed construction and
the placement of structures will have on the slope over the
estimated life of the structure.
(5) A quantitative analysis of slope stability or slope stability
modeling including all existing slopes, modified slopes and
proposed new slopes.
(6) Slope stability shall be evaluated using conventional limit
equilibrium methods, and analyses should be performed using
a state-of-the-practice slope stability computer program such
as the most current versions of Slope/W® (Geo-Slope
International), Slide® (Rocscience, Inc.), GSTABLE with
§ 9-105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-105
1:143
§ 9-106. Responsibility of the Administrator. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988,
Art. III, § 302; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
STEDwin (Gregory Geotechnical Software) and/or ReSSA®
(ADAMA Engineering, Inc.) or equal software. Software shall
be approved by the Administrator.
(7) An assessment of any potential landslide hazards including a
description of the run-out hazard of landslide debris to the
proposed development that starts upslope (whether part of the
subject property or on a neighboring property) and/or the
impacts of landslide run-out on downslope properties.
(8) A minimum factor of safety for all permanent slopes shall be
1.5 and for all temporary slopes shall be 1.3.
3. A soil conservation report shall be required and include existing site
description of the topography, drainage, cover and soils; major
problems such as soil limitations, erosions and sediment potential and
surface runoff changes; and recommendations to minimize soil
limitations, erosion and sediment and surface water disposal problems.
4. Trees and natural ground cover shall be retained wherever possible to
minimize the impact of the development on the site and environment.
5. Provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development and the
Stormwater Management Ordinances are incorporated herein by
reference.
6. Utility Relocation. The applicant shall remove and relocate any existing
utilities from any steep slope greater than (3:1). No proposed utilities
will be permitted in a slope that is greater than 3:1.
7. Storm Sewer. The applicant must have all roof drains and foundation
drains connected to the storm sewer system as set forth in Chapter 22,
§ 513. No piping of stormwater will be allowed onto a slope greater
than 3:1.
1. The Administrator shall require that a geotechnical engineering report
be submitted by the applicant if the site is, has been, or is likely to
become hazardous to persons or property. The overlay maps such as the
Coal Resource Maps prepared by USGS, 1975, for the Greater
Pittsburgh Region shall be used to locate hazardous areas. The report
shall contain a detailed description of the geological conditions of the
site and shall include conclusions and recommendations that will
demonstrate the relationship of the geological conditions to the
proposed development, including hazardous conditions, water
resources, mineral resources and environmental impact.
2. In special cases, when grading occurs in areas of landslide-prone soil,
or rock-fall-prone areas as recognized by the Soil Survey, or other
standard surveys, the Administrator may require special precautions
§ 9-105 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-106
1:144
prior to issuing a permit from the applicant. The results of all soil tests
and core borings made relative to the site shall be submitted to the
Administrator.
3. The Administrator may deny a grading permit if the use of land to be
graded, either excavation or filling, is not specifically known except for
the intent of improving the site. The Administrator shall review the
application, plans specifications and reports and determine whether the
project will improve the site, is in the best interest of the Township, and
is not detrimental to the environment. The applicant may appeal the
Administrator's decision to the Board of Supervisors by preparing and
submitting to the Board of Supervisors a site plan showing the
development of the land in accordance with the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.19
4. When the requirements of this Part for obtaining a permit have been
met, the Administrator shall approve the application and proposed plan
and grant a grading permit to the applicant.
5. The Administrator may waive the requirement of any or all plans and
specifications listed in this Part, if he finds that the information on the
application is sufficient to show that the work will conform to the
provisions of this Part. The said agreement may be incorporated in the
developer's agreement as required in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
6. The administrator will require a slope stability analysis based on the
following guidelines:
A. Slope greater than 3H:1V are considered to be a steep slope and
will require a slope stability analysis as defined herein.
B. Ground areas having a slope of three (horizontal) to one (vertical)
(3H:1V) or flatter are generally considered inherently stable and do
not generally require a slope stability analysis; however, the
administrator may require the analysis based on the following:
(1) Fill slope that do not support structures with side slopes of
3H:1V or flatter will not require a project specific slope
stability evaluation. Exceptions would include embankments
constructed from highly plastic soils, soft subgrade conditions
(deep organics, peat, diatomaceous soils, etc.), slopes subject
to inundation, or other cases where, in the Township
Administrator's judgement, analysis is warranted.
(2) Cut slopes, excavations at 3H:1V or flatter in uniform native
soils will not require site-specific evaluation. Layered
formations, over consolidated clay soils, and colluvium
(landslide debris) would be notable exceptions, or other cases
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 9-106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-106
1:145
§ 9-107. Special Agreement. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 303;
Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
In the event that the applicant will move or grade an area of more than
50,000 square feet, or grade more than 10,000 cubic yards, then a formal
agreement may be required by the Board of Supervisors, and said
agreement will be prepared by the applicant at his own cost and expense,
and must be approved as to form by the Township Solicitor. The said
agreement may be a part of, and incorporated in, a developer's agreement
as required by the Subdivision Ordinance.20
§ 9-108. Expiration of Permit. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 304;
Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
Every grading permit shall expire and become null and void if the work
authorized by said permit has not been commenced within six months or
is not completed within one year from the date of issue; provided that the
Administrator may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that
unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within
the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time, and provided
further, that the application for the extension of time is made before the
date of expiration of the permit.
§ 9-109. Denial of Permit. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 305; Ord.
No. 381, 11/27/2018]
where, in the Township Administrator judgement, analysis is
warranted.
7. Under no circumstances will the administrator allow a slope that is
greater than two (horizontal) to one (vertical) (2H:1V) to be
constructed.
1. If the Administrator shall determine that the work proposed by the
applicant is likely to endanger any property or person, or any street or
alley, or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit shall be
denied. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger
property or streets or alleys, or create hazardous conditions, the
Administrator shall consider, among other relevant factors, the
following: possible saturation by rains, earth movements, surface water
runoff, and subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting
of rock, aquifers, mine conditions, springs and the nature and type of
the soil or rock.
2. Any person who is aggrieved by the application of the provisions of this
Part may, within 15 days from the date of the denial of the permit or
such other adverse determination by the Administrator, file a written
appeal therefrom to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 9-106 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-109
1:146
§ 9-110. Inspections. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 306; Ord. No.
381, 11/27/2018]
shall grant a hearing upon such an appeal within 30 days after the
receipt of the written appeal.
3. If any appeal is taken from the issuance of a building permit where a
grading permit has also been issued and if such appeal shall, pursuant
to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,21 operate as a stay of all
proceedings under any such building permit, then such appeal shall
also operate to stay all proceedings under any such grading permit.
1. The Administrator shall make the inspections thereinafter required and
shall either approve that portion of the work which has been completed
or notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with
provisions of this Part.
2. Grading and drainage plans approved by the Administrator shall be
maintained at the site during the progress of the grading and drainage
and until the work has been approved.
3. The permit holder shall submit to the Administrator an "as built"
drawing of the project before the issuance of a grading certificate of
completion.
4. The permit holder shall notify the Administrator in order to obtain
inspections in accordance with the following schedule and such
notification shall be made by the permit holder at least 48 hours before
the inspection is made:
A. Pre-Construction Meeting. The developer must schedule a preconstruction
meeting with the Administrator. No work can
commence until the pre-construction has been held.
B. Initial Inspection. When work is about to commence and stake out
is complete.
C. Periodic Inspection. As determined by the administrator, but not
less than one site visit per week.
D. Rough Grading. When all rough grading has been completed.
E. Drainage Facilities. Shall be in accordance with Chapter 26.
However, if not specifically identified in Chapter 26, all drainage
facilities (including underdrains and floor drains) shall be
continually inspected by the administrator or their designer.
F. Final Inspection. When all work, including the installation of all
drainage, landscaping and other structures has been completed.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Zoning.
§ 9-109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-110
1:147
§ 9-111. Plan Changes. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 307; Ord.
No. 381, 11/27/2018]
Any physical changes from the original plan uncovered in the site during the
construction, such as surface water drainage, soil and bedrock dislocations,
alteration of groundwater discharge or any other natural or man-made
modification which would tend to undermine the basis upon which the
permit was issued, must be immediately reported to the Administrator by
the permit holder. If the circumstances dictate, the Administrator shall
revoke the permit or otherwise modify the conditions upon which the permit
was initially issued.
§ 9-112. Fees and Bonds. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 308; Ord.
No. 381, 11/27/2018]
5. If at any stage of the work the Administrator shall determine by
inspection that the nature of this excavation or fills is such that further
work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger any
property, or streets, or alleys, or create hazardous conditions, the
Administrator may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be
done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as the
Administrator considers acceptable to avoid such likelihood of danger.
6. All grading and fill shall be inspected by a qualified soil technician from
an established construction material testing (CMT) or engineering firm
with a minimum of five years' field inspection experience. The CMT or
engineering firm shall prepare daily field inspection reports during the
placement, excavation, and compaction of all fill. The inspection reports
shall include the location of fill being placed, the depth of fill placed and
the location and results of field compaction tests to verify and confirm
the placed fill has been compacted to the required compaction levels in
accordance with the recommendations in the geotechnical report. The
inspection reports and compaction test results shall be reviewed by a
licensed professional engineer under full time employment by the CMT
or engineering firm. The licensed professional engineer shall provide to
the Township a letter of compliance, signed and sealed by the licensed
professional engineer confirming all grading and fill operations were
placed and compacted in accordance with the recommendations of the
geotechnical report. The letter shall also include a copy of all field
inspection reports and compaction test results.
7. No work shall be performed without the presence of a qualified field
inspector.
1. At the time of application the applicant shall pay an application review
fee to cover the Township cost of reviewing application documents. Any
additional charges incurred by the Township to review the application
of an excavation permit shall be borne by the applicant. Any application
fees not expended by the Township shall be returned to the applicant
within a reasonable period of time.
§ 9-110 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-112
1:148
§ 9-113. Certificate of Completion. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III,
§ 309; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
2. Fees for review of application and inspections of regular grading
permits shall be in accordance with the schedule set forth in the
applicable resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
3. Fees for review of application and inspections of engineered grading
permits shall be in accordance with the schedule set forth in the
applicable resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Inspection Fee. An inspection fee equal to 2% of the total estimated
cost of the grading work, control facilities and landscaping shall be
collected by the Administrator prior to the issuance of a grading
permit. A minimum fee of $50 shall be charged. Inspection costs
incurred by the Township in excess of the initial fee collected shall
be paid for by the applicant prior to final inspection of the work.
B. Should a special agreement be required by the Township Board of
Supervisors as described in § 9-107 of this Part, a review fee of
$150 will be required.
4. The plan checking fee for an amendment to a grading permit
authorizing additional work to that under a valid permit shall be the
difference between such fee paid for the original permit and the fee
required for the entire project; however, a minimum fee of $25 will be
charged.
5. Should the work require the use or occupancy of Township roads or
streets for access by heavy construction equipment, or for hauling of
spoil or borrow material, a separate bond shall be required to
guarantee the repair of pavements, curbs and sidewalks damaged
during the grading operation.
6. Upon completion of the grading under an engineered grading permit, a
maintenance bond in amount of 15% of the cost estimated as
determined in § 9-112(5) shall be posted (payable to North Strabane
Township) for a period of 18 months.
7. No bond shall be required if another bond or approved security is
posted for construction and/or site improvements which already covers
the cost of grading and other control facilities.
8. As a condition of approval of an engineered grading permit under this
Part, the applicant shall post a cash or performance bond or other
security acceptable to the Township in the amount of 110% of the
estimated cost to perform the work. The cost estimate shall include the
complete scope of work needed to be performed by the applicant to
comply with this Part and shall be prepared and certified by the
applicant's engineer or architect and accepted as reasonable by the
Administrator. The Administrator shall be the final arbiter as to the
reasonableness of any cost estimates.
§ 9-112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-113
1:149
§ 9-114. Maintenance. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 310; Ord. No.
381, 11/27/2018]
1. If, upon final inspection of the site for which a permit has been issued, it
is found that the work authorized by the grading permit has been
satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of this
Part, a grading certificate of completion covering such work and stating
that the work is approved shall be issued to the permit holder by the
Administrator.
2. Based on the receipt of the following:
A. Certification by a professional engineer that the site has been
constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
geotechnical report.
B. Copies of all inspection reports.
C. Maintenance Bond as described in § 9-112(8).
D. As-built drawings showing conformance with approved plan.
1. The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation or fill
permitted, and also all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures,
fences, ground cover, and other protective devices as may be a part of
the permit requirements.
2. The continued use of said area shall be contingent upon the proper
maintenance and upkeep of all the above mentioned items, satisfactory
to the Township and subject to such further conditions as the Township
may prescribe from time to time to keep the site in proper condition.
3. The grading certificate of completion may be revoked by the Township
Board of Supervisors at any time, upon the recommendation of the
Administrator, where the conditions of the permit are not being
observed, the work covered by the permit has been materially extended
or altered without a permit to do so, or conditions exist which prejudice
the health, safety and welfare of any person, persons or property.
Before such revocation, the Administrator shall first give written notice
to the permit holder and to the owner of the property involved,
specifying the defect or unsatisfactory condition involved, and advising
that unless such defect or unsatisfactory condition is remedied, the
certificate shall be revoked. If the defect or unsatisfactory condition is
remedied within 30 days of notice to the permit holder to correct same,
the certificate shall not be revoked.
4. If the permit holder shall fail to correct such defect or unsatisfactory
condition within such thirty-day period, the Township may undertake
the necessary work and the costs thereof shall be borne by the permit
holder and collected in any manner authorized by law, including the
imposition of a lien against the property.
§ 9-113 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-115
1:150
§ 9-115. Hazardous Condition; Nuisance. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art.
III, § 311; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
§ 9-116. Working Conditions. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III, § 312;
Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
1. Whenever the Administrator determines that any existing excavation,
embankment or fill has become a hazard, as defined in this Part, the
owner of the property upon which the grading is located, or other
person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in
writing from the Administrator shall, within the time specified in such
notice, repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation, embankment, or
fill so as to eliminate the hazard.
2. If the permit holder shall fail to correct such hazardous or
unsatisfactory condition within the specified time period, the Township
may undertake the necessary work and the costs thereof shall be borne
by the permit holder and collected in any manner authorized by law,
including an imposition of a lien against the property.
3. Any excavation not completed within 180 days from the date of initial
grading shall constitute a nuisance and a hazard.
4. The property owner shall restore, repair, reconstruct or remove such
excavation, embankment or fill as directed by the Administrator within
30 days of receipt of said written notice.
1. The following working conditions will apply to all grading sites:
A. Dust Control. During grading operations, acceptable measures for
dust control will be exercised.
B. Protection of Public Facilities. All public utilities and roadways
shall be protected in the design of, and during the grading
operation. Construction equipment shall not be operated on public
roads without the placement of protective mats. Aggregate
driveway or roadway surfaces shall be provided to prevent tracking
of dirt and mud onto the public roadways.
C. Clean-Up. All soil washed or carried onto public streets during
grading operations shall be cleaned up as it accumulates. The
owner of the property being graded shall be responsible to protect
and clean up lower properties of silt and debris which have washed
down into the lower properties as a result of the grading work on
higher property.
D. Work Days. None of the work or activity covered by a grading
permit shall be conducted on a Sunday or legal holiday without the
approval of the Supervisors.
E. Work Hours. All of the work and activity covered by a grading
permit shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
§ 9-115 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-116
1:151
§ 9-117. Environmental Protection. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. III,
§ 313; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
§ 9-118. Excavation. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. IV, § 401; Ord. No.
381, 11/27/2018]
p.m., prevailing time, unless these time limits are extended,
excused or otherwise modified by the Board of Supervisors.
1. Live Stream Crossings. Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross
live streams. Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or
bridges for such crossings. Permits shall be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources for temporary
and permanent encroachments, relocations, enclosures and temporary
crossings of streams.
2. Excessive Slopes. Grading on excessive slopes shall be avoided so as to
minimize erosion and storm runoff, to protect watersheds, to
discourage erosion of soils by maintaining adequate foliage cover on
excessive slopes, and to promote the perpetuation of open space on
hillsides. The areas considered to have excessive slope may be revised
or modified by the Board of Supervisors where studies or information
provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need or
possibility for such revision.
1. All topsoil shall be removed from the area to be graded and stockpiled
and preserved for possible re-use on the site. However, at no time
should topsoil or rock be disposed of upon the slope of the development
without said request specifically given written approval by the
Township Administrator. All excavated materials from foundation
construction must be placed in engineered fill and not wasted freely on
engineering graded slopes.
2. Excavation adjacent to any footing, foundations or structure shall not
extend below the minimum angle of repose or natural slope of the soil
under the nearest point of same unless such footing, foundation or
structure is first properly underpinned or otherwise protected against
settlement. Before commencing any excavation which will affect
physically in any way an adjoining property or structures thereon, the
permit holder shall notify, in writing, the owners of the adjoining
property or structures not less than 30 days before such excavation is to
be made informing them excavation is planned. A copy of such notice(s)
shall be submitted to the Administrator. Adjoining properties and
structures shall be protected as provided in the Building Code and/or as
required by the Administrator.
3. The top or bottom edge of final slopes shall normally set back 10 feet
from adjacent property lines, street right-of-way lines, or edge of
bufferyard in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property or bufferyard.
§ 9-116 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-119
1:152
§ 9-119. Blasting. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. IV, § 402; Ord. No. 381,
11/27/2018]
§ 9-120. Fills and Embankments. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. IV,
§ 403; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
1. No person, firm or corporation may store, handle or use any explosive
in the Township of North Strabane without first obtaining a special
permit from the Administrator. The Administrator shall have the
authority to impose reasonable regulations and restrictions upon the
storage, handling and use of explosives, Any violation of any regulation
or requirement imposed by the Administrator, or imposed under any
section of this Part shall be grounds for the revocation of any permit
theretofore issued.
2. All blasting which is conducted in the Township shall be in conformity
with state requirements and shall be in compliance with the Act of July
10, 1957, P.L. 685, 73 P.S. § 164-168, as amended, and the Department
of Labor and Industry Rules and Regulations promulgated pursuant to
the aforesaid statute.
3. The Administrator shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to any
blasting.
1. All topsoil shall be removed from the area to be graded and stockpiled
and preserved for possible re-use on the site. However, at no time
should topsoil or rock be disposed of upon the slopes of the
development without said request specifically given written approval by
the Township Administrator. All excavated materials from foundation
construction must be placed in an engineered fill and not be wasted
freely on engineering graded slopes.
2. Fills, embankments and finish grading shall be designed in accordance
with the following:
A. Where fills are located so that earth movement may result in
personal injury or damage to adjacent property, streets, alleys or
buildings, the bearing value and stability of the material under
proposed fills and embankments shall be determined by subsurface
investigation performed by a soils engineer or engineering
geologist.
B. The type of fill material available in each stage of the grading
operation shall be determined in order to plan proper filling
procedures:
(1) No unsuitable material, such as coal, boney, red-dog, expansive
shale and cinders, shall be placed in fill areas.
(2) Wood or other solid waste material shall not be placed in fill
areas.
§ 9-119 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-120
1:153
§ 9-121. Minimization of Erosion and Sediment. [Ord. 162, 8/23/
1988, Art. IV, § 404; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
(3) Pieces of rock or boulders having a thickness of more than six
inches or a cross-sectional area in any plane of more than 1 1/2
square feet shall not be permitted.
C. No fill of any kind shall be placed over topsoil, trees, stumps or
other material which would create a nuisance, potential fire
hazard, or sanitation problem which would attract rodents,
termites or other pests.
D. On major fills or embankments, a toe bench shall be constructed
below mantle on bedrock under the toe of fill.
E. Benching of the existing surface shall be required and indicated on
the cross-sections.
F. A porous drain shall be installed on the bottom and back wall of the
toe bench, together with a drain pipe and suitable discharge pipe to
the existing nonerosive surface beyond and below the toe of the
proposed fill.
G. Overfilling of slopes is desirable to permit final shaping of surface
to proposed grade without the addition of loose fill over the surface
of the slope, provided that no fill shall be higher than 10 feet
vertically before the slope is shaped to proper grade.
H. At the end of each work day, the horizontal surface of the fill shall
be shaped, compacted and rolled to provide for drainage.
I. All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of materials and to
prevent undesirable settlement. The fill shall be spread in a series
of layers, each not exceeding six inches in thickness, and shall be
compacted by a sheeps foot roller or other approved method after
each layer is spread. Fill shall be placed at the optimum moisture
content for the specified degree of compaction. The Administrator
may require tests or other information if, in his opinion, the
conditions or materials are such that additional information is
needed. Where fills are to have streets, structures, or public
utilities placed in or on them, a Modified Proctor Density of 95%
shall be achieved (ASTM test designation D 1557).
J. The top or bottom edge of final slopes shall be set back 10 feet from
adjacent property lines or street right-of-way lines in order to
permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the
abutting property or street and to allow for location of proper
drainage facilities and protective devices.
1. Guidelines for minimizing erosion and sediment of the Soil
Conservation Service should be followed. One or a combination of
§ 9-120 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-121
1:154
§ 9-122. Slope Treatment and Ground Cover. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988,
Art. IV, § 405; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
§ 9-123. Retaining Walls and Fences. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. IV,
406; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
guidelines should be used to minimize hazards, depending on the site
conditions and the proposed grading.
2. The Administrator may approve grading plans not meeting the above
guidelines if the proposed grading plans are approved by the
Washington County Soil Conservation Service.
1. In order to prevent erosion, the permit holder shall be required to
provide adequate ground covering of such kind and character as may
be approved by the Administrator.
2. For slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, the ground
covering shall be an approved variety of erosion-resistant vegetation.
3. The completion of finish grading should be done during a season of the
year when turf or ground cover can best be established.
1. If a retaining wall is constructed to satisfy a requirement of this
chapter, a building permit shall not be required. The grading permit
shall include the retaining wall, and the requirements for approvals and
inspections, as stated herein, shall be complied with.
2. Retaining wall shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practice. The plans submitted for approval shall
bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer.
3. The backfilling of retaining walls and the construction of subterranean
drainage facilities shall be done in accordance with sound engineering
practice.
4. In general, where a wall is replacing an exposed slope, the vertical face
of the wall shall be at least three feet back from the adjoining property.
A. This requirement may be waived by the Administrator if it can be
satisfactorily demonstrated that such an exception is necessary to
insure normal use of the property.
B. This requirement may also be waived when the proposed retaining
wall is a joint venture between adjacent property owners, and
documents evidencing the same are filed with the application for
the permit.
5. A fence not less that four feet in height, of a design approved by the
Administrator and meeting requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, shall
be placed at the top of all new cuts and fills made when the cuts or fill
slopes are steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and also
elsewhere where public safety dictates.
§ 9-121 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-124
1:155
§ 9-124. Drainage Facilities. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. IV, § 407;
Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
1. No grading work shall be started prior to approval of, and
implementation of, a stormwater management plan in conformance
with Chapter 26 of the Codified Ordinances.
2. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations and/or adjacent properties.
Interception and diversion facilities for stormwater and surface water
run-off, both above and below the cut and fill slope areas during and
after construction shall be included in the design. As a minimum,
drainage facilities to proposed detention areas shall be designed to
accommodate the severest storm that might occur during a ten-year
period.
3. The drainage pattern prior to construction shall be indicated on the
plans. Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent any erosion and
water runoff damage to adjacent properties during the construction and
after completion of construction.
4. Storm sewers, catch basins, drainage ditches and swales necessary to
protect adjacent properties, whether they be permanent or temporary
in nature, shall be constructed before any excavation or filling is
started. The storm sewers, catch basins, drainage ditches and swales
shall be maintained, cleaned, cleared and open during construction. If
the above is not complied with, the Administrator shall stop all clearing
and grading on the site until the necessary drainage facilities are
completed or the permit will be revoked and the required bond
forfeited.
5. Drainage ditches with a grade of 5% or greater shall be paved with
concrete, bituminous mixture, brick, half pipe, rubble or other hard
nonerodible material.
6. Drainage ditches with a grade of less than 5% shall be grassed and
sloped in such a manner that they can be conveniently cut and
maintained.
7. Drainage structures, storm sewers, detention ponds, sedimentation
ponds and appurtenances shall be of proper design and so constructed
as to carry surface water and any subsurface water encountered to the
nearest practical storm drain or natural watercourse approved by the
Administrator as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters.
Approval by the Administrator in no way relieves the owner of his legal
responsibilities to adjacent property owners. The owner shall also
comply with all state laws and regulations dealing with enclosing or
discharging into existing streams, channels or storm sewers.
8. As a guide for the prevention of damage, grading plans shall follow
vegetative control methods and ditch and conduit control methods in
the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Washington County,
§ 9-124 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-124
1:156
§ 9-125. Floodplain Management. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. IV,
§ 408; Ord. No. 381, 11/27/2018]
All grading work within designated or known floodplains shall conform to
the requirements and standards of the Floodplain Ordinance.
§ 9-126. Liability. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. V, § 501, Ord. 381, 11/
27/2018]
§ 9-127. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. V,
§ 502; as amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997; and by Ord. No. 381,
11/27/2018]
Pennsylvania. The Administrator may approve methods and materials
recommended by governmental agencies, professional engineers and
architects, when they are more suitable to the site in preventing
damage. Private drainage facilities of any nature shall be at least
designed to accommodate the largest size storm that would occur on
the average of every 10 years. The site design shall provide a safe
floodway for flows from storms of greater intensity.
9. No rock fill shall be placed around or over storm sewers, or drainage
facilities other than that designed as part of the site drainage facilities.
1. Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter,
nor the compliance with the provisions hereof or with any condition
imposed by the Administrator hereunder, shall relieve any permit
holder from any responsibility for damage to persons or property
resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any
liability upon the Township, its employees, and its consultants for
damages to persons or property.
2. The permit holder shall be fully responsible for any noncompliance with
approved plans. He shall carry the responsibility both for his own
employees and for all subcontractors from the first day of grading until
released by the Township. The use of qualified personnel experienced
and knowledgeable in the practice of excavation and landscape
restoration shall be required.
1. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause same to be done contrary to or in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
2. When notice of any violation of, or noncompliance with, any provision of
this chapter has been given by the Administrator, such violation shall be
discontinued immediately, unless the Administrator has specifically
designated a reasonable time limit for compliance. Any violation which
continues after such notice shall be subject to the penalties provided in
this chapter.
§ 9-124 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-127
1:157
§ 9-128. Remedies. [Ord. 162, 8/23/1988, Art. V, § 503; Ord. No. 381,
11/27/2018]
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper officers of the Township, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township, an appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent
such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such violation.
3. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district
justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days. Whenever any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is notified of such violation by the Administrator by
service, summons or any other manner, each day that a violation of this
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
4. In addition to the above stated violations and penalties, the Township
may seek remedies and penalties under applicable Pennsylvania
statutes or regulations.
§ 9-127 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 9-128
1:158
Chapter 10
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 11
HOUSING
§ 9-128 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 9-128
1:159

Part 1
TENANT REGISTRATION
§ 101. Purposes. [Ord. 105, 2/22/1979; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
This Part is enacted to provide for the uniform and equitable distribution of
the tax levies in the Township of North Strabane and upon the inhabitants
thereof and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township of North Strabane.
§ 102. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 105, 2/22/1979; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS UNIT — A parcel of real estate, with or without improvements
located thereon utilized by any person or persons for any commercial
activity or purpose.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes arranged for occupancy by one family or by one or more persons.
LANDLORD — A lessor, or person who acts as agent for the lessor, of any
parcel of real estate located in the Township of North Strabane, or a lessor,
or person who acts as agent for the lessor, of any improvements on real
estate or any building located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
TENANT — A person who has the use, either by himself or with others, of a
dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than himself, for a
period exceeding 30 days.
§ 103. Reports by Landlords. [Ord. 105, 2/22/1979; as revised by
Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Within 30 days from the effective date of this Part, each landlord shall
submit to the Township Manager, a report form supplied by the Township
Manager, which includes the following information:
1. List of the dwelling units and business units owned by the landlord,
located within the Township limits, whether occupied or not occupied;
2. Address of each dwelling unit and business unit;
3. Brief description of each dwelling unit or business unit;
4. Whether or not said dwelling unit or business unit is inhabited or
utilized by tenants;
5. Names of the tenant or tenants utilizing the aforementioned dwelling
unit or business unit, if any.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:161
§ 104. Reports by Persons Upon Becoming Landlords. [Ord. 105, 2/
22/1979; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
After the effective date of this Part, any person who becomes a landlord
of any parcel of real estate or any improvement on real estate or building
located in the Township by agreement of sale, by deed, or by any other
means, shall, within 30 days thereafter, report to the Township Manager the
information and data set forth in § 103 above, and on forms to be provided
by the Township Manager.
§ 105. Reports of Changes in Use or Occupancy. [Ord. 105, 2/22/
1979; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
After the effective date of this Part, each and every landlord of property
within the Township shall report to the Township Manager on a report
form to be supplied by the Township Manager, any change in the use or
occupancy of any dwelling unit or business unit owned by such landlord.
The reported change shall include the name or names of new tenants
of such dwelling unit or business unit, the date when such change was
effected, and the forwarding address of the old tenant or tenants if known.
A landlord of a hotel, inn or boarding house shall not be required to report
a person as a "tenant" until that person has resided in such landlord's
establishment for a period exceeding 30 days. In the event that a dwelling
unit or business unit was used or utilized by a tenant and then becomes
vacant, this change shall also be reported to the Township Manager. All
reports required by this section shall be made within 10 days after a
landlord has knowledge that such a unit has had a change in occupancy or
has become vacant.
§ 106. Duties of the Township Manager. [Ord. 105, 2/22/1979; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The Township Manager, under the authority of this Part, shall:
§ 107. Penalties. [Ord. 105, 2/22/1979; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
1. Maintain on file at the Township office, the names of the landlords
owning dwelling units and business units in the Township, said list to
include the names of the current tenants of said dwelling units and
business units;
2. Maintain a supply of forms for landlords to use in making reports to the
Township Manager as required by §§ 103, 104 and 105 of this Part;
3. Notify the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief of the Township of North
Strabane of the address and description of any dwelling unit or
business unit that is vacant, unoccupied and not in use.
§ 104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 107
1:162
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 107
1:163
Chapter 12
LIBRARIES
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
§ 107 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 107
1:164
Part 1
JUNK YARDS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 83B, 10/28/1974, § 1]
JUNK — Any discarded material or articles such as is not ordinarily disposed
of as rubbish or refuse. A junk or salvage yard shall be construed to mean
the storing, accumulating, selling or processing of junked vehicles, whether
or not such storing, accumulating, selling or processing is done for profit.
Two or more junked or abandoned vehicles shall be construed as coming
within the scope and meaning of this Part 1. Moreover, any recycling or
impacting or removal, shipment or reuse shall be deemed to come within
the scope and meaning of this Part.
JUNK DEALER — Any person, as hereinafter defined, who shall engage
in the business of storing, accumulating, selling or processing of junked
vehicles.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
§ 102. Prohibition. [Ord. 83B, 10/28/1974, § 2]
From the passage of this Part, no junk or salvage yard shall be established
or maintained except in an industrial zone as a special exception.
§ 103. Annual Permit Fee. [Ord. 83B, 10/28/1974, § 3]
No person in the Township of North Strabane shall engage in business
as a junk or salvage dealer, whether under this Part or as a preexisting
nonconforming use, without first having filed an application with the
Township Office in December of each year. Such application shall provide
information as to the names and addresses of the owner(s) of the tract of
land to be utilized, or the names and addresses of the lessees, information
to the use and extent of the junk or salvage yard, and shall be accompanied
by a permit fee for the ensuing year in the amount of $200.
Provided that all applicable state and Township laws and ordinances have
been complied with, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for the operation
and maintenance of the junk or salvage yard for one year. Such permit fee
shall be renewed annually on or before the first day of January of each year.
§ 104. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 83B, 10/28/1974, § 4]
1. All junk or salvage yards whether or not established prior to the date of
this Part, shall comply with the following rules and regulations:
A. No person under this Part shall by virtue of one permit keep more
than one place of business within the Township of North Strabane
for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a junk or salvage
yard. Nor shall any such person engage in the junk or salvage
business in any place other than the place designated upon the
permit.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:165
§ 105. Penalties. [Ord. 83B, 10/28/1974, § 5; as amended by Ord.
147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. No permit issued under this Part shall be transferred from one
person to another, except when the ownership of the premises shall
change. In such a case a new owner shall apply for a transfer of
such permit to him and shall pay a transfer fee of $50.
C. Every junk or salvage yard dealer shall provide and constantly keep
a book in which shall be fairly written down in the English
language, at the time of the purchase or sale of any junk, a
description of any article or material purchased, sold or received by
him, the date and hour of such transaction, and the person or
persons from whom such items were purchased, sold, or received
concerning said transaction. Such book shall at all times be subject
to inspection by the Township Zoning Officer and the Police of said
Township.
D. No junked or abandoned vehicle shall be dismantled, altered from
its original form, or destroyed except after a period of 48 hours
from the purchase, receipt or delivery thereof to such junk or
salvage yard.
E. Each such establishment shall have on duty an employee during
normal working hours when the establishment is in operation.
F. No junk or salvage yard shall be established or maintained within
an area of 50 feet to any street or road or to any property line.
G. Each such establishment shall be protected with steel posts and
cyclonefence at least eight feet in height from the ground with
structural type qualities and evergreens of the tree variety shall be
planted and grown a maximum of 10 feet apart on the outside of the
fence upon the property of the owner.
§ 104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 105
1:166
Part 2
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 207, 2/28/1995, § 1]
§ 202. License Required; Conditions of Issuance; Fee. [Ord. 207, 2/
28/1995, § 2]
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Township
of North Strabane without first having obtained from the Township
Secretary a license, for which a fee, which shall be for the use of the
Township, shall be charged:
§ 203. Exceptions. [Ord. 207, 2/28/1995, § 3]
1. As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS —
Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample
or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house within the
Township.
A.
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise from a fixed location within the Township, on a
temporary basis, which shall include, but not be limited to, such
activities conducted at the time of special occasions or celebrations
for seasonal purpose, or for or in advance of specific yearly
holidays.
B.
2. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and, the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Five dollars for one days.
B. Fifteen dollars for one month.
C. Thirty-five dollars for one year.
1. No license fee shall be charged:
A. To farmers selling their own produce.
B. For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds where of are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:167
§ 204. License Application. [Ord. 207, 2/28/1995, § 4]
Every person desiring a license under this Part shall first make application
to the Township Secretary for such license. He shall, when making such
C. To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
D. To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the
like, who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar
organizations.
E. To any honorable discharged member of any of the armed services
who complies with the Act of 1867, April 8, P.L. 50, 60 P.S. § 61
(1982), hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted
by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania, and who procures from
the Prothonotary a certificate in pursuance of Act of 1867.
F. To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
G. To any person who has complied with the provisions of the
Solicitation of Charitable Funds Act, August 9, 1963, P.L. 628, 10
P.S. § 160-1 et seq. (1982), as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
H. For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or
business privilege tax at their chief place of business.
2. But all persons exempt hereby from the payment of the license fee shall
be required to register with the Township Secretary and obtain a
license without fee; provided, any person dealing in one or more of the
above mentioned exempted categories, and dealing with other goods,
wares or merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject to the payment
of the license fee fixed by this Section for his activities in connection
with the sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in such exempted
categories. Provided, further, the Township Secretary may similarly
exempt from payment of the license fee, but not from registering with
the Township, persons working without compensation and selling
goods, wares or merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit
corporation. Provided, further, every license issued under the
provisions of this Part shall be issued on an individual basis to any
person or persons engaging in such business; every individual shall
obtain a separate license, issued to him in his name, and the license fee
hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such individual license,
except that a representative of a charitable organization may obtain
licenses for the applicants therein.
§ 203 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 204
1:168
application, exhibit a valid license from any State or County Officer, of such
license is required. The applicant shall state:
§ 205. Issuance of License; Custody, Display and Exhibit. [Ord. 207,
2/28/1995, § 5]
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Township
Secretary, if he shall find such application in order, shall issue the license
required under this Part. Such license shall contain the information
required to be given on the application therefore. Every license holder shall
carry such license upon his person if engaged in transient retail business
from house to house or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public
grounds, or shall display such license at the location where he shall engage
in such business if doing so at a fixed location. He shall exhibit such
license, upon request, to all police officers, municipal officials and citizens
or residents of the Township.
§ 206. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 207, 2/28/1995, § 6]
No person in any transient retail business shall:
A. His criminal record, if any.
B. Name and address of the person by whom he is employed.
C. Type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to deal with in such
transient retail business.
D. Length of time for which license is to be issued.
E. Type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any.
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
B. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds in the Township.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the Township for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate
vicinity.
D. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the Township for
the purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares
or merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material or
stock, wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through
handling, age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any business activity, except by prior appointment, at any
time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 8:30 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m., on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal
holiday.
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 207
1:169
§ 207. Supervision; Records and Reports. [Ord. 207, 2/28/1995, § 7]
The Township Police Chief shall supervise the activities of all persons
holding licenses under this Part. He shall keep a record of all licenses issued
hereunder and shall make a report thereof each month to the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 208. Suspension and Revocation of License; Appeal. [Ord. 207, 2/
28/1995, § 8]
The Township Police Chief is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any
license issued under this Part when he deems such suspension or revocation
to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals, for violation of any
provision of this Part, or for giving false information upon any application
for a license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or revocation may be
made to the Board of Supervisors at any time within 10 days after such
suspension or revocation. No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any
person whose license shall have been suspended or revoked.
§ 209. Purpose of Part Effectuated by Agreements. [Ord. 207, 2/28/
1995, § 9]
Nothing herein shall prevent the Board of Supervisors of North Strabane
Township from entering into an agreement with one or more parties to
effectuate the purpose of this Part for the protection of the citizens of North
Strabane Township and the efficiency of municipal government relating
thereto. Such an agreement shall not be deemed a waiver by the Township
as to the enforcement of this Part as to transient businesses on merchants
not represented by any such agreement.
§ 207 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 209
1:170
Part 3
HELIPORTS
§ 301. Definition. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 1]
HELICOPTER LAND AREA — A heliport, helistop or helipad and any other
surface (water, land or structure) which is specifically adapted to and/or
used primarily or maintained for the landing and takeoff of such aircraft.
§ 302. Size of Landing Area. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 2]
The minimum size of the landing area shall be 200 feet square or a circle
with a diameter of 200 feet, and shall not be located closer than 300 feet
to any private property or school playground, stadium or other place of
outdoor assemblage.
§ 303. Size of Landing Pad. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 3]
The landing pad shall be a minimum size of 60 square feet.
§ 304. Site Approaches. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 4]
The site should be approachable from at least two sides; and provide
sufficient clearance as to allow take-offs and landings from the outer limits
of the touch down pad according to rules set out by PennDOT Bureau of
Aviation.
§ 305. Water Sites. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 5]
A site located adjacent to water shall have a boat, such as a rowboat, tied at
the landing pad to aid possible rescue operations.
§ 306. Wind Indicator. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 6]
A wind direction indicator shall be provided. In the case of night operation,
the navigation facility shall be lighted.
§ 307. Roof-Top Sites. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 7]
In the case of roof-top heliports, special consideration will be given to each
site.
§ 308. Permits. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 8]
Permits for establishing and operating sites shall be issued to the owner(s)
or lessee(s) of such sites by the Township Manager/Safety Director within
45 days after approval by the North Strabane Township Zoning Hearing
Board on payment of $100 and further provided that such sites shall only
be located in Industrial and Commercially Zoned Districts of said Township,
and further provided that:
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 308
1:171
§ 309. Revocation of Permits. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 9]
The permit shall be deemed automatically revoked if:
§ 310. Closing of Site. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 10]
When the site permit has been revoked, the owner(s) or lessee(s) shall
forthwith cause the site to be closed to all helicopter operations by
publishing such notices and warnings and employing such markings as are
customary to accomplish such purpose.
§ 311. Applicability. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 11]
This Part 3 shall apply to sites established hereafter.
§ 312. Accidents. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 12]
No unauthorized person may disturb, remove, conceal or withhold any part
of a civil aircraft involved in an accident, or any property which was aboard
such aircraft at the time of an accident.
§ 313. Penalties. [Ord. 100, 11/30/1978, § 13; as amended by Ord.
147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
3, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
1. The site has been inspected and licensed by the Bureau of Aviation of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as complying with
PennDOT Bureau of Aviation approach corridor, design and other safety
criteria; and
2. The site has received such approval and clearance from the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) as may be required by the Federal
Aviation Regulations.
1. PennDOT Bureau of Aviation revokes the license or refuses to re-license
the site after one of its periodic inspections; or
2. The FAA withdraws or revokes its approval or clearance, if initially
required; or
3. Thirty days after the Township Manager/Safety Director has notified the
permit holder at its last known address, in writing, that the site is no
longer in compliance with the requirements of the Township herein,
from the initial acquisition of the permit, provided the defect(s) has not
been cured within such thirty-day period.
§ 308 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 313
1:172
a violation of this Part 3 continues or each Section of this Part 3 which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 313 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 313
1:173

Part 4
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 401. Intent. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
The Township of North Strabane finds that the development of cable
television and communications systems has the potential of having great
benefit and impact upon the residents of the Township. Because of the
complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television,
the Township further finds that the public convenience, safety and general
welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should
be vested in the Township or such persons as the Township shall designate.
It is the intent of this Part 4 and subsequent amendments to provide for
and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public
purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this Part
shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
§ 402. Short Title. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "North Strabane Cable
Communications Ordinance".
§ 403. Definitions. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
For the purposes of this Part the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number
include the plural numbers, and the use of any gender shall be applicable
to all genders whenever the sense requires. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be
given their common and ordinary meaning.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, SYSTEM, CABLE TELEVISION
SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CATV SYSTEM, COMMUNITY ANTENNA TV
SYSTEM — A system of antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides,
or other conductors, converters, amplifiers, headend equipment, master
controls, earth stations, equipment and facilities designed and constructed
for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and
distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals
within the Township.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — The right granted through a contractural agreement
between the Township and a person by which the Township authorizes such
person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and
maintain a Cable Communications System in the Township. Any Franchise
awarded by an agreement in accordance herewith shall be authorized by
resolution and shall be a nonexclusive franchise. The term "Franchise" shall
also include any "Franchise Renewal."
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:175
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — An agreement entitled "Franchise
Agreement" entered into between the Township and Grantee which is
authorized by resolution and which is enforceable by the Township and
Grantee and which sets forth the rights and obligations between the
Township and Grantee arising out of the Franchise.
GRANTEE — The party or parties granted a Franchise pursuant to this Part.
FRANCHISE FEE — Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by
the Township on a Grantee solely because of its status as such. The term
"Franchise Fee" does not include:
GROSS REVENUES — All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature or
other consideration derived directly or indirectly by a Grantee, its affiliates,
subsidiaries, parents, and any other person or entity in which Grantee has
a financial interest or which has a financial interest in Grantee, arising
from or attributable to operation of the Cable Television System within the
Township, including but not limited to:
Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against Grantee or cable subscribers);
(a)
Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by
Grantee for public, educational or governmental access facilities;
(b)
Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of
the Franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of
credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages;
(c)
(d) Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.
Revenue from all charges for services provided to subscribers of
entertainment and non-entertainment services (including leased access
fee) within the Town of North Strabane;
(a)
Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial
advertisements upon the Cable Television System;
(b)
(c) Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios;
Revenue from all charges for the installation, connection and
reinstatement of equipment necessary for the utilization of the Cable
Television System and the provision of subscriber and other services;
(d)
The sale, exchange or use or cablecast of any programming developed
for community use or institutional users;
(e)
Commissions received by Grantee based upon sales of services or
merchandise on programming services carried on the System.
(f)
§ 403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 403
1:176
LEASED ACCESS — The use on a fee-for-service basis of the Cable
Television System by business enterprises (whether profit, nonprofit or
governmental) to render services to the citizens of the Township and shall
include without limitation all use pursuant to Section 612 of the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC § 521 et seq.).
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture or organization of any kind.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who legally receives any one or more of the
services provided by the Cable Communications System.
STREET — The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, road, highway, freeway, easement, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, or driveway now or hereafter existing as such within the
Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Strabane, and all the territory within
its present and future boundaries and including any area over which the
Township exercises jurisdiction. The Board of Supervisors is the governing
authority of the Township.
§ 404. Police Powers. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Nothing in this Part or in any ordinance of Franchise Agreement awarding
a Franchise in accordance herewith shall be construed as an abrogation by
the Township of any of its police powers.
§ 405. Contents of Franchise Application. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Applications for a Franchise shall include at a minimum:
Items (b), (c), (e), and (f) shall be pro-rated based upon the total
number of subscribers served by the Cable Television System and
those subscribers residing in North Strabane.
Gross Revenues shall include the value at retail price levels of any
goods, service or other renumeration in non-monetary form (including
but not limited to stock options, complementary sports and other
event tickets) received by the Grantee or others described above for
performance by a Grantee or others described above of any advertising
or other service in connection with the Cable Television System.
1. A clear description of the identity of the applicant, including but not
limited to the name of the applicant, the address of the applicant, the
nature of the business entity, and evidence of the compliance of the
business entity with all applicable laws.
2. Evidence that the applicant has applied (including the payment of all
applicable fees) to the Township for all applicable construction permits.
3. Evidence that all aspects of the applicant's Cable Television System
comply with applicable zoning laws of the Township.
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:177
§ 406. Grant of Franchise. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
4. A map or maps of a scale of not less than one inch equaling 100 feet
showing the precise geographic area for which applicant seeks a
Franchise ("Franchise Area") and, also, for any applicant seeking
Franchise Renewal, the area served by the applicant at the time of the
application for renewal.
5. Evidence that applicant has applied (including the payment of all
applicable fees) to the Township for building and electrical code review
and approval of the plans and construction of the entire Cable
Television System within the Franchise Area.
6. Evidence of financial responsibility in the form of a letter of credit and
construction performance bond, conforming to § 421 and § 422 of this
Part, respectively.
7. A non-refundable application fee as may be established by the Township
to cover the costs of review, issuance and enforcement of Franchises
issued pursuant to this Part.
8. A schedule of construction, as established by the applicant and
reflected upon the map(s) provided pursuant to Subsection (4) of this
Section, showing by a logical geographic progression which streets
within the Franchise Area shall be constructed by the applicant within
each calendar quarter during the period of construction.
9. Detailed plans and specifications for the Cable Television System which
is proposed by the applicant.
1. Authority to Grant Franchise. The Township may grant a Franchise for
all or any defined portion of the Township. The Franchise Area shall be
the entire area defined in the Franchise Agreement. The Grantee shall
be required to provide services to all potential subscribers located in
the Franchise Area requesting such service, unless otherwise specified
in the Ordinance granting the Franchise.
2. Grant. In the event that Township shall grant to a Grantee a
nonexclusive, revocable (in accordance with its terms) Franchise to
construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a Cable Communications
System within the Franchise Area, or grant a renewal of an existing
obligation to provide the services of a Cable Communications System as
required by the provisions of this Part and the Franchise Agreement.
§ 405 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 406
1:178
Any Franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained
herein shall be consistent with Federal laws and regulations and State
general laws and regulations. In the event of conflict between the
terms and conditions of the Franchise and the terms and conditions
on which the Township can grant a Franchise, the general law and/or
statutory requirements shall, without exception, control.
Any Franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general
ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective.
Nothing in the Franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements
of the other codes and ordinances of the Township regarding permits,
fees to be paid or manner of construction.
3. Franchise Required. No Cable Communications System shall be
allowed to occupy or use the streets in the Township or be allowed to
operate without a Franchise in accordance with the provisions of this
Part.
4. Establishment of Franchise Requirements. The Township may establish
appropriate requirements for new Franchises or Franchise Renewals
(consistent with the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984), and
may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing
conditions and state of art in the cable industry.
5. Duration. The term of any Franchise and all rights, privileges,
obligations, and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established
in the Franchise Agreement, unless terminated sooner as hereinafter
provided.
6. Franchise Nonexclusive. Any Franchise or Franchise Renewal granted
shall be nonexclusive. The Township specifically reserves the right to
grant, at any time, such additional Franchises for a Cable
Communications System as it deems appropriate, provided however,
that such additional grants shall not contain more favorable or less
burdensome terms than those contained in existing Franchises nor
operate to materially modify, revoke, or terminate any rights previously
granted to any Grantee.
7. Franchise Applications. Applicants for a Franchise or Franchise
Renewal shall submit to the Township written applications utilizing the
standardized format provided by Township, at the time and place
designated by the Township for accepting applications, and shall
include the application fees designated by the Township.
8. Grant Procedure. All Franchise or Franchise Renewal applications
when filed shall be available for public inspection at places designated
by the Township.
A. Initial Franchises. No later than 90 days after the final date for
filing applications, one or more public hearings shall be held on the
applications. A decision shall be made by the Township not later
than 90 days after the conclusion of all such public hearings based
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:179
§ 407. Authority for Use of Streets. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
§ 408. Conditions on Street Occupancy. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
upon an evaluation of the application(s), the hearings, and other
information that the Township may deem relevant. Township may
grant one or more Franchises, or may decline to grant any
Franchise.
B. Franchise Renewals. Applications may be made during the period
30 months to 36 months prior to expiration of an existing
Franchise. The procedure for Franchise Renewals shall be
governed by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.
1. For the purposes of operating and maintaining a Cable Communications
System in the Township, Grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and
along the streets within the Township such lines, cables, conductors,
ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals,
attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and
appurtenant to the operation of the Cable System, provided that all
applicable permits are applied for and granted, all fees paid and all
other Township codes and ordinances are otherwise complied with.
2. Prior to construction or alteration, Grantee shall in each case file plans
with all appropriate Township agencies and utility companies and
receive written approval of such plans, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Grantee shall provide a monthly progress
report to Township through the completion of construction or
alteration.
3. Grantee shall construct and maintain a Cable Communications System
so as not to interfere with other uses of streets. Grantee shall make use
of existing poles and other facilities available to Grantee. Grantee shall
individually notify all residents affected by proposed construction prior
to the commencement of that work.
4. Notwithstanding the above grant to use streets, no street shall be used
by Grantee if the Township, in its sole opinion, determines that such use
is inconsistent with the terms, conditions or provisions by which such
street was created or dedicated, or presently used.
1. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the Grantee within the Township shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and
other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any
of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.
2. In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved
area, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner
§ 406 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 408
1:180
§ 409. Erection of Poles. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
§ 410. Undergrounding. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works, replace and restore
such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in as good a
condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done.
3. The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and places of
the Township so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming
in contact with the wires and cables of the Grantee, except that at the
option of the Township, such trimming may be done by it or under its
supervision and direction at the expense of the Grantee.
1. No Franchise shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the
Grantee to construct or install poles or wireholding structures within
streets for the purpose of placing cables, wires, line or otherwise,
without the written consent of the Township. Such consent shall be
given upon such terms and conditions as the Board of Supervisors in its
sole direction may prescribe. The Grantee shall perform, at its sole
expense, all tree trimming required to maintain the poles clear of
obstructions.
2. With respect to any poles or wire-holding structures which a Grantee is
authorized to construct and install within streets, a public utility
serving the Township may, if denied the privilege of utilizing such poles
or wire-holding structures by the Grantee, apply for such permission to
the Board of Supervisors. If the Board of Supervisors finds that such use
would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere
with Grantee's operations, the Board of Supervisors may authorize such
use subject to such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate. Such
authorization shall include the condition that the public utility pay to
the Grantee any and all actual and necessary costs incurred by the
Grantee in permitting such use.
1. Except as hereinafter provided, in all areas of the Township where the
cables, wires and other like facilities of a public utility are placed
underground, each Grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires,
and other facilities underground. Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted
terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing technology
reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so
located as not to be unsightly or unsafe. In any area of the Township
where there are certain cables, wires and other like facilities of a public
utility underground and at least one operable cable, wire or like facility
of a public utility suspended above the ground from poles a Grantee
may construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from the
same pole.
2. With respect to any cables, wires and other like facilities constructed
and installed by a Grantee above ground, the Grantee shall, at its sole
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 410
1:181
§ 411. Relocation. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
If during the term of a Franchise the Township, a public utility or authority,
a public water company or authority, a public sanitation company or
authority, a public drainage authority or any other similar special public
entity or authority elects to alter, repair, realign, abandon, improve, vacate,
reroute or change the grade of any street or to replace, repair, install,
maintain, or otherwise alter any above ground or underground cable, wire
conduit, pipe, line, pole, wireholding structure, structure, or other facility
utilized for the provision of utility or other services or transportation of
drainage, sewage or other liquids, the Grantee has, except as otherwise
hereinafter provided, at its sole expense, remove or relocate as necessary
its poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and any other
facilities which it has installed. The entities may decide among themselves
who is to bear the cost of relocation; provided, that the Township shall not
be liable to a Grantee for such costs. Regardless of who bears the costs, a
Grantee shall take action to remove or relocate at such time or times as are
directed by the entity of company undertaking the work.
§ 412. Movement of Buildings. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Each Grantee shall, upon request by any person holding a building moving
permit, franchise or other approval issued by any governmental entity
having jurisdiction over the same, temporarily remove, raise or lower its
wire to permit the movement of buildings. The expense of such removal,
raising or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting same, and a
Grantee shall be authorized to require such payment in advance. A Grantee
shall be given not less than 48 hours oral or written notice to arrange for
such temporary wire changes.
§ 413. Removal. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
expense, reconstruct and reinstall such cables, wires or other facilities
underground pursuant to any project under which the cables, wires or
other like facilities of such utilities are placed underground within an
area. The duty of a Grantee to place its cables, wires and other like
facilities underground shall arise only if all like facilities of utilities
which are existing above ground are placed underground.
1. Upon expiration or termination of a Franchise without renewal the
Grantee may either disable its underground cable, or, at its option,
remove any underground cable from the streets which has been
installed in compliance with the following:
A. Grantee shall file written notice with the Township not later than 30
calendar days following the date of expiration or termination of the
Franchise of its intention to remove cable and a schedule for
removal by location. The scheduled timing of removal shall be
subject to approval and regulation by the Superintendent of Public
Works of the Township. Removal shall be completed not later than
§ 410 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 413
1:182
§ 414. Universal Service. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Any Cable Television System Franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions
of this Part shall provide equal and uniform cable television service to
all persons requesting service in the Franchise Area, except as provided
otherwise in the Franchise Agreement.
§ 415. The Franchise Area. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
The applicant shall define a Franchise Area whose contour, so far as is
possible, shall follow streets. Within the perimeter of the contour, no
dwelling units shall be excluded from service provided to the Franchise
Area defined by the applicant.
§ 416. General Capability. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Each Cable Television System shall, at minimum:
one year following the date of the expiration of the Franchise
and all streets shall be repaired to their preexisting condition.
Underground cable and conduit in the streets which is not removed
shall be deemed abandoned and title thereto shall be vested in the
Township.
B. Upon expiration or termination of a Franchise without renewal the
Grantee, at its sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation
by the Township, remove from the streets all above ground
elements of the Cable Television System, including but not limited
to amplifier boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, and cable
attached to or suspended from poles.
C. The Grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits,
licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and
deposit such security as required by applicable ordinance of the
Township, shall conduct and complete the work of removal in
compliance with all such applicable ordinances, and shall restore
the streets to the same condition they were in before the work of
removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not
later than one year following the date of expiration of the
Franchise.
1. Relay to subscriber terminals those broadcast signals required by
Federal law, rules and regulations.
2. Distribute in color all signals which it receives in color.
3. Distribute in stereo all signals which are capable of being received by
Grantee in stereo.
4. Make available upon request at reasonable cost by any subscribers
receiving channels showing premium services and pay per view events,
§ 413 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 416
1:183
§ 417. Standby Power. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Each Cable Television System shall include equipment capable of providing
standby power for headend, transportation and truck amplifiers for a
minimum of three hours and all repair work shall be performed in a manner
to minimize interruption of service. The system shall incorporate safeguards
necessary to prevent injury to linemen resulting from a standby generator
powering a "dead" utility line.
§ 418. Override Capability. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Each Cable Television System shall include an "Emergency Alert Capability"
which will permit the Township, in times of emergency and in cooperation
with other communities served by the Cable Television System, to override
by remote control alternatively the audio and video of all channels
simultaneously.
§ 419. Technical Standards. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
a lockout device which prevents the unauthorized viewing of such
channels.
5. Make available to subscribers at reasonable cost, upon request, an RF
switch (an A-B switch) permitting conversion from cable to antenna
reception.
6. Provide state of the art service and capacity as is reasonable in light of
both cost and services provided by neighboring systems of comparable
size.
1. Each Grantee shall construct, install and maintain its Cable Television
System in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable
laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements,
and technical standards equivalent to those established by the FCC.
Each Grantee shall provide to the Board of Supervisors, upon request,
written reports of the Grantee's annual proof of performance tests
conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements.
2. Each Grantee shall at all times comply with the National Electrical
Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code
National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); applicable FCC and other
Federal, State and local regulations; and codes and other ordinances of
the Township.
3. The Cable Television System shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property within the Township or other areas where
the Grantee may have equipment located.
4. All working facilities, conditions and procedures, used or occurring
during construction of the Cable Television System shall comply with
the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
§ 416 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 419
1:184
§ 420. Transfers. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
5. Construction, installation and maintenance of the Cable Television
System shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and
in close coordination with public and private utilities serving the
Township following accepted construction procedures and practices
and working through existing committees and organizations.
6. All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
consideration.
7. Any antenna structure used in the Cable Television System shall comply
with construction, marking and lighting of antennae structures,
required by the United States Department of Transportation.
8. The Grantee shall comply with all FCC regulations regarding RF
leakage, which shall be checked periodically in accordance with FCC
regulations at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove
no interference signal combinations are possible. Radiation shall be
measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation or
communication radio sites to prove no interference to air navigational
reception.
1. A Franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole
or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property
therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent
of the Township. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably.
No such consent shall be required for a transfer to or among affiliated
companies or to related parties, nor a transfer in trust, mortgage, or
other hypothecation as a whole or in part to secure an indebtedness,
except that when such hypothecation shall exceed 50% of the market
value of the property used by the Grantee in conducting the business
of the franchise.
The proposed assignee must show technical ability, financial capability,
legal qualifications and general character qualifications as determined
by the Township and must agree to comply with all provisions of the
Franchise and such conditions as may be prescribed by the Board of
Supervisors expressed by resolution. The Township shall be deemed
to have denied a proposed transfer or assignment in the event that
its consent is not communicated in writing to Grantee within 120
days following receipt of written notice of the proposed transfer or
assignment.
2. The Grantee shall promptly notify the Township of any actual or
proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of,
control of the Grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited
to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever
§ 419 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 420
1:185
§ 421. Performance Bond. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
manner exercised. Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of
the Grantee shall make the Franchise subject to cancellation unless and
until the Township shall have consented thereto, which consent will not
be unreasonably withheld. However, a transfer of control shall not be
deemed to have occurred where the transfer is (i) to or among affiliated
companies; or (ii) to related persons. For the purpose of determining
whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of
control, the Township may inquire into the qualifications of the
prospective controlling party and the Grantee shall assist the Township
in any such inquiry.
3. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall
arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any unrelated person or
group of persons of 10% of the voting control of the Grantee.
4. The consent or approval of the Board of Supervisors to any transfer of
the Franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the right of the
Township in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be
expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of a Franchise.
5. In any absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Township will not
approve any transfer or assignment of a Franchise prior to substantial
completion of construction of a proposed system.
6. In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without
the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the Franchise
Agreement.
1. Each Grantee shall file with its acceptance of a Franchise, and at all
times thereafter maintain in full force and effect until construction of its
Cable Television System has been completed, an acceptable corporate
surety bond issued by a surety licensed therefor by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania in the estimated amount of the proposed construction
as specified in the Franchise Agreement. The surety bond shall be
conditioned that in the event the Grantee shall fail to complete
construction of the Cable Television System in a timely manner whether
or not the Franchise is terminated, then there shall be recoverable
jointly damages and costs of repairing or completing the Cable
Television System, and cost of removal or abandonment of property and
repair of streets and other public or private improvements, up to the
full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation
until the Grantee has satisfied all of its construction obligations which
may have arisen from the acceptance of the Franchise or from its
exercise of any privileges thereunder. The bond shall not be cancelled
by the surety, whether for failure to pay a premium or otherwise,
without 30 calendar days advance written notice mailed by the surety to
the Township Secretary by certified mail. The form of the bond and
surety shall be subject to the approval by the Township Solicitor.
§ 420 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 421
1:186
§ 422. Letter of Credit. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
2. Neither the provisions of this Section, nor any bond presented pursuant
thereto, nor any damages recovered thereunder shall be construed to
excuse faithful performance by the Grantee or to limit the liability of the
Grantee under the Franchise or for damages.
1. Within 30 days of the effective date of the Ordinance awarding a
Franchise or Franchise Renewal, a Grantee shall cause to be
established and issued by a Federally insured commercial lending
institution an irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the Township in an
amount as specified in the Franchise Agreement or Franchise Renewal
Agreement. The Grantee shall be required to maintain a letter of credit
throughout the term. The form and substance of said letter of credit are
subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor. The purpose of the
aforesaid letter of credit is to insure the faithful performance by a
Grantee of all provisions of this Part and the Grantee's Franchise
Agreement, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of
any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the
Township having jurisdiction over a Grantee's acts or defaults under a
Franchise and the payment by the Grantee of any penalties, liquidated
damages, claims, liens and taxes due the Township which arise by
reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system,
including cost of removal or abandonment of any property of Grantee.
2. The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the Township by presentation
of a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a written
certificate on Township letterhead signed by the Township Manager
certifying that the Grantee has failed to comply with this Part, the
Franchise or Franchise Agreement, stating the specific reasons
therefor, and stating the basis for the amount being drawn. Examples of
a basis for drawing upon the letter of credit include but are not limited
to the following:
A. Failure of the Grantee to pay the Township any taxes after 10 days
written notice of delinquency.
B. Failure of the Grantee to pay to the Township after 10 days written
notice, any amounts due and owing the Township by reason of the
indemnity provisions of this Part.
C. Failure by the Grantee to pay to the Township any liquidated
damages due and owing to the Township;
D. Failure by the Grantee to pay any amounts owing as franchise fees
pursuant to § 429 and § 430 of this Part.
3. The Grantee shall be required to maintain a Letter of Credit throughout
the term in the amount stated on the Franchise Agreement, and shall,
within 10 days of the Township's draw-down under a letter of credit,
increase its letter of credit or provide a new letter of credit so that the
§ 421 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 422
1:187
§ 423. Indemnification. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Each Grantee shall, at its sole expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, and their capacity as such, the officers, agents
and employees thereof, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions,
liability and judgments for damages or otherwise:
§ 424. Grantee Insurance. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Township will have available the full amount stated in the Franchise
Agreement.
4. The rights reserved to the Township with respect to the letter of credit
are in addition to all other right of the Township, whether reserved by a
Franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of
a right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right
the Township may have.
1. For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of use
of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is
physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through
the acts or omissions of the Grantee or its officers, agents, employees,
or contractors or to which the Grantee's or its officers, agents,
employees or contractors acts or omissions in any way contribute.
2. Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for
invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or
corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright,
trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of
any person, firm or corporation.
3. Arising out of or alleged to arise out of Grantee's failure to comply with
the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of the United
States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any local agency applicable
to the Grantee in its business.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the parties indemnified and
held harmless from participating in the defense of any litigation by
their own counsel at the Grantee's sole expense. Such participation
shall not under any circumstances relieve the Grantee from its duty
of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against
such party.
1. As a part of the indemnification provided by § 423, but without limiting
the foregoing, each Grantee shall file with the application, and at all
times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, an
acceptable policy or policies of liability insurance, including
comprehensive general liability insurance, products/completed
operations liability, personal injury liability, owners and contractors
protective liability, broad form property damage, contractual liability,
automobile liability (owned, nonowned and hired automobiles), workers
§ 422 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 424
1:188
§ 425. Alternative Remedies. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
No provision of this Part shall be deemed to bar the right of the Township
to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the
Franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated
thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this Part
not the right of the Township to recover monetary damages (except where
liquidated damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation the
Grantee, or judicial enforcement of the Grantee's obligations by means of
specific performance, injunction relief or mandate, or any other judicial
remedy at law or in equity.
§ 426. Non-Enforcement. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
A Grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of the Franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive
promulgated thereunder by reason of any failure of the Township or its
officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt compliance.
§ 427. Communication With Regulatory Agencies. [Ord. 167, 8/8/
1989]
On request, the Grantee shall provide to the Township copies of all petitions,
applications, communications and reports submitted by the Grantee to the
FCC or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having
jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting construction or operation
of a Cable Television System or services provided through such a system.
Copies of responses or any other communications from the regulatory
agencies to a Grantee likewise shall be provided on request to the Township.
compensation and employer liability. The Grantee and the Township
and its officers, agents, and employees shall be named as additional
insureds, and the policy or policies shall contain cross-liability
endorsements. Policies of insurance shall be in the single limit amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence. The insurance policy or policies shall
insure against the types of liabilities covered by the indemnification and
hold harmless provisions of § 423.
2. The form and substance of the policy or policies of insurance shall be
subject to approval by the Township Solicitor.
3. The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by the Grantee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the Franchise. Each policy
of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will
not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment
of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of the
Grantee or for other reasons, except after 30 calendar days advance
written notice mailed by the insurer to the Township Secretary by
certified mail.
§ 424 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 428
1:189
§ 428. Rates. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
The Township Board of Supervisors expressly reserves the right to approve
the rates which the Grantee charges its subscribers for basic cable service
to the extent the Board of Supervisors is permitted to do so by law. Such
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. "Basic cable service" shall
mean any tier of service which includes the retransmission of local
broadcast signals. The Grantee shall not deny, delay, interrupt or terminate
Cable Communications Services to subscribers or users because the Board
of Supervisors denies a request for a rate increase, provided, however,
that nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Grantee's right to seek
judicial review of such action. Grantee shall notify the Township of any
proposed rate increase at least 60 days in advance of the effective date of
said increase. The increase shall take place automatically unless denied by
the Board of Supervisors at a public meeting, after public hearing, during
the sixty-day period.
§ 429. Franchise Fees. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with
which to defray the costs of regulation arising out of the granting of
Franchises under this Part and each Grantee shall pay Franchise Fees in the
amount prescribe by § 430.
§ 430. Amount and Payment of Franchise Fees. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
§ 431. Interest on Delinquent Franchise Fees. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Any Franchise Fees which remain unpaid after the dates specified in § 430
above shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the rate of
18% per annum.
1. During the term of each Franchise, each Grantee shall pay to the
Township an amount equal to 5% per year of the Grantee's annual gross
revenues. Said fees shall be paid quarterly not later than August 1,
November 1, February 1 and May 1 for the preceding three-month
period ending, respectively, June 30, September 30, December 31 and
March 31. Not later than the date of each payment, each Grantee shall
file with the Township a written statement in the form prescribed by the
Township and signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the
Grantee, which identifies the sources and amounts of gross revenues
received by a Grantee during the quarter for which payment is made.
2. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim which the Township
may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of
this Section.
§ 428 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 432
1:190
§ 432. Accounting Standards. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
Not less than annually, the Grantee shall provide the Township with an
unqualified certification of an independent certified public accountant
certifying the accuracy of the Franchise Fee payments made during the
preceding 12 months pursuant to § 430. Said certification shall be prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards as established
by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB).
§ 433. Gross Revenue Calculations. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
1. For purposes of the gross revenue calculations required by § 430 above,
the phrase "consideration derived directly or indirectly" as used in
§ 403(9) above shall include but not be limited to:
A. Any contract in which the Grantee is to receive a percentage of the
gross revenues and/or a percentage of the net income of the other
party to the transaction by reason of the activities encompassed by
said contract.
B. Any debt relationship in which the Grantee as debtor borrows
funds at a rate more advantageous than that generally available to
similarly situated entities of similar credit worthiness.
C. Any debt relationship in which the Grantee as creditor receives a
rate of interest exceeding that which would otherwise be paid by a
similarly situated debtor of similar credit worthiness.
D. Any option or warrant to purchase the stock or other equity interest
in an entity or entity related to an entity which generates revenues
arising from or attributable to the operation of the system, where
such option or warrant is obtained in lieu of actual payment to
Grantee for services provided.
E. Any debt relationship which has conversion privileges to a form of
equity of the nature described in the preceding subsection.
2. For purposes of the gross revenue calculation required by § 430 above,
the phrase "arising from or attributable to operation of the cable
television system" as used in § 403(9) above shall include but not be
limited to:
A. Any activity, product or service which generates revenue of any
type whatsoever to the Grantee and which is offered to the
subscribers of the system.
B. Revenue derived from the sale of the System's subscriber list or
any portion thereof.
C. Any consideration received for the use of the System's production
facilities or administrative facilities.
§ 432 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 434
1:191
§ 434. Auditing and Financial Records. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
During the term of each Franchise, the Township may, not more frequently
than once each year, conduct an audit of the books, records and accounts
of the Grantee for the purpose of determining whether the Grantee has
paid Franchise Fees in the amounts prescribed by § 430. The audit may be
conducted by an independent certified public accounting firm retained by
the Township, and shall be conducted at the sole expense of the Township.
The party conducting the audit shall prepare a written report containing its
findings, and the report shall be filed with the Township, and mailed to the
Township and Grantee.
§ 435. Liquidated Damages. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
1. By acceptance of the Franchise granted by the Township, a Grantee
understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and
performance requirements as stipulated in this Part and the Franchise
Agreement will result in damage to the Township, and that it is and will
be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the
event of delay or non-performance. As a result, the Grantee shall be
liable for liquidated damages in amounts set forth below:
A. For failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in
accordance with this Part and the Franchise Agreement, unless the
Board of Supervisors specifically approves the delay by motion or
resolution due to the occurrence of conditions beyond Grantee's
control, a Grantee shall pay $300 per day for each day, or part
thereof, the deficiency continues.
B. For failure to provide to the Township within 15 days of written
request, data, documents, reports, information, a Grantee shall pay
$50 per day, or part thereof, each violation occurs or continues.
Failure to provide each document shall constitute a separate
violation.
C. For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the
System within 15 days following a written request pursuant to this
Part or the Franchise Agreement, a Grantee shall pay to Township
$100 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance
continues.
D. For failure to provide in a continuing manner the types of services
proposed in the Franchise Agreement, unless the Board of
Supervisors specifically excuses the delay or change, or the
Grantee has obtained modification of its obligation under § 625 of
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Grantee shall pay to
the Township $300 per day for each day, or part thereof, that each
noncompliance continues.
E. If the Township concludes that a Grantee is liable for liquidated
damages pursuant to this Section, it shall issue to Grantee by
§ 434 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 435
1:192
§ 436. Breach or Default by Grantee. [Ord. 167, 8/8/1989]
certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages.
The notice shall set forth the basis for the assessment and inform
the Grantee that liquidated damages will be assessed beginning
15 days after the date of the notice unless the assessment notice
is appealed for hearing before the Board of Supervisors and the
Board of Supervisors rules that a reduction in the assessment or
that an extension of time or other relief should be granted. A
Grantee desiring a hearing before the Board of Supervisors shall
send a written notice of appeal by certified mail to the Township
within 10 days of the date on which the Township sent the notice
of intention to assess liquidated damages. A public hearing on
the Grantee's appeal shall [held] be within 30 days of the date of
Grantee's notice of appeal.
2. Unless the Board of Supervisors indicates to the contrary, said
liquidated damages shall be assessed beginning with the date on which
the Township sent the notice of the intention to assess liquidated
damages and continuing thereafter until such time as the violation
ceases, as determined by the Board of Supervisors.
1. In the event the Grantee should violate any of the terms of this Part or
any applicable Federal, State or local law or regulation, or any of the
rules and regulations as may hereafter be from time to time lawfully
adopted, or any provision of the Franchise Agreement, the Township
may, after giving notice of deficiency, and after the time period for
correction (and appeal) has expired:
A. Make such correction itself and charge the cost of the same to the
Grantee.
B. Secure the proceeds from the performance bond required by § 421
of this part for construction delays.
C. Secure the proceeds from the Letter of Credit required by § 422 of
this Part, as authorized by § 435 of this Part.
D. In the case of a material breach of this part or the Franchise
Agreement, declare the Grantee in default and terminate the
Franchise and rights granted under the Franchise.
2. A material breach by Grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
A. Violation of any material provision of the Franchise Agreement,
Franchise Renewal Agreement, this Part or any material rule,
order, regulation or determination of the Township made pursuant
to the Franchise Agreement, Franchise Renewal Agreement or this
Part.
§ 435 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 436
1:193
B. Attempt to evade any material provision of the Franchise
Agreement, Franchise Renewal Agreement or this Part or the
practicing of any fraud or deceit upon the Township or its
subscribers or customers.
C. Failure to begin or complete System construction, reconstruction
or System extension as provided under the Franchise Agreement,
Franchise Renewal Agreement or this Part.
D. Failure to provide the types of services promised, assuming
Grantee has unsuccessfully pursued whatever recourse is available
under § 416 of this Part and § 625 of the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984.
E. Failure to restore cable service after 96 consecutive hours of
interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is
obtained from the Township or due to conditions beyond the
Grantee's control.
F. Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or
negotiation of the Franchise Agreement or Franchise Renewal
Agreement.
3. Prior to terminating a Franchise, the Township shall make a written
demand that a Grantee comply with any such provision, rule, order or
determination under or pursuant to this Part, the Franchise Agreement
or Franchise Renewal Agreement. If the material breach by the Grantee
continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand
without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is
being actively and expeditiously pursued, the Board of Supervisors may
schedule a public hearing to address termination of a Franchise. The
Board of Supervisors shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear
any person interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion
whether or not any material breach by the Grantee has occurred. If the
Board of Supervisors shall determine the material breach by a Grantee
was the fault of the Grantee and within its control, the Board of
Supervisors may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the
Grantee shall be forfeited and terminated immediately or forfeited and
terminated unless there is compliance within such period as the Board
of Supervisors may fix.
4. Any enforcement action or remedy provided by this Section or this Part
or by the Franchise Agreement shall not be deemed exclusive but shall
be alternative or cumulative in nature.
5. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Part, the Township
shall not impose any penalty upon the Grantee where either the
violation or failure to cure the same results from force majeure, labor
dispute, declaration of war or other hostilities, Act of God, or any other
reason beyond the control of the Grantee.
§ 436 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 436
1:194
Part 5
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 501. License Required. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 1]
No person, firm, association, co-partnership or corporation shall, at any
time, have in its or their possession within the Township of North Strabane,
Washington County, Pennsylvania, any device, juke box, mechanical device,
electronic and/or video computer game or any other apparatus of like
nature whatsoever, for the playing of games, for profit, amusement and
whether or not a prize is offered, whether or not registering a score,
whether operated by pegs, balls, electronic batteries, central lighting
system or by any other device; and music boxes, phonographs or other
similar musical devices, operated through the insertion therein of a coin,
slug, token, plate or key, without first having procured a license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
§ 502. Application. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 2]
Any person, firm, association, co-partnership or corporation using,
operating or causing to be used or operated any such device as
aforementioned, shall first make application for a license or licenses, to the
Township Secretary, on forms provided by the Township, which application
shall set forth the following:
1. The name of the Township;
2. The name and address of the person operating or managing such
device;
3. The place where such device is to be used or played;
4. The number and kind of machines or devices to be operated and giving
the manufacturer's name and/or identification when available;
5. The year for which the license fee shall have been paid;
6. The date on which such license fee shall have been paid;
7. The amount of license fee paid.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:195
§ 503. Definitions. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 3; as amended by Ord.
239, 10/28/1997, § 1; and by Ord. 281, 2/26/2002, § 1]
Unless otherwise stated, the following terms shall have, for the purpose of
this Part, the meaning herein indicated:
DEVICE — Any pool table, juke box, electronic and/or video computer game,
and/or other mechanical amusement device under this Part.
ELECTRONIC CASINO DEVICE — Any device which is generally considered
a gambling type device and which does or may provide a type of payoff
including, but not limited to, video poker machines, slot machines, ticket
devices, baccarat machines, mechanical or electronic games of chance and
like devices.
JUKE BOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device, which,
upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice
or other opening or by the payment of any price, operated or that may
be operated for the emission of any score, song, music or other similar
amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, other than a juke box,
which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key, may be
operated for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, association, co-partnership or
corporation.
Said application shall thereafter be referred to the Township Police for
investigation for approval and after such approval, a license shall be
issued by the Township Secretary as hereinafter set forth. Whenever
any fee shall have been paid under this Part, the Township Secretary
shall prepare a duplicate certificate. The original certificate, to which
the Township Seal shall be affixed, shall be given to the person
operating or managing such device and the duplicate shall be kept on
file in the Township Offices. The Township Secretary shall also give to
each person paying such fee, a seal to be affixed to each device upon
which a fee is paid. Such seal shall indicate the year for which the fee
is paid, the type of device and a number.
In case of a loss, defacement or destruction of any original certificate
or seal, the Township Secretary may re-issue another certificate or seal
upon payment of a fee of $2 and amend the duplicate of the certificates
first issued. In the event of removal of any device regulated under this
act to another location within the Township or in case of a change of
identity of the person operating or managing any such device, such
fact shall be reported within 15 days to the Township Secretary, who
shall immediately amend the certificate and the duplicate certificate.
No refund on any license fee shall be granted under this Part in the
event any device is destroyed, stolen or otherwise disposed of.
§ 502 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 504
1:196
§ 504. Gambling Devices. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 4; as amended by
Ord. 281, 2/26/2002, § 2]
Nothing in this Part shall be in any way construed to authorize, license or
permit any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law,
nor shall any such device be used for gambling purposes unless otherwise
allowed by law.
§ 505. Inspection. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 5]
It shall be the duty of the Township Police to regulate and supervise the
operation of all such devices and to regularly inspect the premises where
the same are being used and to require full compliance with the Laws of
the Commonwealth and this Part so that the same shall not amount to a
nuisance or be used in violation of the same.
§ 506. Revocation of Premises. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 6]
In the event that any such machine or device is so operated as to constitute
a nuisance or in violation of any of the Laws of the Commonwealth or
ordinances of the Township, then the license as to all machines and/or
devices operated on subject premises shall be revoked and there shall be no
return of the license fee.
§ 507. License Fees. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 7; as amended by Ord.
147, 11/26/1985; by Ord. 239, 10/28/1997; and by Ord. 281, 2/26/
2002, § 3]
The license fee per year for every mechanical device shall be as follows:
§ 508. Enforcement and Remedies. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 8; as
amended by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
A. All mechanical gambling type devices, including but not limited to,
video poker machines, slot machines, ticket devices, baccarat
machines, mechanical or electronic games of chance and like devices —
$300.
B. All other devices as set forth in this Part — $200.
1. Enforcement Notice.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this Part 5 has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this Section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
§ 504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 508
1:197
§ 509. Confidentiality of Information. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 9]
Any information gained by the Township Secretary or any other officials or
agents of the Township arising out of any investigations and/or verifications
required or authorized by this Part shall be confidential, except for official
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record
and any other person against whom the Township intends to
take action.
(2) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in
violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provision of this Part.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Board of Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(6) That the failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Board of
Supervisors, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions
clearly described.
2. Enforcement Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Part 5 shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues or each Section of
this Part 5 which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Section.
C. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this Section.
§ 508 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 509
1:198
purposes, and except in accordance with proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any information, contrary to
the provisions of this Section shall constitute a violation of this Part.
§ 510. Overdue License Fee. [Ord. 114, 4/13/1982, § 10]
If any fee levied in pursuance of this Part shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of the fee due shall be added thereto.
§ 509 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 510
1:199

Part 6
PARADES AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS
§ 601. Definition. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
In this Part, the word PERSON shall mean and include any natural person,
partnership, association, firm or corporation. The singular shall include the
plural; the plural shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
§ 602. Permit Required; Application; Refusal or Revocation. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
No person shall conduct any street parade, street meeting, or public
gathering of any nature, involving participation by five or more persons,
upon any street in the Township of North Strabane without first having
obtained a permit from the Township Secretary. Such permit shall be issued
without payment of a fee. The application for such permit shall be made
to the Township Secretary in person, at least 24 hours before the
commencement of such parade, meeting or gathering. Such permit shall
state the time and place of such parade, meeting or gathering, and the route
in the case of a parade, and it shall be a violation of this Part for any person
to conduct or take part in any such parade, meeting or gathering otherwise
than in strict adherence of the terms of such permit; provided, the Township
Secretary may refuse or revoke a permit under this section, upon cause
shown that the parade, meeting or gathering contemplated would be likely
to interfere with the peace and good order of the Township Secretary or
create an unreasonable interference or obstruction in the streets or public
grounds in the Township.
§ 603. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:201

Part 7
LEWD MATERIALS
§ 701. Legislative Finding, Purpose and Short Title. [Ord. 145, 8/27/
1985, § 1]
§ 702. Definitions. [Ord. 145, 8/27/1985, § 2]
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC — The matter or performance may be
purchased or attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee
arrangement, or for a separate fee for each item or performance.
COMMUNITY STANDARDS — The standards of the community from which
the jury is drawn or would be drawn if it were the trier of the fact.
DISPLAYS PUBLICLY — Exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any
fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in
such a manner that it may be readily seen, and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway, or
public sidewalk, or from the property of others.
DISSEMINATE — To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Any pictorial, two- or three-dimensional
material depicting: human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual
intercourse, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals,
sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal
human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or of anthropological
significance shall not be deemed to be included in the foregoing definition.
1. The Township Supervisors find that the crass commercial exploitation
of explicit sexual conduct through the public exhibition of obscene films
and the sale of obscene publications and devices, and the use of socalled
massage parlors and model studios for the purpose of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution constitutes a debasement and distortion of a
sensitive key relationship of human existence, central to family life,
community welfare and the development of human personality, is
indecent and offensive to the senses and to public morals and interferes
with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, in that such
interference with the interest of the public in the quality of life and total
community environment, the tone of commerce in the community,
property values, and the public safety; and that the continued operation
of such activities is detrimental to the best health, safety, convenience,
good morals and general welfare of the Township and of the residents,
citizens, inhabitants and business thereof. Accordingly, the Supervisors
hereby declare such activities to be illegal as hereinafter set forth, and
further, that such activities are public nuisances, and herein establishes
penalties for such activities.
2. This Part may be known and cited as the "Obscenity Control
Ordinance."
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:203
ILLICIT SEX OR SEXUAL IMMORALITY — Any public display of human
genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; fondling or other erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast.
KNOWINGLY, KNOWLEDGE — Being aware of or having knowledge of the
contents or character of the patently offensive conduct, demonstration, film,
publication, or acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution which occur
on the premises or failure to exercise reasonable inspection which would
disclose such character.
MASSAGE — Any process consisting of kneading, rubbing or otherwise
manipulating the skin of the body of a human being either with the hand or
by means of electrical instruments or apparatus or other special apparatus
where performed on a member of the opposite sex, but shall not include
massages by duly licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, registered
nurses and practical nurses operating under a physician's directions,
registered speech pathologists, physical or occupational therapists and
properly licensed masseur or masseuse who treat only patients
recommended by a licensed physician and who operate only under such
physician's direction; nor shall this definition include any massage of the
face or neck practiced by beauticians, cosmetologists and barbers duly
licensed.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, room, place or establishment
where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage is applied upon
the human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath,
chiropractor, registered nurse and practical nurse operating under a
physician's directions, registered speech pathologist, physical or
occupational therapist and properly licensed masseur and masseuse who
treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate only
under such physician's direction, whether with or without the use of
mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include turkish
bathhouses. The term shall not include a regularly licensed hospital,
medical clinic or nursing home, duly licensed beauty parlors or barber
shops.
MATERIAL OR MATTER — Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed
or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture,
or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any
recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction
or any other articles, equipment or machines.
MINOR — Any person 17 years of age, or younger.
MODEL STUDIO — Any premises on which there is conducted the business
of furnishing figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being
observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who
pay a fee, or other consideration or compensation, or a gratuity, for the
right or opportunity so to depict the figure model, or for admission to,
or for permission to remain upon, or as a condition for remaining upon
the premises; or any premises where there is conducted the business of
§ 702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 702
1:204
furnishing or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted; provided,
however, that the term "model studio" shall not include (1) any studio
which is operated by any college or junior college, public school, or any
governmental agency wherein the person, firm, association, partnership,
or corporation operating it has met the requirements of the State of
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized
thereunder to issue and confer a diploma or honorary diploma; or (2) any
premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing, providing or
procuring figure models solely for any studio described in subsection (1)
of this subsection; or (3) any studio operated by a tax exempt, nonprofit
corporation devoted to the development of art and its appreciation.
NUDE — Shall include: (1) completely without clothing or (2) with the
human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full
opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OJBECTIONABLE PUBLICATIONS AND MATERIALS — Those items which
depict illicit sex or sexual immorality or nude or partially denuded figures.
OBSCENE — The average person applying contemporary community
standards would find that the predominant appeal of the subject matter
taken as a whole, is to prurient interest; that is, a shameful or morbid
interest in sexual conduct, nudity, or excretion; and the subject matter
depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive manner, and the
subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE — So offensive on its face as to affront current
standards of decency, and shall be deemed to include any of the following
described forms of sexual conduct, if they are depicted so as to affront
current standards of decency:
An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
real or animated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being
and an animal.
(1)
Sadomasochistic abuse meaning flagellation or torture or sexual
gratification, by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments
or in revealing costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
(2)
Masturbation, excretory functions, and lewd exhibition of the genitals,
including any explicit close-up representation of a human genital or
organ or spread-eagle exposure of female genital organs.
(3)
Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or
naked pubic area or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts
(4)
§ 702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:205
PERFORMANCE — Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other
exhibition performed before an audience.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships, firms, corporations, associations,
jointstock companies, trusts and any unincorporated organizations.
Whenever used in a clause describing or imposing a fine or term of
imprisonment or both, the term "person" as applied to a partnership shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation or
joint-stock company shall mean the officers thereof and as applied to a trust
shall mean the trustees thereof.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space,
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
PORNOGRAPHIC FOR MINORS — Any material or device or performance
is "pornographic for minors" if it is primarily devoted to description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse; and its predominant appeal is to
prurient interest in sex; and, it is patently offensive to prevailing standards
in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material
for minors; and, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value
for minors.
PROMOTE — To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
PUBLICATION — Any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing, printing,
illustration, picture, sound recording, or motion picture film which is
displayed in an area open to the public, offered for sale or exhibited in a
coin-operated machine.
SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
consideration, and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or rental
arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any consideration is
received for the use of, or transfer of possession of, obscene matter.
SERVICE TO PATRONS — The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages; including, but not limited to
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bar tending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waiter and waitressing and entertaining.
SEXUAL DEVICE — Any instrument or appliance primarily designed,
promoted or marketed for the purposes of artificially causing, simulating,
of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex, between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.
A device designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of
the human genital organs.
(5)
(6) Male or female genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Fellatio, cunnilingus, anal sodomy, seminal ejaculation, or any excretory
function.
(7)
§ 702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 702
1:206
stimulating or enhancing sexual conduct, except that any such device which
is sold, distributed or displayed for bona fide medical purposes shall not be
included within this definition.
§ 703. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. 145, 8/27/1985, § 3]
1. No person shall knowingly either sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, show,
transmit, or offer either to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, show or
transmit, or have in his possession or under his control with intent
either to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, show or transmit to another, any
obscene motion picture film or any obscene literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story book, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, figure, image, or any written or printed matter of an
obscene nature or any device, article or instrument of an obscene
nature.
2. No person shall knowingly participate in, support or in any way aid or
assist any person in selling, renting, distributing, or showing any
obscene motion picture film, or any obscene literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story book, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, figure or image or any written or printed matter of an
obscene nature or any device, article or instrument of an obscene
nature.
3. No person shall knowingly design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter,
publish or in any manner manufacture or prepare any obscene motion
picture film, or any obscene book, picture, film, drawing, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, story book, paper, comic book, writing, figure,
image, matter, device, article, or instrument of an obscene nature.
4. No person shall knowingly produce, present, or direct any obscene
performance or participate in the portion thereof which is obscene.
5. No person, being the owner or lessee of any premises or having control
thereof, shall knowingly permit within or upon said premises the
exhibition, projection or showing of any motion picture film, show,
presentation or performance of an obscene nature, or permit anyone to
sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene literature,
book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story book, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, figure or image, or any written or printed
matter of an obscene nature.
6. No person shall knowingly write, print, publish or utter, or cause to be
printed, published or uttered, any advertisement or notice of any kind
giving information directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state
where, how or whom or by what means, any obscene motion picture
film, picture, book, writing, paper, comic book, figure, image, matter,
article or thing of an obscene nature can be seen, purchased, obtained
or had.
§ 702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 703
1:207
7. No person shall knowingly write, print, publish or utter, or cause to be
printed, published or uttered, any advertisement or notice of any kind
giving information directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state
where, how or whom or by what means, any obscene motion picture
film, picture, book, writing, paper, comic book, figure image, matter,
article or thing of an obscene nature can be seen, purchased, obtained
or had.
A. His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
public hair region;
B. Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region; or
C. Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
8. No person shall own, operate or maintain any massage parlor or model
studio which, as a regular course of business, is used for the purpose of
lewdness, assignation or prostitution, and every such massage parlor or
model studio in or upon which acts of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution are held or occur, is declared to be a public nuisance.
9. No person shall knowingly lease, own, or make available for such
purposes a massage establishment, or engage in or offer to engage in
for pecuniary gain or consideration the practice of massage as such
conduct is defined herein.
10. No person shall knowingly publicly display explicit sexual material or,
to fail to take prompt action to remove the display of explicit sexual
material from property in his possession after learning of its existence.
11. No person shall knowingly furnish pornographic material to minors.
12. No person, within the Township, shall display at newsstands or any
other business establishment frequented by minors or where said
minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public, or where
they may view same, any material depicting the acts specified in § 702
of this Part, male or female buttocks or genitals or the female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
13. In addition to any other violations or penalties prescribed herein, any
person in the Township who has in his possession or under his control
with intent to sell, rent, distribute, exhibit, show or transmit to another,
any obscene motion picture film or any obscene literature, book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story book, paper, comic book, writing
or any other written or printed matter containing photographs or
photographic images depicting children under the age of 17 years,
participating, performing, or observing any of the acts defined in § 701
of this Part, shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300 for each
offense or undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or
§ 703 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 703
1:208
§ 704. Notice of Obscene Material. [Ord. 145, 8/27/1985, § 4]
§ 705. Enforcement. [Ord. 145, 8/27/1985, § 5]
both, in addition to any other penalties imposed. Each and every alleged
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
14. Any obscene literature or film displaying or presenting pictures,
photographs or photographic images depicting prepubescent children
exhibiting underdeveloped genitails or breasts, shall be a per se
violation of the provisions of this section without further proof of age.
15. No person shall knowingly promote the commission of any of the above
listed acts.
1. Actual notice of the obscene or pornographic nature of any such
material, performance or activity may be given to a person involved in
or responsible for such by the Township Manager, zoning officer, code
enforcement officer or other duly authorized Township official at the
Township's sole election.
A. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered by mail or in person to
the alleged offender;
B. Such a notice shall state that;
(1) In the opinion of the Township Manager, zoning officer, code
enforcement officer or other duly authorized Township official
the activity engaged in falls within the prohibitions of § 702;
(2) That if such activity has not ceased within 24 hours the
Township will take appropriate legal action.
2. A person who promotes any activity prohibited in § 703 in the course of
his business is presumed to do so with knowledge of its content and
character.
3. Provided, however, that this section shall not be construed as a
condition precedent to the commencement by the Township of criminal
and/or civil proceedings hereunder. The Township is specifically
authorized to institute criminal and/or civil proceedings for violations of
this Part at its sole election without first having to give notice as
provided by this section.
1. Criminal Action.
A. Upon observing or receiving notice of a potential violation of this
Part, the Police Department shall conduct an investigation to
determine whether legal action shall be taken. If the Department
determines that there is reason to believe that a violation of this
Part has or is continuing to occur, the Department shall continue its
investigation in order to provide the Court of Common Pleas or a
District Justice (hereinafter referred to as "judge") with sufficient
§ 703 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 705
1:209
§ 706. Penalties. [Ord. 145, 8/27/1985, § 6; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
facts to establish probable cause that this Part has been violated
and to request the Judge to issue the appropriate process. The facts
establishing probable cause shall be assembled according to the
following procedure:
(1) Obscene Articles Available for Purchase. A police officer shall
purchase the allegedly obscene articles, prepare a citation for
each article purchased and present the article and the citation
to the Judge, requesting the Judge to issue the appropriate
process.
(2) Obscene Films. If an allegedly obscene film is not available for
purchase, a police officer shall prepare a search warrant for
the seizure of the film. After the search warrant has been
issued the officer shall confiscate the film described in the
search warrant, prepare a citation and present the film and the
citation to the Judge, requesting the Judge to issue the
appropriate process.
(a) If the film seized is the only copy available, the officer shall
request the Judge who issued the search warrant to allow
the copying of the film. The original film shall be returned
to the owner as soon as possible after review by the Judge
and, after it has been copied pursuant to the Judge's
authorization.
(3) Obscene Live Performances. An officer shall observe the
allegedly obscene performance, prepare a citation and present
the citation to the Judge, requesting the Judge to issue the
appropriate process.
2. Civil Action.
A. The Township may maintain an action to enjoin any person from
operating a facility which is used for prohibited conduct as
specified herein.
B. Preliminary and permanent injunctions may be issued to prevent
the further continuance of such conduct. The offenders or persons
owning, in control or in charge of such facility shall certify that the
illegal activity has been abated.
1. In addition to any other penalties specifically provided, any person, firm
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in the
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
§ 705 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 706
1:210
Each day that a violation of this Part continues or each Section of
this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
2. Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment against
parcel of land upon which such nuisance is maintained. Upon its
determination in a civil action, such shall, by separate legal proceeding,
be made a lien against such property and a personal obligation against
any person, and shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary Municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject
to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary Municipal taxes. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of Municipal taxes
shall be applicable to such special assessment.
The cost of abatement shall include the following:
A. Investigative costs;
B. Court costs;
C. Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for and
trial of the cause, appeals therefrom and other costs allowed on
appeal; and
D. Printing costs of the trial and appellate briefs, and all other papers
filed in such proceeding.
§ 706 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 706
1:211

Part 8
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
§ 801. Short Title. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 1]
This Part shall be referred to as the "Sexually Oriented Business" regulation
provisions.
§ 802. Purpose and Findings. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 2]
1. Purpose.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township
Code to prohibit nuisances, to promote the health, welfare,
cleanliness, comfort and safety of the citizens of North Strabane
Township (hereinafter "Township") and to regulate the time of
opening and closing and the conduct of places of public
entertainment, amusement and recreation, the Township of North
Strabane enacts this Part to minimize and control the adverse
secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and thereby
protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to protect the
citizens from increased crime, to preserve the quality of life, to
preserve the property values and character of surrounding
neighborhoods and to deter the spread of blight.
B. The Board of Supervisors (hereinafter "Supervisors") has
determined that licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of
accountability to insure that operators of sexually oriented
businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to insure that
operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used
as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.
C. The Supervisors do not intend by this Part to suppress any speech
or expression activities protected by the First Amendment, but to
enact a content neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary
effects of sexually oriented businesses.
2. Legislative Findings. The Supervisors find that:
A. Sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects which
should be regulated to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to, the
spread of communicable diseases, performance of sexual acts in
public places, presence of discarded sexually oriented materials on
public and private property, sexual harassment, obscenity,
prostitution and other illegal sexual activities, crime and
neighborhood deterioration.
B. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
§ 801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 802
1:213
licensing procedure will place a hereto fore nonexistent incentive
on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run
in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the Township. It
is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee
is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
C. Removal of doors on viewing booths and requiring sufficient
lighting on premises with viewing booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in discouraging illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult theaters.
D. Requiring licenses of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incident of certain types of criminal
behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or
suspects and by preventing minors from working in such
establishments.
E. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented businesses will help limit and control the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses.
F. It is desirable, for the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases, to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this Part
is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such
activity.
G. The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license
has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in
contravention of this Part.
H. The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually
oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to
and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases.
I. The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the
Township will be promoted by the enactment of this Part.
J. The limitation of operating hours of sexually oriented businesses to
10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, and closure
of such businesses on Sundays and holidays reduces the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses, including particularly, but not
limited to, late night noise levels, crime and sexually offensive
materials and activities in public areas, and promotes the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 802 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 803
1:214
§ 803. Definitions. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 3]
As used in this Part the following words and phrases shall have the meaning
indicated unless the context indicates a different meaning.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other image-producing
devices are maintained, not located within viewing booths, to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomic areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE
— A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATRE — A commercial establishment
where, of any form of consideration, films motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions or visual presentations of any
kind are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT THEATRE — A theatre, concert hall, dance hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides,
CD ROM discs or other computer software, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specific sexual activities."
(2)
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."
(2)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions or visual presentations of any other kind which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(3)
§ 803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 803
1:215
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid
a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
"Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises, or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offer
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears nude or
seminude, in a state of nudity or who displays "specified anatomical areas"
and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other person who pay money or any
form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business.
(1)
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
(2)
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business or to a nonsexually oriented business.
(3)
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
That no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing.
(1)
Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class.
(2)
§ 803 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 803
1:216
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than
a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACES — All outdoor areas owned by or opened to the general
public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the
general public including, but not limited to, places of entertainment,
taverns, restaurants, clubs, theatres, dance halls, banquet halls, party
rooms or halls limited to specific member, and party rooms or halls
restricted to adults or patrons invited to attend, whether or not an
admission charge is levied.
SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in
which clothing partially or non-opaquely covers "specified anatomical
areas."
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion-picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter
center.
SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region, anus,
buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of
the areola or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
any one time.
(3)
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex.
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the person is in a sate of nudity or semi-nudity.
(2)
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled
substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code other states or countries.
(1)
§ 803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 803
1:217
SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
VIEWING BOOTHS — Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, rooms
or other enclosures which are available for viewing (1) films, movies, videos
or other visual reproductions of any kind depicting or describing "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or (2) persons who appear
in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or who offer performances or
presentations characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas"
or "specified sexual activities."
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
For which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor
offense.
(a)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
(b)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(c)
(2)
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
(3)
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy.
(2)
Excretory functions os part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in (1) and (2) above.
(3)
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfer the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
(3)
§ 803 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 803
1:218
§ 804. License Required. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 4]
The character and content of any material or performance described
herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by a licensee or
person.
(1)
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability here under if the licensee or person
made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such
minor.
(2)
1. It is unlawful:
A. For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the Township
pursuant to this Part.
B. For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to
employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is
not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the
Township pursuant to this Part.
C. For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually business employee
license pursuant to this Part.
D. Beginning on the 60th day after enactment of this Part, for any
person to continue to operate any sexually oriented business in
operation at the time of the enactment of this Part without a valid
sexually oriented business license pursuant to this Part.
E. Beginning on the 60th day after enactment of this Part, for any
person who operates a sexually oriented business in operation at
the time of the enactment of this Part to employ a person to work
for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually
oriented business employee by the Township pursuant to this Part.
F. Beginning on the 60th day after enactment of this Part, for any
person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business in
operation at the time of the enactment of this Part without having
secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to
this Part.
2. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Township.
3. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this Part.
The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as to enable the Township to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this Part.
§ 803 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 804
1:219
4. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business, must sign the application for a license
as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this Part and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
5. The completed application for a sexually oriented business shall contain
the following information and shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
A. If the applicant is:
(1) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of
age.
(2) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the name of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any.
(3) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and
qualified and authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania,
the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent
and the address of the registered office for service of process.
B. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state:
(1) The sexually oriented business' fictitious name.
(2) Submit the required registration documents.
C. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
Part, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place and jurisdiction of each.
D. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
had a previous license under this Part or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance or law from another municipality, state
or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation and whether the applicant or person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or
an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
§ 804 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 804
1:220
licensed under this Part whose license has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
E. Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other license under this Part or other similar sexually oriented
business ordinance or law from another municipality, state or
county and, if so, the names and location of such other licensed
businesses.
F. The specific classification of sexually oriented use for which the
applicant is filing along with a detailed description of each and
every activity encompassed by the proposed sexually oriented
business, which description shall thoroughly demonstrate
compliance and/or intended compliance with all provisions of this
Part.
G. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any.
H. The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
I. A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
J. The applicant's driver's permit number, Social Security number and
his/her State or Federally issued tax identification number.
K. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
L. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines, the property to be certified, the location of all
structures, the depiction of all parking areas, to include the
dimensions of each space.
M. If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
which includes viewing booths, then the applicant shall also comply
with the application requirements set forth in subsection (K), above
and shall separately apply for and obtain a building and occupancy
permit of the installation of the viewing booths.
N. The application form shall inform the applicant that:
(1) Separate applications are required for any necessary zoning
permits, subdivision and land development approvals or
§ 804 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 804
1:221
building and occupancy permits and that the applicant may
apply for such permits by contacting the Township Code
Enforcement Officer (hereinafter "Enforcement Officer").
(2) That Department of Labor and Industry approval is required.
O. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the Township the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage"
names) or aliases used by the individual.
(2) Age, date and place of birth.
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color.
(4) Present residence address and telephone number.
(5) Present business address and telephone number.
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other
identification card information.
(7) Social Security number.
(8) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
P. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license as provided above shall be the following:
(1) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the
applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form
provided by any police department. Any fees for the
photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for
the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application, including whether such applicant previously
operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county,
municipality, state or country any business or has ever had a
license, permit or authorization to do business or has ever had
a license, permit or authorization to do business denied,
revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational
license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of
any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full
the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of
any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached
to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this Part and, if so, the
§ 804 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 804
1:222
§ 805. Issuance of License. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 5]
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and
jurisdiction of each.
1. Upon the filing of said application in a fully completed form for a
sexually oriented business license or for a sexually oriented business
license, the application shall then be referred to the Enforcement
Officer for review and investigation. The Enforcement Officer shall
utilize any available resources through the Pennsylvania State Police,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or other law enforcement
agencies as may be necessary to complete the review and investigation
required by this Part. Within 30 days from the date the completed
application is filed, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a license, unless
it is determined by the Enforcement Officer that one or more of the
following findings is true:
A. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
B. The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
C. This applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity,"
as defined in this Part.
D. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or State law, statute,
rule or regulation or prohibited by a particular provision of this
Part.
E. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked within two years of the date of the current
application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is
denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately
deemed null and void. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license
issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal as set
forth in § 803, herein.
F. The required application, investigation and license fees have not
been paid.
G. An applicant's license to operate a sexually oriented business,
issued by any jurisdiction, has been revoked within the preceding
12 months.
H. The proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of or is not
in compliance with any of the provisions of this Part.
2. A license granted pursuant to this Section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the Township that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
§ 804 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 805
1:223
§ 806. Fees. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 6]
criminal activity as defined in this Part or committed any act during the
existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the
initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to
the payment of the fee as set forth in § 804.
3. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business and the specific classification of sexually
oriented use for which the license is issued. Licenses for sexually
oriented businesses shall not commence until all necessary zoning,
subdivision and land development and/or building code approvals and
Department of Labor and Industry approvals are obtained. All licenses
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read by any
person at any time.
4. Applications for building and occupancy permits shall be processed and
either denied or approved within 30 days of a complete application by
the Township.
5. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for the specific
classification of sexually oriented use as permitted by this Part and
applied for.
6. A license denial shall conform to the provisions of § 810(4).
7. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a license may appeal, in writing,
within 10 days from the date of issuance of the license, to the
Supervisors. The Supervisors shall then hold a Local Agency Law
hearing within 10 days of the date of filing of the appeal and render a
decision within 10 days from the end of the hearing. Appeals from a
decision of the Supervisors may be taken to court subject to § 810(5) of
this Part.
1. Every application fee for a sexually oriented business license (whether
for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee in an
amount set by resolution of the Supervisors.
2. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the Township an annual nonrefundable license fee
in an amount set by resolution of the Supervisors within 30 days of
license issuance or renewal.
3. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation and
license fee in an amount set by resolution by the Supervisors.
§ 805 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 806
1:224
§ 807. Inspection. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 7]
§ 808. Expiration of License. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 8]
§ 809. Suspension. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 9]
§ 810. Revocations and Appeals of Denials, Suspensions or
Revocations. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 10]
4. Any license application and fee shall be submitted to the office of the
Township Secretary/Treasurer, and, thereafter, the applications shall be
forwarded to the Enforcement Officer for review and investigation and
approval or denial.
1. An applicant or licensee shall permit authorized Township officers and
their agents or consultants to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law,
and this Part, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
2. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee commits a violation of this Part if he refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
1. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 804. An
application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration
date, the date of expiration of the license will not be extended.
2. When the Township denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the Township finds that the basis for denial of the renewal has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
1. The Enforcement Officer shall suspend a license for a period not to
exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this Part.
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this Part.
C. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises.
1. The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension
in § 809 occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
§ 806 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 810
1:225
2. The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a license if he determines that:
A. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process.
B. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises.
C. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises.
D. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended.
E. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in
or on the license premises.
F. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Township for any
licensing fees past due.
3. When the Township revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Township finds that the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.
4. All license applications, renewal, suspension or revocation decisions
shall be sent in writing to the applicant or licensee. All such decisions
which deny, suspend or revoke a permit shall state specifically the Part
requirement not met and any other basis for the decision. After denial
of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or after
suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may
appeal pursuant to the Local Agency Law to the Supervisors. The
Supervisors will then hold a Local Agency Law hearing within 20 days
from the date the appeal was filed and will render a written decision
within 10 days from the date such hearing concludes. Any such appeal
must be filed, in writing, with the Township Secretary within 10 days
from the date of mailing of the decision appealed from. Failure to file
said appeal with the Township Secretary/Treasurer within 10 days from
the date of the mailing of the decision appealed from shall be deemed a
conclusive determination as to the issues or matters address by the
written decision. In the case of a denial of a license renewal, or in the
case of a license suspension or revocation, the licensee may continue to
operate to the same extent as immediately prior to the suspension or
revocation until the earlier of:
A. The expiration of the ten-day appeal period without filing of an
appeal.
B. The date of a decision dismissing any appeal.
§ 810 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 810
1:226
§ 811. Transfer of License. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 11]
A license shall not transfer his/her/its license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 812. Regulating Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit
Films, Videos or Live Entertainment in Viewing Rooms. [Ord. 259, 6/
22/1999, § 12]
5. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Supervisors may appeal to a
court of competent jurisdiction. The Township shall, upon filing of such
appeal, consent to any request by a license applicant or licensee to the
court to give expedited review to such appeal. The Township shall
certify any record to the court within 20 days of any request by the
court to do so.
1. A person who operates viewing booths or causes them to be operated
shall comply with the following requirement:
A. Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations
and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will
be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimensions of all areas of interior of the
premises to an accuracy plus or minus six inches. The Township
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
B. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
C. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
D. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose including rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
§ 810 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 812
1:227
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station. In addition, all viewing booths shall
have at least one side fully open so that all of the area inside the
booth is open to the view of persons in the public area of the
establishment.
E. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in subsection (D), above, remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to the subsection (A), above.
F. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at a
time.
G. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five-footcandle
as measured at the floor level.
H. It is the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illuminating
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
I. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
J. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing rooms or booths.
K. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes
exist.
L. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
M. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
2. A person having a duty under § 812(A) through (M), above, commits a
violation of this Part if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
§ 812 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 813
1:228
§ 813. Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies. [Ord. 259, 6/22/
1999, § 13]
§ 814. Additional Regulations for Nude Model Studios. [Ord. 259, 6/
22/1999, § 14]
§ 815. Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity. [Ord. 259,
6/22/1999, § 15]
1. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
2. A person commits a violation of this Part if the person acts as an escort
or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
1. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
2. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this Part if the
person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of
a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this
subsection if the person under 18 years was in a rest room not open to
public view or visible to any other person.
3. A person commits a violation of this Part if the person appears in a state
of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in
an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the
public right-of-way.
4. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be place in a
reception room open to the public.
1. It shall be a violation of this Part for a person to knowingly and
intentionally in a public place:
A. Engage in sexual intercourse or to engage in deviate sexual
intercourse as defined by the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
B. Appear in a state of nudity as that term is herein defined.
C. Fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
2. It shall be a violation of this Part for a person who knowingly or
intentionally in a sexually oriented business appear in a seminude
condition unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall
be at least 10 feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least
two feet from the floor.
3. It shall be a violation of this Part for an employee, while seminude, in a
sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
§ 813 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 815
1:229
§ 816. Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented
Business. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 16]
A person commits a violation of this Part if the person knowingly allows a
person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
§ 817. Hours of Operation. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 17]
No sexually oriented business shall be open for business before 10:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday or after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
Sexually oriented businesses shall be closed at all times on Sundays and
legal holidays.
§ 818. Exemptions. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 18]
It is a defense to prosecution under § 815 that a person appearing in a state
of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
§ 819. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 259, 6/22/1999, § 19]
gratuity to any employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually
oriented business.
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, a college, a junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation.
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
3. In a structure:
A. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing.
B. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class.
C. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
1. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or permits the violation of
any provisions of this Part or the rules and regulations approved and
hereinafter adopted shall pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each
violation. Whenever such person shall have been officially notified by
the Township that he is committing a violation of this Part or the rules
and regulations approved and hereinafter adopted, each day that he
shall continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a
separate violation punishable by a like fine.
§ 815 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 819
1:230
2. Any person who violates or permits the violation of this Part shall pay, in
addition to the fine set forth above, all court costs and reasonable
attorney's fees incurred by the Township in connection with any civil
enforcement proceedings brought to enforce this Part.
3. The Township may commence civil enforcement proceedings to assess
fines for violations of this Part. In addition to such civil enforcement
proceedings, the Township may commence, at any time, appropriate
actions in equity or otherwise to prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or
abate violations of this Part.
§ 819 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 819
1:231

Part 9
FIREWORKS
§ 901. Definitions.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The North Strabane Board of Supervisors.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — North Strabane Township's designated
Code Enforcement Officer, or in his absence or unavailability, the Assistant
Code Enforcement Officer.
FIRE CHIEF — The duly authorized Fire Chief for the North Strabane
Township Volunteer Fire Department, or in his absence or unavailability, the
Assistant Fire Chief.
FIREWORKS —
MUNICIPALITY — North Strabane Township sometimes designate as the
"Township."
§ 902. Prohibition. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 2]
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership,
association or corporation to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell
at retail, or use or explode any fireworks.
§ 903. Power to Grant Permit. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 3]
The Board of Supervisors shall have the power, under reasonable rules and
regulations adopted by it, to grant permits for supervised public displays of
fireworks to be held therein by municipalities, fair associations, amusement
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances, or, except as hereinafter provided, any
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall
include blank cartridges and toy cannons in which explosives are used,
the type of balloons, not to include hot air balloons, which require
fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets,
roman candles, aerial fireworks, or other fireworks of like construction,
and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound or
any tablets or other device containing an explosive substance.
A.
The term "fireworks" shall not include sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes,
toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing 0.25 grains or
less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed
that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for
the explosion, and toy pistol paper caps which contain less than 0.20
grains of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted
at all times, nor shall the term "fireworks" include toy cannons, which
operate on the principle of mixing calcium carbide, weighing less than
1/10th of an ounce, and water in the reservoir of the cannon and in
which ignition results upon the creation of a spark.
B.
§ 901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 903
1:233
parks and other organizations or groups of individuals. Every such display
shall be handled by a competent and licensed operator to be approved by
the Township Code Enforcement Officer and shall be of such a character
and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the Township
Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Chief of the fire department and/
or such other officer as may be designated by the governing body of the
municipality, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person or persons.
§ 904. Application for Permit. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 4]
Application for permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance
of the date of the display. After such privilege shall have been granted,
sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall
be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.
§ 905. Bond Required. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 5]
The Board of Supervisors of North Strabane Township hereby requires a
bond to be provided by the licensee seeking to conduct a fireworks display
in North Strabane Township in an amount not less than $50,000 which
shall be a condition for approval and is condition for the payment of all
damages which may be caused either to a person or persons, or to property
by reason of the licensed display and arising from any acts of the licensee,
his or her agents, employees or subcontractors. The Township also requires
proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $500,000 per claim for
the aforesaid purpose, from a reputable insurance company authorized to
conduct business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 906. Continuance of Permit. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 6]
If by reason of unfavorable weather the display for which a permit has been
granted does not take place at the time so authorized, the person to whom
such permit was issued may, within 24 hours, apply to the Township, setting
forth under oath the fact that such display was not made, giving the reason
therefore, and requesting a continuance of such permit for a day designated
therein, not later than one week after the day fixed originally in said permit.
Upon receiving such application for a continuance the Code Enforcement
Officer, if he believes the facts stated therein are true, shall extend the
provisions of said permit to the day fixed in said application, not later than
one week after the original day designated in the permit, and such extension
of time shall be granted without the payment of any additional fee and
without requiring any additional insurance and bond other than the one
given for the original permit, the provisions of which shall extend to and
cover all damages which may be caused by reason of the said display taking
place at such extended date in the same manner and to the same extent as
if such display had taken place at the date originally fixed in the permit.
§ 903 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 907
1:234
§ 907. Agricultural Permits. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 7]
The Township shall have the power, under reasonable rules and regulations
adopted by the Board of Supervisors, to grant permits for the use of suitable
fireworks for agricultural purposes in connection with the raising of crops
and the protection of crops from bird and animal damage. Such permits
shall be good for the calendar year in which issued. After such permit has
been granted, sales, possession and use of fireworks of the type and for the
purpose mentioned in the permit shall be lawful for that purpose only.
§ 908. Conflict. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 8]
North Strabane Township hereby recognizes the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Fireworks Law, Act of 1939, P.L. 134, No. 65, as amended,
regarding the manufacture, transport, holding, offering or exposing for
sale and the display of combustible materials and items commonly referred
to as fireworks. Where there is any conflict between this Part and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania statute, the more strict provision shall
apply.
§ 909. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. 300, 4/28/2004, § 9]
In addition, the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Township Police
Department are hereby authorized to file a citation(s) at the office of the
local District Justice against any person or persons who violate any
provision of this Part. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to waive
or in any way impair the Township's rights or remedies at law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, the seizure of fireworks or such similar items
or devices.
§ 907 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 909
1:235
Chapter 14
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 909 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 909
1:236
Part 1
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MOBILE HOME — A single-family dwelling which is designed after
assembly and fabrication, for transportation, on streets and highways on its
own running gear, and which may be temporarily or permanently affixed
to real estate, used for nontransient residential purposes, and constructed
with the same, or similar, electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities as
immobile housing.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground which is leased or rented, and
upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park,
designated for the accommodation of one mobile home and leased or rented
for that purpose.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, corporation, company,
association, or other legal entity which rents or leases spaces in a mobile
home park.
PERMIT — The written approval as issued by the Board of Supervisors,
authorizing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home or a mobile
home park under the provisions of this Part.
SERVICE BUILDING — A structure which contains operational, office,
recreational, sanitary, maintenance, or other facilities built for the use of
the mobile home park residents or owner.
SEWER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser
pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
WATER CONNECTION — All pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the
mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point on
each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — All pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances from
the water main of the park distribution system to the water outlet of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:237
§ 102. Permits; Sale of Mobile Home Space. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
1. Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain,
construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the
Township of North Strabane unless he holds a permit issued by the
Board of Supervisors in the name of such person for the specific
maintenance, construction, alteration, or extension proposed. The
municipal permit shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the
premises of the mobile home park at all times.
2. Application to Township. The applicant shall submit an application to
the Board of Supervisors using a form furnished by the Board of
Supervisors for a permit to operate a mobile home park in the
Township.
3. Renewal Permits. Renewal permits shall be issued by the Board of
Supervisors upon furnishing proof by the applicant that his park
continues to meet standards prescribed by this Part.
4. Inspection of Mobile Home Parks. A representative of the Board of
Supervisors may inspect a mobile home park at reasonable intervals,
and at reasonable times, to determine compliance with this Part.
5. Compliance of Existing Mobile Home Parks.
A. Mobile home parks in existence at the date of adoption of this Part
may be continued so long as they otherwise remain lawful.
B. Any subsequent new construction, alteration or extension of an
existing mobile home park shall comply with the provisions of the
Township's subdivision and zoning ordinances.
C. Any existing mobile home park which in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors creates a safety hazard shall be required to comply
with this Part within a reasonable period of time as determined by
the Board of Supervisors.
6. Individual Mobile Homes. Individual mobile homes permitted in areas
as set forth in the zoning ordinance and not located in a mobile home
park shall not be required to obtain a mobile home park permit;
however, they shall be required to obtain zoning and building permits
as prescribed by the Township ordinances.
Individual mobile homes shall comply with all other applicable
municipal ordinances and regulations governing single-family homes.
7. Inspection; Revocation of Permit. Whenever, upon inspection of any
mobile home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this Part, or of any regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, the Board of Supervisors shall give notice in
writing in accordance with the provisions of this Part to the person to
whom the certificate was issued, advising him that unless such
conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time
§ 102 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 102
1:238
§ 103. Fees. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
All fees shall be set by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to resolution.
§ 104. Application for Permit. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 105. Water Supply. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
specified in the notice, the Permit to operate in the Township shall be
suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home park shall be
inspected and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected,
the Board of Supervisors shall suspend the permit and give notice in
writing of such suspension to the person to whom the permit is issued.
1. Application for the mobile home park permit shall be filed in triplicate
with the Board of Supervisors. The application shall be in writing,
signed by the owner and shall include the following:
A. Name and address of the owner;
B. Location and legal description of the mobile home park;
C. Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home
park; and
D. Such further information as may be requested by the various
municipal agencies to enable them to determine if the proposed
park will comply with legal requirements.
1. General Requirements. An adequate supply of water shall be provided
for mobile homes, service buildings, and other accessory facilities as
required by this Part. Where a public water supply system of
satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall
be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a
satisfactory factory public water supply system is not available, the
development of a private water supply system shall be approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or other
authorities having jurisdiction.
2. Fire Hydrants. Where a public supply of water is provided, fire hydrants
shall be installed as agreed upon by the Board of Supervisors and the
agency responsible for supplying water.
3. Individual Water-Riser Pipes and Connections.
A. Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby insuring
the shortest water connection possible and decreasing
susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
§ 102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:239
§ 106. Sewage Disposal. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 107. Electrical Distribution System. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
B. The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 3/4
inches and terminate at least four inches above the ground surface.
The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home
does not occupy the lot.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and
showing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
D. A shut-off water valve below the frost line shall be provided near
the water-riser pipe in each mobile home lot. Underground stopand-
waste valves are prohibited unless their types of manufacture
and their method of installation are approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
1. General Requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities.
2. Individual Sewer Connections.
A. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch
diameter sewer riser pipe. This sewer riser pipe shall be imbedded
in poured concrete, minimum twelve-inch diameter and minimum
eighteen-inch depth. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least
1/2 inch above ground elevation. The sewer riser pipe shall be so
located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile
home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
B. The sewer connection (see § 101 for definition) shall have a
nominal inside diameter of not less than three inches, and the slope
of any portion thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot. All joints
shall be watertight.
C. All materials used for a sewer connection shall be semirigid,
corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface
shall be smooth.
D. Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser.
1. General Requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring
system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances
which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
Township ordinances regulating such systems.
§ 105 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 107
1:240
§ 108. Service Buildings and Other Community Service Facilities.
[Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 109. Refuse Disposal. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall
be so managed as to not create health hazards, rodent harborages, insectbreeding
areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution, and shall be in
accordance with the Township ordinances.
§ 110. Fire Protection. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Fire protection provisions shall be in accordance with the Township
ordinances.
§ 111. Fuel. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall
be copper or other acceptable metallic tubing and shall be permanently
installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders
shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath
the mobile home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
§ 112. Supervision; Responsibilities of the Park Management. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
2. Power Distribution Lines. Main power lines not located underground
shall be suspended at least 18 feet above the ground, and shall have a
minimum vertical clearance of eight feet above any mobile home,
service building or other structure.
1. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreation buildings and other community service facilities when
constructed such as: management offices, repair shops, and storage
areas; laundry facilities; indoor recreation areas.
2. All structural requirements shall be in accordance with the Township
ordinances regulating same.
1. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this Part and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment
in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections.
3. The park management shall give the Board of Supervisors or their
representative free access to all mobile home lots, service buildings and
other community service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
§ 107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 112
1:241
§ 113. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is determined that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of
this Part, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Municipal
Inspector shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the permit was
issued, advising them that unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within the period of time specified in the notice, the permit to operate shall
be suspended. At the end of such period, such mobile home park shall be
reinspected and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected,
the Municipal Inspector shall suspend the permit and give notice in writing
of such suspension to the person to whom the permit is issued. An aggrieved
party may file an appeal to the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the
Local Agency Law.
§ 114. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
4. The management shall maintain a register containing the names and
addresses of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any
authorized person inspecting the park.
5. The management shall notify the local Pennsylvania Department of
Health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious
disease within the park.
§ 112 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 114
1:242
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 114 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 114
1:243

Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking
Regulations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 103. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted, under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
The Chief of Police and/or Manager shall have the following powers to
regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
1. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
Parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
2. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
3. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
1. In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
2. In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct
of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic
and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:245
§ 105. Experimental Regulations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township where, for a period
of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as is they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 106. Traffic on Streets Closed or Restricted for Construction,
Maintenance or Special Events. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this Chapter 15 for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
1. The Manager shall have authority to close any street or specific part of
a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is underway or a special event is being conducted on
the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
upon any such closed portion.
2. The Manager shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area
upon any street where construction or maintenance work is underway
and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device,
not to proceed.
§ 104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 106
1:246
§ 107. Use of Streets by Processions and Assemblages. [Ord. 147,
11/26/1985]
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street;
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Manager, which shall be issued without
fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in
advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but
in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Manager, which shall be issued without
fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in
advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in
any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is underway, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 108
1:247
§ 108. Authority of Police Officers. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The police officers of the Township of North Strabane are hereby given
authority to direct traffic on the highways of the Township and at
intersections thereof.
§ 109. Authorization for Use of Speed-Timing Devices. [Ord. 147,
11/26/1985]
The Township of North Strabane Police Department is hereby authorized to
use all mechanical or electrical speed-timing devices for the determination
of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the
Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
including but not limited to E.S.P. and Vascar systems.
This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Township, be they Township, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 P.S. § 1101 et seq.
(1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 108 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 109
1:248
Part 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 201. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Streets. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 197, 4/26/1994, § 1; by Ord.
233, 3/25/1997, § 1; by Ord. 249, 6/4/1998, § 2; and by Ord. 296, 10/
28/2003, § 1]
1. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specific streets, as
follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on any
part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Alexander Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Amber Woods Drive Entire length 25 mph
Anderson Drive Entire length 25 mph
Arnold Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Ash Street Entire length 25 mph
Bluegrass Drive Entire length 25 mph
Blue Jay Drive Entire length 25 mph
Brehm Road Entire length 35 mph
Bridlewood Court Entire length 25 mph
Brookfield Court Entire length 25 mph
Burgess Lane Entire length 25 mph
Caterbury Road Entire length 25 mph
Carl Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Carol Drive Entire length 25 mph
Carriage Court Entire length 25 mph
Carriage Way Entire length 25 mph
Carriage Way Entire length 25 mph
Centennial Drive Entire length 25 mph
Chambers Lane Entire length 25 mph
Cheslock Road Entire length 25 mph
Chesnic Drive Entire length 25 mph
Christy Road Entire length 25 mph
Chubbic Road Entire length 35 mph
Clare Drive Entire length 25 mph
Clutter Drive Entire length 25 mph
Coachside Drive Entire length 25 mph
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:249
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Conklin Road Entire length 25 mph
Countryside Court Entire length 25 mph
Cricketwood Court Entire length 25 mph
Deerfield Drive Entire length 25 mph
Deerwatch Drive Entire length 25 mph
DeMar Boulevard Entire length 25 mph
DiCio Street Entire length 25 mph
Driftwood Road Entire length 25 mph
Dundee Drive Entire length 25 mph
Elm Street Entire length 25 mph
Fair Meadows Drive Entire length 25 mph
Fieldbrook Drive Entire length 25 mph
Fieldbrook Drive Entire length 25 mph
Francis Street Entire length 25 mph
Fulton Road Entire length 25 mph
Garden Street Entire length 25 mph
Giffin Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Glen Cannon Drive Entire length 25 mph
Glen Springs Circle Entire length 25 mph
Grandview Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Greenvalley Road Entire length 35 mph
Greenwood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Griffwood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Helen Street Entire length 25 mph
Hickory Circle Entire length 25 mph
Highland Drive Entire length 25 mph
Hitchman Street Entire length 25 mph
Horseshoe Circle East Entire length 25 mph
Horseshoe Circle West Entire length 25 mph
Hunting Creek Road Entire length 25 mph
Joan Court Entire length 25 mph
Lakeview Court Entire length 25 mph
Lakewood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Lenore Way Entire length 25 mph
Lindley Road Entire length 25 mph
Linnwood Road Entire length 25 mph
§ 201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 201
1:250
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Locust Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Locust Circle Entire length 25 mph
Locust Street Entire length 25 mph
Long Drive Entire length 25 mph
Louise Court Entire length 25 mph
Mansfield Road Entire length 25 mph
Maple Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Maple Street Entire length 25 mph
Martha Court Entire length 25 mph
Martha Drive Entire length 25 mph
Mary Lane Entire length 25 mph
McBride Road Entire length 25 mph
McDowell Lane Entire length 25 mph
McGregor Drive Entire length 25 mph
Meadow Court Entire length 25 mph
Meadowbrook Drive Entire length 25 mph
Meadowlands
Boulevard
Entire length 35 mph
Meadowview Drive Entire length 25 mph
Merino Drive Entire length 25 mph
Mitchell Drive Entire length 25 mph
Mockingbird Drive Entire length 25 mph
Morgan Circle Entire length 25 mph
Mosier Road Entire length 25 mph
Munce Ridge Road Entire length 25 mph
Nancy Lane Entire length 25 mph
Neely Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Norris Drive Entire length 25 mph
Oak Lane Entire length 25 mph
Old Farm Road Entire length 25 mph
Old Meadow Road Entire length 25 mph
Pacers Ridge Drive Entire length 25 mph
Pacers Ridge Drive Entire length 25 mph
Partridge Way Entire length 25 mph
Pearl Drive Entire length 25 mph
Percheron Court Entire length 25 mph
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:251
Street Between Maximum Speed Limit
Pheasant Cove Entire length 25 mph
Pioneer Trail Drive Entire length 25 mph
Poplar Street Entire length 25 mph
Rose Street Entire length 25 mph
Ross Road Entire length 25 mph
Royal Drive Entire length 25 mph
Saddle Brook Lane Entire length 25 mph
Selwyn Street Entire length 25 mph
Short Street Entire length 25 mph
Skyview Drive Entire length 25 mph
Sleepy Hollow Road Entire length 25 mph
Smallwood Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Smith Place Entire length 25 mph
Springvalley Road Entire length 25 mph
Springdale Road Entire length 25 mph
Stonegate Drive Entire length 25 mph
Strabane Street Entire length 25 mph
Sundust Road Entire length 25 mph
Sunset Drive Entire length 25 mph
Surrey Drive Entire length 25 mph
Sweet Briar Road Entire length 25 mph
Taylor Drive Entire length 25 mph
Theresa Drive Entire length 25 mph
Vance Drive Entire length 25 mph
Vandale Drive Entire length 25 mph
Victor Court Entire length 25 mph
View Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Village Drive Entire length 25 mph
Vista Hill Road Entire length 25 mph
Walker Road Entire length 25 mph
William Drive Entire length 25 mph
Winners Circle Entire length 25 mph
Woodridge Drive Entire length 25 mph
Wylie Avenue Entire length 25 mph
2. Any person who shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of that
established therefor, upon any highway or portion thereof as specified
§ 201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 201
1:252
§ 202. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Bridges and
Elevated Structures. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 203. Maximum Speed Limits Established for Certain Vehicles on
Hazardous Grades. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 204. Maximum Speed Limits Established in Parks. [Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
in this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $35 and, for exceeding a maximum speed limit by more than
five miles per hour, shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile per
hour in excess of five miles per hour, over the maximum speed limit, or
to undergo imprisonment for not more than one day for each $10 for
failure to pay said fine and costs.
1. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure.
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:253
§ 205. Traffic Signals at Certain Locations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 206. Intersections Where Turn Prohibited on Red Signal. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
§ 207. One-Way Streets Established. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as
amended by Ord. 177, 11/27/1990, § 1]
§ 208. Turning at Certain Intersections Prohibited or Restricted.
[Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
1. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
(Reserved)
2. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
(Reserved)
2. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Strabane Street McClelland Road Morganza Road East
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 204 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 208
1:254
§ 209. Right Turns Only Permitted at Certain Intersections. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
§ 210. U-Turns Prohibited at Certain Locations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
§ 211. No-Passing Zones Established. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
on
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
to
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to make left
turn into or
travel straight
across
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
§ 208 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 211
1:255
§ 212. Stop Intersections Established. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as
amended by Ord. 197, 4/26/1994, § 2; by Ord. 203, 8/23/1994, § 1; by
Ord. 228, 11/26/1996, § 1; by Ord. 233, 3/25/1997, § II; by Ord. 249,
6/4/1998, § 3; by Ord. 263, 10/26/1999, § 2; by Ord. 283, 3/26/2002,
§ 2; and by Ord. 292, 6/24/2003, § 1]
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following intersections are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby
confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, shall to come
a full stop before entering any such intersection.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Alexander Avenue Bone Avenue* West
Alexander Avenue Boone Avenue South
Alexander Avenue Selwyn Avenue West
Alexander Avenue Chartiers Street* 4 Way
Alexander Avenue View Avenue East & West
Amberwood Drive Woodridge Drive* East
Anderson Drive McClelland Road* South
Arnold Avenue Boone Avenue* East & West
Arnold Avenue Selwyn Street West
Ash Street Boone Avenue North
Bennington Street South Central Avenue* East
Blue Jay Drive East-West Fair Meadows 4 Way
Blue Jay Drive Galley Road* West
Bluegrass Drive Johnson Road* West
Bluegrass Drive Bridlewood Circle 3 Way
Boone Avenue Alexander Avenue West
Boone Avenue* South Central Avenue* East
Boone Avenue* Chartiers Street* East & West
Boone Avenue* Wylie Avenue West
§ 211 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 212
1:256
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Boone Avenue* Latimer Avenue* West
Brehm Road Conklin Road West
Brehm Road Linnwood Road East
Brookfield Drive Meadowbrook Drive West
Brownlee Road Route 519* South
Burgess Lane William Drive South
Canterbury Road Thomas Road* South
Carol Drive Route 519* North
Carriage Court Surrey Drive North
Carriage Way Meadowbrook Drive North
Carriage Way Meadowbrook Drive West
Carriage Way Meadowbrook Drive West
Centennial Drive Morganza Road West
Centennial Drive Morgan Circle East
Chamber Land Weavertown Road South
Chartiers Street* Latimer Avenue 3 Way
Cheslock Road Linden Creek Road* West
Chesnic Drive Route 519* West
Christy Road Linnwood Road 4 Way
Christy Road Route 519* East
Christy Road Conklin Road West
Chubbic Road Route 519* West
Chubbic Road Linnwood Road East
Clare Drive Mary Lane 3 Way
Clutter Drive Norris Drive East
Coachside Drive Meadowbrook Drive East
Colonial Court Morgan Circle West
Conklin Road Route 19* West
Countryside Court Meadowbrook Drive West
Cricketwood Court Hunting Creek Road 3 Way
Curry Avenue Morganza Road* West
Deerwatch Drive Meadowbrook Drive East
DeMar Blvd. McClennand Road* North
DeMar Blvd. Griffin Street 3 Way
DeMar Blvd. Neely Street East
§ 212 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 212
1:257
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
DeMar Blvd. Route 19* East
DiCio Street Mitchell Drive North
Driftwood Road Hunting Creek Road East
Dundee Drive McGregor Drive East
Dundee Drive McGregor Drive West
Deerfield Drive Old Meadows Drive East
Deerfield Drive Meadowbrook Drive East
Elm Street Boone Avenue* South
Elm Street Ext. Boone Avenue* North
Fair Meadows
Drive
Blue Jay Drive 4 Way
Fieldbrook Drive Meadowbrook Drive West
Fieldbrook Drive Meadowbrook Drive East
Francis Street Route 519* West
Fulton Road Route 19* West
Fulton Road Walker Road East
Galley Road Linden Creek Road* West
Garden Street South Central Avenue* West
Giffin Street DeMar Blvd. 3 Way
Gilkeson Road Thomas-84 Road* North
Grand View Locust Circle North
Green Valley Road Brownlee Road* East
Greenwood Drive Wavertown Road* North
Griffwood Drive Canterbury Road West
Griffwood Drive Thomas Road* West
Helen Street Route 519* West
Highland Drive Mary Lane South
Hitchman Street Boone Avenue* South
Horseshoe Drive
East
Meadowbrook Drive 3 Way
Horseshoe Drive
West
Meadowbrook Drive West
Hunting Creek
Road
Village Drive South
Hunting Creek
Road
Old Meadows Drive 3 Way
§ 212 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 212
1:258
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Hunting Creek
Road
Driftwood Drive 3 Way
Hunting Creek
Road
Glenn Cannon Street 3 Way
Hunting Creek
Road
Cricketwood 3 Way
Johnson Road* Racetrack Road* South
Joan Court Clare Drive West
Lenore Way Taylor Drive North
Lenore Way Nancy Road South
Lakewood Drive W. McMurray Road* North
Lakewood Drive Sweetbriar Drive South
Latimer Avenue* Chartiers Street* North
Linden Road* Route 19* West
Lindley Road Route 19* East
Lindley Road Johnson* West
Linwood Road Route 519* North
Linwood Road Christy Road 4 Way
Linwood Road Route 136* South
Linwood Road/
Chubbic Road
(South)
Linwood Road (North) South
Louise Court Clare Drive West
Locust Avenue Route 19 East
Locust Avenue Garden Street West
Locust Avenue Locust Circle East
Locust Circle Locust Avenue North (both ends)
Locust Street Route 19* East
Locust Street Poplar Street 3 Way
Long Drive Linden Road* North
Long Drive Thomas-84 Road* South
Martha Court William Drive South
Martha Drive William Drive North
Mary Lane Clare Drive 3 Way
Mary Lane Chambers Lane East
Mansfield Road Route 19* West
§ 212 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 212
1:259
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Maple Avenue Fulton Road South
Maple Street South Central Avenue* West
McBride Road Lindley Road West
McBride Road Johnson Road* East
McClelland Road Morganza Road* West
McDowell Road McClelland Road* South
McGregor Drive McClelland Road* South
McMurray Road* Morganza Road* West
Meadowbrook
Drive
McBride Road East
Meadowbrook
Drive
Saddlebrook Lane 3 Way
Meadowbrook
Drive
Route 19* East
Meadowbrook
Drive
McBride Road West
Meadowbrook
Drive
Route 19 East
Meadowbrook
Drive
Saddlebrook Drive East
Meadowbrook
Drive
Meadowbrook Drive South
Meadowbrook
Drive
Pacers Ridge Drive 3 Way
Meadowlands Blvd. Johnson Road* West
Meadowlands Road Racetrack Road* East
Meadowview Old Meadow 3 Way
Merino Drive William Drive North
Mitchell Drive McClelland Drive* North
Mitchell Drive Neely Avenue South
Mosier Road Brownlee Road* West
Mosier Road Route 136* East
Munce Road Christy Road West
Munce Road Route 136* East
Nancy Lane Taylor Drive 4 Way
Nancy Road Springdale Road West
Neely Drive DeMar Blvd. South
§ 212 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 212
1:260
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Norris Drive DeMar Blvd. South
Oak Lane Sweetbriar Road 2 Way
Oak Lane Skyview Drive South
Old Farm Road W. McMurray Road* North
Old Farm Road Lakewood Drive South
Old Meadow Court Hunting Creek Road East
Old Meadow Road Meadowview Drive 3 Way
Old Meadow Road Deerfield Drive 3 Way
Pacers Ridge Drive Meadowbrook Drive West
Pacers Ridge Drive Meadowbrook Drive East
Pacers Ridge Drive Meadowbrook Drive West
Partridge Way Driftwood North
Patterson Road Brownlee Road* East
Pearl Drive Giffin Street West
Pearl Drive Clare Drive East
Percheron Circle Martha Drive North
Pheasant Cove Hunting Creek Road East
Pike Street Ext. Morganza Road West
Pioneer Trail Drive Morgan Circle North
Quail Acres Lane Race Track Road* West
Ross Road Linden Road* East
Ross Road Thomas Road* West
Route 519* South Central Avenue* South
Royal Circle Meadowbrook Drive South
Royal Drive Meadowbrook Drive East
Saddle Brook Lane Meadowbrook Drive West
Saddlebrook Drive Meadowbrook Drive North
Saddlebrook Lane Meadowbrook Drive 3 Way
Selwyn Avenue View Drive South
Selwyn Avenue Wylie Avenue North & South
Selwyn Avenue Alexander Avenue North & South
Selwyn Avenue Latimer Avenue* North
Short Street Latimer Avenue* North
Short Street Alexander Avenue South
Skyview Drive Woodridge Drive 2 Way
§ 212 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 212
1:261
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Sleepy Hollow
Road
Maple Avenue West
Spring Valley Road Waterdam Road* North & South
Springdale Road Thomas Road* West
Springdale Road Windy Hill Lane East
Springdale Road Windy Hill Lane West
Springvalley Road Ross Road South
Route 519* South Central Avenue* South
Stonegate Drive Waterdam Road* North
Strabane Avenue Morganza Road* North
Sunset Drive Thomas Road* East
Surrey Drive Linden Creek Road* West
Sweetbriar Drive Oak Lane East
Taylor Drive Nancy Lane 4 Way
Theresa Street Route 519* West
Thomas-84 Road* Route 519* West
Thomas-84 Road* Linden Road* East
Thome Road Munce Road East
Timber Lane Route 519* North
Timber Lane Route 519* South
Trotwood Circle Trotwood Drive West
Trotwood Drive Johnson Road* East
Valleyview Drive Village Drive West
Valleyview Drive Deerfield Drive East
Vance Drive South Central Avenue East
View Avenue Chartiers Avenue East
View Avenue Wylie Avenue East & West
Village Drive William Drive West
Vista Hill Linden Creek Road* East
Walker Road Linden Road* South
Walker Road Fulton Road North
Walker Road Fulton Road West 3 Way
W. McMurray
Road*
Morganza Road* 3 Way
Wilson Road Route 519* West
§ 212 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 212
1:262
§ 213. Yield Intersections Established. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 214. Restrictions on Use of Pushcarts. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Wilson Road* Linden Road* West
William Drive Marino Drove East
Windfield Street Fulton Road South
Winner Circle Meadowbrook Drive East
Wylie Avenue Chartiers Street* East
Wylie Avenue Selwyn Avenue West
Wylie Avenue Boone Avenue* West
William Drive Merino Drive* East
William Drive McClelland Road* North
William Drive Martha Drive/Circle 4 Way
Willow Street Sleepy Hollow Road North & South
Woodridge Drive Old Farm Road North
Woodridge Drive Amberwood Drive North
(* Indicates state-owned and maintained roads)
2. Any driver of a vehicle who shall fail to come to a full stop before
entering any stop intersection, as hereinabove required, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of
prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment for not more than one day for
each $10 for failure to pay said fine and costs.
1. The following intersections are established as yield intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected)
in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-name street
(the through street) on the first-named street (the yield street) in the
direction or directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or yield street,
in the direction indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the
vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, and then
yield the right-of-way as required by that subsection of the Vehicle
Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 212 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 214
1:263
§ 215. Skates, Coasters, Sleds and Other Toy Vehicles. [Ord. 147,
11/26/1985]
1. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, other
than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from the Board of Supervisors, as provided in Subsection 3 of
this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that
pushcart goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from
the Manager. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Township, of $100 for any calendar year, $50 for any sixmonth
period, or $25 for any three-month period. The permit shall be
granted to the applicant upon payment of the fee and upon his signing
an agreement with the Manager that he shall be bound by the
conditions imposed by the Manager and made a part of the permit,
dealing with the following matters:
A. Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location;
B. Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on;
C. Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Township, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a portion
of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 105 of Part 1 or
§ 216 of this Part 2 of the chapter; provided: nothing in this subsection
shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider,
upon a sidewalk.
§ 214 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 215
1:264
§ 216. Prohibition of the Use of Air Brakes. [Ord. 275, 1/23/2001,
§ 1; as added by Ord. 275, 1/23/2001, § 1]
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in rollerskating or to ride
upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
A. Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
B. Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in
this paragraph shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use air brakes in the
North Strabane Township on State Route 519 south from Segment/
Offset120/1451 to Segment/Offset 130/0541 while traveling in a north
bound direction.
2. Any person or persons who violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $50 plus costs and
any other related state mandated costs.
§ 215 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 216
1:265

Part 3
RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE, WEIGHT AND TYPE OF VEHICLE AND
LOAD
§ 301. Vehicle Weight Limits Established on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 302. Restrictions on Size of Vehicles on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 303. Restrictions as to Weight and Size of Vehicles on Certain
Streets and Bridges. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge
or street or part of street, as the case may be;
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
All Township streets Entire length 20,000 pounds
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-l) of the Vehicle Code
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150
for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) and Section 4902(g-l) of the Vehicle
Code and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and
costs.
1. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by Section 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:267
§ 304. Truck Traffic Restricted on Certain Streets. [Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(b) and 4902(g-l) of the Vehicle Code
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 and not more than $100 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
Provided: nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or
from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or
other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from
premises located along that street or part of a street.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 304
1:268
Part 4
GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 401. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces. [Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this Part for any person to
park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 402. Angle Parking Required on Portions of Certain Streets. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at the
angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 403. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 197, 4/26/1994, § 3; by Ord.
199, 5/24/1994, § 1; by Ord. 249, 6/4/1998, § 1; by Ord. 263, 10/26/
1999, § 1; and by Ord. 283, 3/26/2002, § 1]
1. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Acme Road Both Entire length
Alexander Avenue Both Entire length
Amber Woods Drive Both Entire length
Anderson Drive Both Entire length
Arold Avenue Both Entire length
Ash Street Both Entire length
Baltimore Avenue Both Entire length
Barber Avenue Both Entire length
Bennington Street Both Entire length
Blue Jay Drive Both Entire length
Bluegrass Drive Both Entire length
Boone Avenue Both Entire length
Boot Road Both Entire length
Brehm Road Both Entire length
Bridlewood Court Both Entire length
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:269
Street Side Between
Brookfield Court Both Entire length
Brownlee Road Both Entire length
Bruce Drive Both Entire length
Burgess Lane Both Entire length
Canterbury Road Both Entire length
Carl Avenue Both Entire length
Carol Drive Both Entire length
Carriage Court Both Entire length
Carriage Way Both Entire length
Centennial Drive Both Entire length
Chambers Lane Both Entire length
Chartiers Street Both Entire length
Cherry Street Both Entire length
Cheslock Road Both Entire length
Chesnic Drive Both Entire length
Christy Road Both Entire length
Chubbic Road Both Entire length
Clare Drive Both Entire length
Clutter Street Both Entire length
Coachside Drive Both Entire length
Colby Street Both Entire length
Conklin Road Both Entire length
Countryside Court Both Entire length
Cricketwood Court Both Entire length
Curry Avenue Both Entire length
Deerfield Drive Both Entire length
Deer Watch Drive Both Entire length
Deerwatch Drive Both Entire length
DeMar Boulevard Both Entire length
DiCio Street Both Entire length
Dooley Street Both Entire length
Driftwood Road Both Entire length
Dundee Drive Both Entire length
Elm Street Both Entire length
Fair Meadow Drive Both Entire length
Fieldbrook Drive Both Entire length
§ 403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 403
1:270
Street Side Between
Francis Street Both Entire length
Fulton Road Both Entire length
Galley Road Both Entire length
Garden Street Both Entire length
Giffin Avenue Both Entire length
Gilkeson Road Both Entire length
Glencannon Drive Both Entire length
Glen Springs Circle Both Entire length
Gowern Street Both Entire length
Grandview Avenue Both Entire length
Green Valley Road Both Entire length
Greenwood Drive Both Entire length
Greystone Drive Both Entire length
Griffwood Drive Both Entire length
Hahn Drive Both Entire length
Helen Street Both Entire length
Hickory Circle Both Entire length
Highland Drive Both Entire length
Hitchman Street Both Entire length
Hook Street Both From Weavertown as signed
Horseshoe Circle East Both Entire length
Horseshoe Circle West Both Entire length
Hunting Creek Road Both Entire length
Joan Court Both Entire length
Kidder Lane Both Entire length
Latimer Avenue Both Entire length
Lenore Way Both Entire length
Lindley Road Both Entire length
Locust Avenue Both Entire length
Locust Circle Both Entire length
Locust Street Both Entire length
Long Drive Both Entire length
Louise Court Both Entire length
Mansfield Road Both Entire length
Maple Avenue Both Entire length
Maple Street Both Entire length
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:271
Street Side Between
Martha Court Both Entire length
Martha Drive Both Entire length
Mary Lane Both Entire length
McBride Road Both Entire length
McDowell Lane Both Entire length
McGregor Drive Both Entire length
Meadow Court Both Entire length
Meadowlands Boulevard Both Entire length
Meadowview Drive Both Entire length
Merino Drive Both Entire length
Mitchell Drive Both Entire length
Mockingbird Drive Both Entire length
Mosier Road Both Entire length
Nancy Lane Both Entire length
Neely Drive Both Entire length
Norris Drive Both Entire length
Oak Lane Both Entire length
Old Farm Road Both Entire length
Old Meadow Road Both Entire length
Pacers Ridge Road Both Entire length
Partridge Way Both Entire length
Pearl Drive Both Entire length
Pheasant Cove Both Entire length
Poplar Street Both Entire length
Saddle Brook Lane Both Entire length
School Street Both Entire length
Selwyn street Both Entire length
Short Street Both Entire length
Sleepy Hollow Road Both Entire length
Smith Place Both Entire length
Strabane Street Both Entire length
Sunset Drive Both Entire length
Surrey Drive Both Entire length
Sweet Briar Road Both Entire length
Taylor Drive Both Entire length
Thome Road Both Entire length
§ 403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 403
1:272
§ 404. Parking Prohibited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
Street Side Between
Timber Lane Both Entire length
Trotwood Circle Both Entire length
Trotwood Drive Both Entire length
Unnamed access drives
that connect to Hunting
Creek Road in
Glencannon
Both As marked
Vance Drive Both Entire length
Vandale Drive Both Entire length
Victoria Drive Both Entire length
View Drive Both Entire length
Village Drive Both Entire length
Vista Hill Road Both Entire length
Walker Road Both Entire length
Water Street Both Entire length
William Drive Both Entire length
Willow Street Both Entire length
Willowlake Drive Both Entire length
Winfield Street Both Entire length
Winners Circle Both Entire length
Woodridge Drive Both Entire length
Wylie Avenue Both Entire length
Zeman Drive Both Entire length
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be cited by
the North Strabane Township Police and/or parking enforcement officer
to pay a fine of $5. If said citation is not paid within 10 working days,
the aforementioned representatives/employees of the Township shall
file the violation with the magistrate jurisdiction of North Strabane
Township, and, upon conviction thereof, said person shall pay a fine
consistent therewith plus costs, or undergo imprisonment for not more
than one day for each $10 for failure to pay said fine and costs.
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:273
§ 405. Parking of Trucks, Buses and Certain Other Vehicles
Prohibited in Certain Locations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 406. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
(Reserved)
§ 407. Special Purposes Parking Zones Established; Parking
Otherwise Prohibited. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
(Reserved)
§ 408. Standing or Parking on Roadway for Loading or Unloading.
[Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m.
and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than
necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 405 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 409
1:274
§ 409. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any person who violates any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs. Provided: it
shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel
of the Township to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
provision of this Part, indicating, in each case: the section violated; the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where
the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this Part. The notice shall contain instructions
to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of
the Manager and pay the sum of $5 within two business days after the
date of the report, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
§ 409 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 409
1:275

Part 5
(RESERVED)22
§ 501. through § 508. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Part 5, Regulation Of Vehicle, Material And Equipment Uses,
Adopted 3/22/2005 By Ord. 302, Was Repealed 8/23/2016 By Ord. 369. See Now
International Property Maintenance Code § 302.8.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 501
1:277

Part 6
REGULATION OF PEDALCYCLES
§ 601. Riding and Parking of Pedalcycles on Sidewalks Along
Certain Streets Prohibited. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Township:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 602. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any person who violates any provision of § 601 of this Part shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and costs.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 602
1:279

Part 7
SNOW REMOVAL CONDITION
§ 701. Definitions. [Ord. 196, 4/26/1994, § 1]
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets,
including snow, sleet, hail, ice and freezing rain.
SNOW REMOVAL CONDITION — A state of street conditions that are
hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or so declared
by the Manager of North Strabane Township.
CHAINS — Full chains, strap chains or other types of chains mounted on
both rear wheels of a motorized vehicle.
SNOW TIRES — Tires having treads designed for use in the snow, which
tires must be in such condition as to serve the purpose for which they were
designed.
VEHICLE — Any self-propelled motorized vehicle licensed to travel upon the
streets, roads and highways of North Strabane Township.
§ 702. Declaration of Snow Removal. [Ord. 196, 4/26/1994, § 2]
A snow removal condition is hereby declared in the Township of North
Strabane whenever snow falls during any period of 12 hours or less to
an accumulated depth of three inches or more, or at any other such time
when, in the opinion of the Manager of North Strabane Township, or such
person designated by the Manager, the street conditions are hazardous
and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic because of snow
accumulation. The Manager of North Strabane Township, or such person
designated by the Manager, shall have authority to declare a snow removal
condition, notice of which shall immediately be issued to local radio and
news services. In either instance, a snow removal condition is presumed to
continue for a period of 12 hours following the accumulation of snow, or
until such period of time as designated by the Township Manager.
§ 703. Unattended Vehicles Prohibited During Emergency. [Ord.
196, 4/26/1994, § 3]
During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, it shall be a
violation of this Part for any person, firm, organization or entity to park,
abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on the various streets, roads and
highways and their adjacent rights-of-way within the boundaries of North
Strabane Township.
§ 704. Snow Tires or Chains Required. [Ord. 196, 4/26/1994, § 4]
During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect any person,
firm, organization or entity operating or causing to be operated a vehicle
which is not equipped with snow tires, all-weather tires or chains upon any
street, road or highway within the boundaries of North Strabane Township
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 704
1:281
resulting in such vehicle becoming stalled or incapable of moving under its
own power, or who leaves such vehicle abandoned or unattended on any
street, road or highway within the boundaries of North Strabane Township
as a result of its inability to move under its own power because of its failure
to be equipped with snow tires or chains, shall be in violation of this Part
and shall be subject to the penalties and fines set forth in § 705 of this Part.
§ 705. Penalties. [Ord. 196, 4/26/1994, § 5]
1. During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, any person
who shall park a vehicle anywhere upon or along any of the highways of
the Township shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $40 and costs of
prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than one day for each $10 of the unpaid
balance of the fine and costs.
2. Any person who shall operate a vehicle upon any highway of the
Township, if such vehicle shall become stalled during such time as a
snow removal condition is in effect, and if such stalling shall have been
by reason of the failure to have such vehicle equipped as prescribed in
§ 704 of this Part, shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon
conviction thereof, such person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $40
and costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than one day for each $10 of the
unpaid fine and costs.
§ 704 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 705
1:282
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 705 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 705
1:283

Part 1
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: repealing
NONRESIDENTS — All other "persons."
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include all
parks, parklets, recreation areas, trails, tennis courts, recreation structures
and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all other
land or property or structures, now or hereafter owned or acquired by the
Township of North Strabane for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON or PARTY — Any natural person, corporation, organization or
person, company, association and partnership.
RESIDENTS — All persons living in the Township and those owning real
property within Township boundaries.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Board of Supervisors under the authority
herein conferred.
SPECIAL USE or RESERVATION — Any use of a park area or facility as
requested by a party. The Township Manager or designated representative
makes the final determination for the approval or denial of all special use
requests. If approved, the area or facility will be reserved for the requested
party's activity, which may be exclusive. There also may be a requirement
for a deposit and rental fee to be paid.
TOWNSHIP — North Strabane Township.
§ 102. Park Hours. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
All parks and parklets will be open at sunrise, prevailing time, and close
at 11:00 p.m. Except for official business or with the written permission of
the Township Manager or his designated representative, no person or motor
vehicle shall be permitted within any park or parklet after the established
closing hour.
§ 103. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
No person in attendance at a park shall:
A. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, fences, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures or any other
property of the Township located within the park.
B. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste materials; nor dispose of the same other than in any way except
in receptacles designated for such purpose.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:285
C. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in Township-approved
barbeque grills. The Township reserves the right for special exceptions
approved by the Township Manager or his designated representative
for purposes of special events or Township-related functions.
D. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliances without the express,
written permission of the Board of Supervisors.
E. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of the Board of Supervisors;
nor shall any notice or placard be posted within the park other than by
authority of the Board of Supervisors or designated representative,
except upon notice boards specifically provided for such purposes.
F. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park, or distribute, sell, service or
rent any services or commodity, or solicit for any purposes without the
express, written permission of the Township Manager or his designated
representative.
G. Allow pets to run at large, out of control. All pets must remain on a
leash (maximum ten-foot leash).
H. Carry or shoot firearms.
I. Participate in gambling activities or partake of alcoholic beverages or
illegal drugs. (Exception, see 2012 North Strabane Township Park and
Field Use Policy.)
J. Be permitted to park motor vehicles, except on paved street, roadways,
or cart paths, within the parks and/or parklets specifically designated
therefor. Vehicles shall not be operated thereon at a speed in excess of
15 miles per hour, unless specifically authorized by the Township
Manager or his designated representative.
K. Operate motor scooters, minibikes, ATV's or go-carts within the parks
or parklets.
L. Conduct themselves in an unruly or disorderly manner or detract from
the general public enjoyment of any park area.
M. Use loudspeakers, amplifiers, or other means of sound amplification in
the parks or parklets without the written permission of the Township
Manager or his designated representative, and then only for specific
uses and times as designated in the permit.
N. Camp in other than areas designated by the Township. All camping
approvals must satisfy requirements for the following: adequate
supervision, primitive camp style, no use of special vehicles such as
trailers, and pre-arrangements with the Township.
O. Golf on playing fields.
§ 103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 103
1:286
§ 104. Reservations for Specific Uses. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
The use of all parks shall be on a first-come, first-served basis unless
otherwise reserved:
§ 105. Authority to Close Areas. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use or subject
to damage due to weather, water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may
be closed at the discretion of the Township Manager or his designated
representative.
§ 106. Special Use. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
P. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any party/person occupying any
area used for a special event or program.
Q. Ride a horse on any ballfield, shelter/picnic area, playground area, or
any area used for a special event or program. Horses are prohibited on
trails also.
R. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire. Exception may be permitted for a
Parks and Recreational Department approved special use.
A. By annual permission granted by the Township Manager or his
designated representative for the scheduling of various league games,
etc.
B. For school district athletics games, practice, contests or exhibitions.
C. For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs.
D. By permission granted by the Township Manager or his designated
representative for a specific requested use.
1. Reservation; Approvals and Revocations. All reservations for any park
facility or area will be managed by the Parks and Recreation Staff. Any
approval/permit may be revoked by the Township upon finding a
violation of any ordinance or rule or upon good cause shown.
2. Deposits. Deposits may be required to be paid the Township for some
special use requests and applied as follows:
A. The damage/clean up deposits will be determined by the Director of
Parks and Recreation with the prior approval of the Board of
Supervisors. The deposit charges shall not exceed $1,000. The
deposit required must always be presented to the Township in the
form of a check (never cash) and must be received at the time of
application. A refund check will be returned to the party if no
damage or excessive cleanup has been incurred by the Township.
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:287
§ 107. Promulgation of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/
2012]
The Director of Parks and Recreation with prior approval of the Board
of Supervisors may, from time to time, promulgate rules and regulations
to effectuate the provisions of this Part, including, but not limited to,
adjustment of park hours, deposits, costs, and fees relating to parks(s) use
without being required to amend this Part.
§ 108. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
The police officers and/or the code enforcement officers of the Township,
as the case may be, are charged with enforcement of the provisions of this
Part.
B. If for any reason there is damage to any part of the park area, the
Township shall determine the extent of the damage and deduct the
dollar amount from the deposit paid by the party. If the cleanup
exceeds the routine duties required, a restitution fee shall be
assessed and deducted from the deposit.
C. In either or both cases, if the amount of damage or extra cleanup
required exceeds the deposit paid by the party, the Township may
bill the party for the balance, to be paid in full, no more than 30
days from the billing date. If the payment is not received from the
party within that time, all future special use requests by that party
will be denied until such time as payment is received. The
foregoing provisions shall also apply in cases in which the party
was not required to remit a deposit.
3. Reservation Fee. Fees for reservations shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, or may be established to
underwrite a particular service as necessary. All fees must be received
by the Township at the time of application.
4. Refunds.
A. If the party cancels its special use at least 72 hours prior to the
reserved activity, the rental fee will be refunded. If the party
cancels its reservation with less than 72 hours prior to the special
use, the deposit will be refunded; however, the rental fee will be
forfeited.
B. If the reserved special use was unable to be conducted due to
inclement weather, or any condition which renders the facility/area
unusable, a full refund will be granted upon request. Rain date
must be identified in advance and, if used, must be treated as any
other special use.
§ 106 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 109
1:288
§ 109. Penalties. [Ord. No. 348, 6/26/2012]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than
$1,000, and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:289
Chapter 17
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 109 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 109
1:290
Part 1
SEWER CONNECTIONS, TOWNSHIP
§ 101. Specific Definitions. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 101; as amended
by Ord. 180, 7/23/1991, § 1; by Ord. 186, 1/26/1993, § 1; and by Ord.
318, 5/29/2007]
Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of specific
terms in this Part shall be as follows:
ACT — The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing Materials.
AUTHORITY MANAGER — Manager of the Authority's public sewer system
or an authorized designee.
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) — The quantity of oxygen
used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING SEWER — The service line connected to and running from one
of the Municipal Authority's main service lines or any extension thereof,
over private property to the structure provided with public sanitary sewer
service.
CAPACITY COMPONENT or CAPACITY PART — As used in § 118 of this
Part, shall mean a fee imposed per each unit of capacity, for use of capacity
related facilities, built and/or purchased by the Municipal Authority or
Township, which fee does not exceed the amount calculated as:
CAPACITY RELATED FACILITIES — As used in § 118 of this Part, shall
mean components of the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system
relating to treatment, transmission, trunk, interceptors and mains, sludge
treatment or disposal, interconnection or other general system facilities. As
The historical cost of such facilities trended to current cost using the
Engineering News Record. [Construction Cost Index (CCI)] divided by
the design capacity of the facilities, less:
Any grants and/or capital contributions which have financed such
facilities;
(1)
Outstanding debt related to existing facilities which do not
exclusively serve new customers; provided however, that debt
related to existing facilities exclusively serving new customers
shall be included in calculation of historical cost; and,
(2)
Costs of expanding, upgrading, replacing, updating facilities
serving existing customers to meet stricter efficiency,
environmental, regulatory or safety standards and to provide better
service to, or meet the needs of existing customers.
(3)
A.
B. For purposes of this definition, the unit of capacity shall be one EDU.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:291
used herein "capacity related facilities" may include those such facilities
that provide existing service and/or those that will provide future service.
COLLECTION COMPONENT or COLLECTION PART — As used in § 118 of
this Part, shall mean a fee per each unit of capacity for use of collection
facilities built and/or purchased by the Municipal Authority or Township,
which does not exceed the amount calculated as:
COLLECTION FACILITIES — As used in § 118 of this Part, shall mean
components of the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system related
to the provision of collection services including, but not limited to, mains
and pumping stations. As used herein, "collection facilities" may include
such facilities that provide existing service and/or those that will provide
future service.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm or surface water.
COMMERCIAL USER (Class II) — Any property occupied by a
nonresidential establishment not within the definition of an "Industrial User
(Class III)", and which is connected to the public wastewater system.
CONNECTION FEE — A fee imposed to recover the Municipal Authority's
cost of:
The historical cost of such facilities trended to current cost using the
Engineering News Record [Construction Cost Index (CCI)] divided by
the design capacity of the facilities less:
Any grants and/or capital contributions which have financed such
facilities;
(1)
Outstanding debt related to existing facilities which do not
exclusively serve new customers; provided, however, that debt
related to existing facilities exclusively serving new customers
shall be included in calculation of historical cost; and,
(2)
Costs of expanding, upgrading, replacing, updating facilities
serving existing customers to meet stricter efficiency,
environmental, regulatory or safety standards and to provide better
service to, or meet the needs of existing customers.
(3)
A.
B. For purposes of this definition, the unit of capacity shall be one EDU.
Constructing facilities between a sewer main line and the property lines
of the property serviced or to be serviced, which fee shall not exceed
an amount based on the actual cost of the service connection, lateral
sewer and related costs, of the property extending from the Municipal
Authority's main line to the property line of the property so connected;
and,
A.
Inspection of the facilities identified in Subsection A above, whether
built by the Municipal Authority or otherwise.
B.
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:292
CUSTOMER FACILITIES FEE — A fee imposed to recover the Municipal
Authority's cost of:
DAY — The twenty-four-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
EDU (EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT) — The amount of water consumed
each year for each residential unit, or 58,000 gallons of water consumed per
year for nonresidential use.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EXISTING CUSTOMER — Individuals and/or entities who/which are users
of the public wastewater system in North Strabane Township as of the
effective date of the Schedule of Fees attached hereto and expressly
incorporated herein.
EXISTING FACILITIES — Those facilities which comprise part of the
Municipal Authority public wastewater system as of the effective date of
this Part provided, however, that for purposes of calculation of the tapping
fee imposed by § 118 of this Part, this term shall not include facilities
contributed to the Authority and/or the Township of North Strabane by any
person, government or agency.
GARBAGE — The solid animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
domestic or commercial handling, storage, dispensing, preparation, cooking
and serving of foods.
GREASE TRAP — A device used to separate fats, oils, grease, etc., from
the domestic wastewater. Grease traps are required in all nonresidential
kitchen facilities in North Strabane Township.
GRINDER PUMP — A privately owned mechanical device used to pump
sewage into the Authority's collection system, as approved and inspected by
the Authority.
The part of this fee set forth in Subsection A above shall be chargeable
only in the event that the Authority itself incurs costs (other than costs
of inspection) in the construction of the lateral.
Facilities installed between the property line of a property and the
building to which service is provided, which fee shall not exceed an
amount based on the actual cost of the facilities servicing the connected
property, from the property line to the dwelling or building to be served;
and,
A.
Inspection of the facilities identified in Subsection A above, whether
built by the Municipal Authority or otherwise.
The part of this fee set forth in Subsection A above shall be chargeable
only in the event that, as a result of the property owner's failure to
promptly and properly connect the building to the Authority's system,
in accordance with this Part, the Authority is required to do so.
B.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:293
GROUNDWATER — Water within the earth.
INDUSTRIAL USER (Class III) — Any nonresidential user identified in
Division A, B, D, E, or I of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual.
Class III shall also include any user which discharges wastewater
containing toxic or poisonous substances, or any substance(s) which
cause(s) interference in the public wastewater system.
HISTORICAL COST — Except as otherwise provided herein, all costs
associated with acquisition of real and personal property and/or
construction rights, construction itself, related financing, engineering, legal
and other professional fees, and other administrative expenses incurred in
the acquisition and/or construction of any part of the existing facilities.
INTERFERENCE — Inhibition or disruption of any sewer system,
wastewater treatment process, sludge disposal system, or their operation,
which substantially contributes to a violation of applicable discharge
permits.
MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION EXPENSES — Those expenditures made
during the useful life of a sewer system for labor, materials, utilities,
equipment, accessories and/or appurtenances and such other items as are
necessary to manage and maintain the system capacity and performance
and to provide the service for which the system was constructed.
MANUAL OF PROCEDURES OF NSTMA — A manual of procedures,
construction materials and design requirements for the construction of
sanitary sewer and service lines, adopted by the Authority, as amended.
MAY — Is permissive, "shall" is mandatory.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
any other natural body of surface or groundwater.
NONRESIDENTIAL USE — Any use other than a residential use.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
program, which regulates point-source discharges into waters of the
Commonwealth, whether administered by the EPA or by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
OIL SEPARATOR — A device used to separate oil and gasoline products
from the domestic wastewater in nonresidential facilities in North Strabane
Township.
OWNER — The person or persons who legally own, lease, or occupy private
property with wastewater facilities which discharge, or will discharge, to
the public wastewater system.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:294
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in grams per liter of solution as determined by Standard
Methods.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to discharge to the public wastewater
system.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and
(c) of the Act, which apply to Industrial Users.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions
normally prevailing in the public wastewater system, with no particle
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC WASTEWATER SYSTEM — The combination of wastewater sewers
and the wastewater treatment facilities.
REIMBURSEMENT COMPONENT or REIMBURSEMENT PART — As used
in §§ 118, 119, and 119.1 of this Part, shall mean the amount necessary
to recapture the allocable portion of facilities in order to reimburse the
property owner who constructed the facilities, or at whose expense such
facilities were constructed.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any room, group of rooms or enclosure, occupied
or intended for occupancy as the separate living quarters of a person
living alone, a family or any other group of persons living together. Each
residential dwelling unit within a house, in a double house, in a room of
connecting houses, in a condominium, in a motel, or in the separate living
quarters of a congregate care facility or congregate living facility, shall be
separate residential use.
RESIDENTIAL USER (Class I) — Any user of premises used only for human
residency and which is connected to the public wastewater system.
SANITARY WASTEWATER — Wastewater discharged from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings, office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions.
SEWER SERVICE EXTENSION LINE or EXTENSION LINE or LATERAL —
A sanitary sewer designed and constructed as an extension to a main sewer
line within the public right-of-way, to which a building sewer from individual
properties of customers or potential customers are to be connected. As used
herein, this term does not include any building sewer.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater, published by the American Public
Health Association, Water Pollution Control Federation and American Water
Works Association.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORM SEWER — A sewer for conveying storm, surface, and other waters
which are not intended to be transported to a treatment facility.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:295
SURFACE WATER — Water which occurs when the rate of precipitation
exceeds the rate at which water may infiltrate into the soil.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — The total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of or is suspended in water or wastewater, as determined by
Standard Methods.
TAP PERMIT — The written approval, if any, received by an applicant for
connection to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system, which
allows the property to which the approval relates to be physically connected
to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system, and/or reserves
capacity in the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system. Except
as may otherwise be authorized by Township Ordinance, the tap permit
shall automatically expire on the date that occurs two years after the date
of issuance of the tap permit, which issuance date shall be identified on
said tap permit, if the property to which the tap permit relates has not,
as of that date, been physically connected to the Municipal Authority's
public wastewater system at that time, and satisfactory inspection of said
connection has not been performed by or on behalf of the Municipal
Authority, in accordance with Township Ordinances or Township and/or
Authority regulations.
TAPPING FEE — A fee initially payable to the Municipal Authority at the
time of application for connection to the Municipal Authority's public
wastewater system, which fee is identified on the Schedule attached to this
Part. The term "connection" includes:
TOXICS — Any of the pollutants designated by Federal regulations pursuant
to § 307(a)(1) of the Act.
WASTEWATER — A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industries, and institutions.
WASTEWATER SEWER — The structures, processes, equipment and
arrangements necessary to collect and transport wastewaters to the
treatment facilities.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY — The structures, processes,
equipment and arrangements necessary to treat and discharge
wastewaters.
WPCF — The Water Pollution Control Federation.
The physical connection of the property to the public wastewater
system; and/or,
A.
Resulting increases in EDUs in the public wastewater system
attributable to a building or structure previously physically connected
to which renovations, modifications, and/or additions are made; and/or.
B.
"Indirect connections" to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater
system as identified in § 118.1 hereof.
C.
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 102
1:296
§ 102. General Definitions. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 102]
Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
in this Part and not defined in § 101 above, shall be as defined in the
Glossary of Water and Wastewater Control Engineering prepared by the
Joint Editorial Board of the American Public Health Association, American
Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works Association and Water
Pollution Control Federation, copyright 1969.
§ 103. Purpose. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 103; as amended by Ord. 180,
7/23/1991, § 2]
The purpose of this Part are: to provide for the maximum possible beneficial
use of the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system through
regulation of sewer construction, sewer use, and wastewater discharge; to
provide for equitable and legally authorized distribution of the costs of the
Municipal Authority's public wastewater system; to provide procedures for
complying with requirements contained herein and to promote the general
health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the Township.
§ 104. Scope. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 104; as amended by Ord. 180,
7/23/1991, § 3]
§ 105. Administration. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 105; as amended by
Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Authority Manager, or such other
person or firm designated by the Municipal Authority, shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter 18 of the North
Strabane Township Code of Ordinances. This designation of Authority
Manager replaces the term "Maintenance Supervisor" through Chapter 18
1. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the discharge of all wastewater
to the public wastewater system of the Municipal Authority. This Part
provides for the uses of the Municipal Authority's wastewater system;
regulation of construction of sewers and/or treatment facilities; control
of the quantity and quality of wastewater discharged to the public
wastewater system; equitably and legally authorized distribution of
costs among existing customers of the existing system, among existing
customers with respect to future expansions or enhancements of the
system, and among future customers; assurance that existing capacity
needs of existing customers will not be preempted; approval of sewer,
pump station and/or treatment facilities, construction plans, issuance of
wastewater discharge permits, establishments of sewer connection
standards, conditions and costs, and imposition of penalties and
procedures applicable as a result of violation of this Part.
2. This Part shall apply to all persons in the Township and to persons
outside the Township who are, by contract or agreement with the
Township, users of the Municipal Authority's wastewater sewers or
wastewater treatment facilities.
§ 102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:297
and shall be hereby inserted and substituted for the term Maintenance
Supervisor throughout Chapter 18.
§ 106. Notice of Violation. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 106; as amended
by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Any person found in violation of this Part or any requirement of a permit
issued hereunder may be served with a written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for compliance. Any
such notice given shall be in writing and served in person or by registered
or certified mail. The notice shall be sent to the last address of the violator
known to the Authority Manager. Where the violator's address is unknown,
service may be made upon the owner of record of the property involved. If
satisfactory action is not taken in the time allotted by the notice, § 107 of
this Part shall be implemented.
§ 107. Violations. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 107; as amended by Ord.
240, 10/28/1997]
§ 108. Fees and Charges. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 108; as amended by
Ord. 180, 7/23/1991, § 4]
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part or any person who continues to violate the discharge provisions of
this Part beyond the time limit provided for in the notice given pursuant
to § 106 above, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part continues or
each Section of this Part which shall be found to have been violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
2. Upon conviction, such person may be subject to disconnection from the
Municipal Authority's public wastewater system upon approval by the
Township Board of Supervisors.
1. Except as otherwise provided herein, all fees and charges payable
under the provisions of this Part shall be paid to the Municipal
Authority. Such fees and charges shall be set forth in Part 3 of this
Chapter related to sewer rates and charges.
2. With the exception of tapping fees imposed pursuant to §§ 118 and
118.1 of this Part, all fees and charges collected under this Part shall be
used for the sole purpose of constructing, operating or maintaining the
public wastewater system or the retirement of debt incurred for the
same. No part of any tapping fee collected under this Part shall be used
for maintenance and operation expenses, and/or for the expansion,
replacement, updating or upgrading of facilities serving existing
customers in order to meet stricter efficiency, environmental,
§ 105 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 108
1:298
§ 109. Inspections. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 109; as amended by Ord.
318, 5/29/2007]
§ 110. Wastewater Discharges. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 110; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
It shall be unlawful to discharge without an NPDES permit to any natural
outlet within the Township, or in any area under its jurisdiction. Wastewater
discharges to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system are not
authorized unless approved by the Authority Manager in accordance with
the provisions of this Part or unless approved prior to the effective date
hereof in accordance with procedures applicable at that time. NPDES
permits must be obtained from State and Federal agencies in accordance
with law and applicable regulations.
§ 111. Wastewater Disposal. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 111]
Except as provided in, or permitted by, this Part, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
regulatory or safety standards or to provide better service to, or meet
the needs of, existing customers.
3. Except as otherwise provided, all fees and charges payable under the
provisions of this Part are due and payable upon receipt of notice of the
fees and charges. Sewer rates and charges shall become payable, and
shall become delinquent and/or subject to penalty and interest charges,
in accordance with Part 3 of this Chapter.
1. The Authority Manager, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter properties at any reasonable time for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, and sampling of the
wastewater discharge to ensure that discharge to the Municipal
Authority's public wastewater system is in accordance with the
provisions of this part.
2. The Authority Manager, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all private property through which the
Municipal Authority holds an easement for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any of
the Municipal Authority's wastewater facilities lying with any easement
in, on, over, under, or through such property. All entry, and any
subsequent work on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
3. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 109, Subsections 1 and 2, above, the Authority Manager shall
observe all safety rules established by the owner or occupant of the
property and applicable to the premises and not inconsistent with the
Authority's rights.
§ 108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 112
1:299
§ 112. Private Wastewater Disposal. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 112; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
1. This Section shall not apply to any private system which discharges to
the public wastewater system of the Municipal Authority or which
discharges directly to a natural outlet by authority of a separate NPDES
permit and in compliance with applicable State and Federal laws.
2. All houses, buildings or properties which are required by law or
regulation other than this Part, or which elect to have sanitary or
industrial wastewater disposal facilities, and are located in an area
within the Jurisdiction of the Township, but are not located where a
proper wastewater sewer is available as specified by the provisions of
§ 113 of this Part, shall be equipped, at the owner's expense, with
suitable wastewater facilities connected to a private wastewater
disposal system which complies with the provisions of this Part.
3. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system required under § 112(b) above, the owner shall first obtain a
written construction permit signed by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the Township which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information relevant to wastewater discharges
as are deemed necessary by the Township. A permit and inspection fee
in an amount established by resolution of the Township Board of
Supervisors shall be paid to the Municipal Authority at the time the
application is filed.
4. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources and applicable Federal law.
No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system
employing subsurface soil disposal facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 21,780 square feet (0.5 acres). Septic tank or cesspool
dischargers require the use of subsurface disposal and must be first
approved by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. This
requirement excludes deep well disposal as defined by State and
Federal laws.
5. Before commencement of operation of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written operating permit signed
by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. The operating permit
shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the Sewage Enforcement Officer who shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction. The applicant shall notify
the Sewage Enforcement officer when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within normal business hours after receipt of
notice by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
§ 112 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 112
1:300
§ 113. Direct Connection Required. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 113; as
amended by Ord. 180, 7/23/1991, § 5; and by Ord. 289, 1/28/2003,
§§ 1, 2]
Every owner of property in the Township whose principal building or
structure, or any structure generating sewage waste which are located
within 150 feet of any public wastewater sewer, shall connect the house,
building or other structures and/or any subsequent additions thereto,
located on said property with the aforementioned public wastewater sewers
for the purpose of disposing of all acceptable sanitary wastewater
emanating from said property.
6. At such time as a public wastewater sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct
connection shall be made to the public wastewater system in
accordance with §§ 113-127 of this Part. Upon connection to the public
wastewater system, any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar wastewater
disposal facilities shall be emptied and filled with sand or other suitable
material.
7. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times in accordance with the
conditions of the operating permit, and at no expense to the Municipal
Authority or the Township. Such facilities shall be subject to inspection
by the Sewage Enforcement Officer and the Authority Manager at
reasonable times.
8. No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer or other applicable authority.
A. In such event, a property owner shall be required at his/its sole cost and
expense, to construct and to dedicate to the authority, that part of the
sewer line between the property line, and the Authority's main line, or
any extension or lateral thereto, which is necessary to provide sanitary
sewer service. Any such construction may be performed by the property
owner or a contractor retained by the property owner, and shall be in
accordance with this Part, the terms and conditions of any agreement
between the Municipal Authority and the property owners resulting
therefrom, and/or other reasonable rules and regulations of the
Municipal Authority and/or Township. The property owner shall pay to
the Authority the inspection component of the connection fee identified
on the Schedule attached hereto. The failure of a property owner to
comply with the terms of this Section shall result in imposition of a
connection fee calculated as set forth in § 126 of this Part.
B. In such event, a property owner shall also be required at his/her sole
cost and expense, to construct the building sewer necessary to provide
sanitary sewer service from the dwelling or other building proposed to
be served to the lateral. The property owner shall pay to the Authority
the inspection component of the customer facilities fee identified in the
§ 112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 113
1:301
§ 114. Other Disposal Systems Prohibited. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988,
§ 114]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any property in the
Township which is located within 150 feet of any public sanitary sewer to
employ any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy vault, mine hole
or otherwise, for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other than into
and through said public wastewater sewers.
§ 115. Notification to Connect. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 115]
Where any house, building or structure in the Township which is located
within 150 feet of any public wastewater sewer is now or hereafter may be
using any method for the disposal of sanitary sewage other than through
said public sanitary sewers, it shall be the duty of the Township Secretary
or such other person as shall be authorized by the Board of Supervisors,
to notify the owner and lessee or occupier of such structure in writing,
either by personal service, certified mail, or registered mail, to disconnect
the same and make proper connection for the discharge and disposal of all
acceptable sanitary sewage through the said public wastewater sewers, as
herein provided, within 60 days after receipt for such notice.
§ 116. Other Disposal Systems Not to be Connected. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988, § 116]
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, pit mine hole or similar receptacle
for human excrement shall at the present time or at any time hereafter be
connected with the aforesaid public wastewater sewers.
Schedule attached hereto. The failure of the property owner to comply
with this obligation shall result in imposition of a customer facilities fee
calculated as set forth in § 126 of this Part.
C. Separate physical connections to the public wastewater system, and
corresponding separate tapping fees, shall be required for each
building or structure for which public sanitary sewer service is required
pursuant to this Part. A separate tapping fee shall also be required for
each renovation or modification (including the construction of
additions) to any such building or structure, regardless of the date of
the renovation or modification, where such modification or addition
results in a designed increase in the number of EDUs attributable to the
building or structure. Where modifications or additions result in a
designed increase in EDUs, the Authority reserves the right, in
appropriate circumstances, to require separate physical connections as
well. Under no circumstances, however, shall the Authority assume, or
be construed as assuming, any obligation or responsibility for damages
caused by or resulting from the imposition of such requirement. In any
event, the property owner shall nonetheless remain obligated to pay
tapping fees in the same amount calculated in the same manner as
otherwise would have been payable.
§ 113 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 117
1:302
§ 117. Surface Runoff and Groundmaker Drains. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1998, § 117]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
aforementioned public sanitary sewers to connect any roof foundation,
areaway, parking lot, roadway, or other surface runoff or other groundwater
drain thereto or permit any such drain to remain connected thereto or
to permit, allow, or cause to enter into such public sanitary sewers any
stormwater, foundation drain water, spring water, surface water or any
sewage or industrial waste from any property other than that for which a
permit is issued.
§ 118. Requirements of Connection to the System. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1998, § 118; as amended by Ord. 163, 1/10/1989; by Ord. 180, 7/23/
1991, § 6; and by Ord. 244, 2/24/1998, § 1]
In addition to any of the requirements set forth in any other Section of
this Part, no person, firm, or corporation shall uncover, use, alter, or make
cause to be made any connection with any of the aforementioned public
wastewater sewers until all of the following conditions have been fulfilled:
A. Application must be made to the Municipal Authority upon a permit
form formulated and supplied by the Municipal Authority for
permission to uncover, use, alter, or connect to the aforementioned
public wastewater sewers. Said permit form shall include, but not be
limited to, a requirement that the applicant state the character and use
of each structure and/or addition thereto, located, or to be located,
upon the property and the number of EDUs attributable to the
structure, and/or addition thereto, as estimated at the time the
application is submitted.
B. There shall be two classes of permits for connections to the public
wastewater sewer: Class I — Residential, and Class II — Nonresidential.
Each nonresidential use application shall be supplemented by any
information required to administer Part 5 of this Chapter.
C. At the time of application for permission to make a connection, the
property owner shall pay a tapping fee for each of the EDUs
attributable to the structure, and/or addition thereto, located or to be
located upon the property, as estimated at the time the application is
submitted; provided, however, that the number of EDUs attributable to
the structure(s), or addition thereto, (as estimated) shall be subject to
review and modification by the Authority's Consulting Engineer:
(1) Prior to approval of the tap permit application by the Authority; and
(2) After one year of water consumption data has been obtained by the
Authority after the building or renovation is provided with sanitary
sewer service.
§ 117 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 118
1:303
In the event that, within the one-year period after sanitary sewer
service to the structure and/or addition thereto is first provided,
the Authority's Consulting Engineer determines that the actual
number of EDUs attributable to the structure and/or addition
thereto at issue exceeds the estimated number of EDUs upon
which approval of the tap permit application was based, the
Authority shall so notify the property owner. The property owner
shall be required to pay such additional amount as would have
been payable had the actual number of EDUs used during said
one-year period, been used initially in calculating the tapping fee
due. A property owner's failure to pay such additional amount
within 90 days thereof shall result in penalties and interest
charges as provided for sewer service billing within Part 3 of this
Chapter.
D. The amount of the tapping fee payable per EDU shall be as set forth in
the Schedule "A" attached hereto and expressly incorporated herein,
which Schedule "A" is hereby adopted by the Township. The tapping
fees hereby imposed shall be in addition to any charges which might
otherwise be assessed against the property as a result of the
construction of the sewer main by the Municipal Authority or Township,
any sewer user rates and charges payable in accordance with Part 3 of
this chapter, and/or any customer facilities fees or connection fees
imposed under this Part. As identified on the attached Schedule "A," the
tapping fee represents the total of the calculated: (1) capacity
component; (2) collection component; and (3) reimbursement
component.
E. No capacity in the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system shall
be guaranteed for a property owner or owners until such time as
tapping fees imposed hereunder have been paid or secured by other
financial security acceptable to the Municipal Authority.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no work related to the physical
connection of the structure, and/or addition thereto, to the
aforementioned wastewater sewers shall commence before the
payment of the tapping fees imposed hereunder have been received and
the aforementioned connection permit has been issued.
F. Each property owner shall give the Municipal Authority at least 24
hours' notice of the time when the physical connection is to be made to
the public wastewater sewers of the Municipal Authority, pursuant to
the aforementioned connection permit, to permit an individual duly
authorized by the Municipal Authority to be present to inspect and
approve the work of connection. The inspector shall signify his approval
in writing on the aforementioned connection permit in the possession of
the permittees.
G. At the time of the inspection of the connection, the property owner shall
permit an individual duly authorized by the Authority, full and complete
access to all sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each
§ 118 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 118
1:304
§ 118.1. Requirements of Indirect Connection to the System. [Ord.
160, 6/7/1988; as added by Ord. 180, 7/23/1991, § 7]
In recognition of the capacity limitations inherent in the Municipal
Authority's public wastewater system, a tapping fee will be payable in
accordance with § 118A through E of this Part, from each property owner
whose property is indirectly connected to the Municipal Authority's public
water system. For purposes of this Section, a property will be deemed to
be "indirectly connected" to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater
system where the service connector line is connected to a main sewer
line, or an extension thereof, owned and/or operated by a municipality
other than the Township of North Strabane, or owned and/or operated by
a municipal authority other than the North Strabane Township Municipal
Authority, which main sewer line or extension is then connected to the
public wastewater system of the Municipal Authority.
§ 119. Construction by Property Owner. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 119;
as amended by Ord. 180, 7/23/1991, § 8]
building and in and about all parts of the property. No building sewer
shall be covered or in any manner concealed, until after it has been
inspected and approved by said inspector.
H. The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer installation and
connection to the public wastewater system shall be borne by the owner
of the building sewer. The owner shall indemnify the Township and the
Municipal Authority from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
I. The construction of all sewer lines shall be done in accordance with the
current standards of the construction industry. All costs and expenses
incurred in the making of the physical connection to the public
wastewater system shall be borne by the property owner.
1. Where an extension of the Municipal Authority's public wastewater
system is to be constructed at the expense of the property owner, the
property owner shall have the right to construct the extension himself
or through a contractor; provided, however, that the Municipal
Authority shall have the right, at its option, to perform the construction
itself if it is able to provide the extension at a lower cost and within the
same timetable specified or proposed by the property owner or the
approved subcontractor.
2. Construction of an extension to the facilities by the property owner or
an approved subcontractor shall be subject to the following further
conditions:
A. Construction shall be in accordance with an agreement entered
into between the Municipal Authority and the property owner prior
to the commencement of such construction, which agreement shall
be in writing and shall include, in addition to such conditions as
§ 118 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 119
1:305
§ 119.1. Reimbursement of Cost of Construction. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988; as added by Ord. 180, 7/23/1991, § 9]
might otherwise be deemed necessary and prudent by the
Municipal Authority, provisions relating to the right of the property
owner to be partially reimbursed as a result of subsequent
connections to the sewer line to be constructed, in accordance with
§ 119.1 of this Part.
B. Plans and specifications shall be approved by the Municipal
Authority prior to the commencement of construction.
C. Construction shall be undertaken pursuant to such other existing
regulations, requirements, rules and/or standards of the Township
of North Strabane and/or the Municipal Authority, applicable to
such construction.
D. Construction shall be subject to an inspection by individual duly
authorized to approve such construction and employed or retained
by the Municipal Authority during such construction.
E. Prior to such construction, the property owners shall deposit with
the Municipal Authority an amount equal to the Municipal
Authority's estimated reasonable and necessary costs for reviewing
plans, construction, inspections, administrative services, and legal
and engineering services. In addition, property owners shall post
such other appropriate financial security as may be required by the
Municipal Authority.
F. Property owners shall reimburse the Municipal Authority for
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the Municipal
Authority as a result of the construction of the extension.
3. Upon completion of construction, the property owner shall dedicate,
and the Authority shall accept, the extension into the Authority's public
wastewater system; provided, however, that dedication of the facilities
and the Authority's acceptance thereof shall be conditioned upon full
compliance of construction of the facilities with the plans,
specifications, and regulations of the Municipal Authority, the Township
of North Strabane, and the agreement between the Municipal Authority
and the property owner.
4. Within the agreement between the Municipal Authority and the
property owner referenced in Subsection 2A above, the Municipal
Authority shall notify the property owner of his right to partial
reimbursement of the cost of construction of the extension of the
system, in accordance with § 119.1 of this Part. Said agreement shall
attach as an exhibit an itemized listing of all components of the
Authority's public wastewater system for which reimbursement shall be
available.
§ 119 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 119.1
1:306
1. A property owner who constructs or causes to be constructed at his
expense any extension of the Municipal Authority's public wastewater
system shall be entitled to apply to the Municipal Authority for
reimbursement of part of such expense if, within 10 years of the date of
dedication to the Municipal Authority of the extension constructed by
the property owner, the owner(s) of another property or properties not
situated in the development for which the extension was originally
constructed, connect(s) a building sewer directly to the extension. This
reimbursement program shall apply only with respect to those lines for
which the Authority has not previously paid.
2. The amount of reimbursement shall be equal to, but not in place of, the
collection part of each tapping fee collected as a result of the
subsequent connection(s), less a five-percent fee to be retained by the
Municipal Authority for administrative expenses and services rendered
in calculating, collecting, monitoring and disbursing the
reimbursement payments to the property owner(s) entitled thereto.
3. The total reimbursement to which a property owner shall be entitled
shall not exceed the cost of all labor, material, engineering design,
performance and maintenance bonds, Authority review and inspection
charges, and flushing and televising charges, and any and all charges
involved in the acceptance and dedication of such facilities by the
Authority, less the amount which would be chargeable to such property
owner based upon the collection part of the Authority's tapping fee
which would be applicable to all lands of the property owner served
directly or indirectly through such extensions, if the property owner did
not fund the extension.
4. Within 30 calendar days of the Authority's receipt of a tapping fee
resulting from a subsequent connection to the line constructed by the
property owner, and with respect to which the property owner is
eligible to receive a reimbursement in accordance with this Section, the
Authority shall notify the property owner, by certified mail addressed to
the property owner's last known address, of the payment of the tapping
fee which entitles the property owner to such reimbursement. If the
property owner does not claim the reimbursement within 120 calendar
days of the date of mailing of the notice, the reimbursement to which
the property owner would otherwise be entitled, shall revert to, and
become the sole property of, the Municipal Authority, and the Municipal
Authority shall have no further obligation to reimburse the property
owner vis-a-vis payment of that tapping fee. Nothing set forth herein
shall obligate the Authority to notify such property owner of the
payment of a tapping fee with respect to a connection to the line
constructed by the property owner, where said connection occurs on a
date more than 10 years after the date of dedication of the line to the
Municipal Authority.
§ 119.1 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 120
1:307
§ 120. Existing Building Sewers. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 120; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Existing building sewers may be used for connection of any new buildings
to the public wastewater system only when they are found, on examination
and test by the Authority Manager, to meet the requirements of this Part.
§ 121. Building Sewer Design. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 121]
The size, slope, alignment, construction materials, trench excavation and
backfill methods, pipe placement, jointing and testing methods used in
the construction and installation of a building sewer shall conform to the
building and plumbing code or other applicable requirements of the
Municipal Authority and the Township. In the absence of code provisions
or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of a recognized national plumbing code shall
apply.
§ 122. Building Sewer Elevation. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 122]
Whenever practicable, the building sewer shall be brought to a building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the Municipal Authority's public
wastewater system, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be
lifted at the owner's expense by an approved means and discharged to a
building sewer draining to the public wastewater system.
§ 123. Conformance to Applicable Codes. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988,
§ 123; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
§ 124. Excavation Guards and Property Restoration. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988, § 124]
Excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
1. The connection of a building sewer into a wastewater sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code,
Manual of Procedures of NSTMA, or other applicable requirements of
the Township or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of a recognized national plumbing code. The connection shall be made
gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved, in
writing, by-the Authority Manager before installation.
2. The connection of a surface runoff or groundwater drain to a storm
sewer or natural outlet designed to transport surface runoff or
groundwater drainage shall conform to the requirements of the
applicable building code or other applicable requirements of the
Township and Municipal Authority. The connection of any such drain to
a wastewater sewer shall not be permitted.
§ 120 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 124
1:308
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Municipal
Authority and the Township.
§ 125. Protection of Capacity for Existing Users. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988, § 125; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
The Authority Manager shall not issue a permit for any class of connection
to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system unless there is
sufficient capacity, not legally committed to other users, in the public
wastewater system to convey and adequately treat the quantity of
wastewater which the requested connection will add to the system. The
Authority Manager may permit such a connection if commitments to provide
the needed capacity are then in existence and legally bind the Authority or
the Township.
§ 126. Authority May Do Work and Impose Appropriate Fees. [Ord.
160, 6/7/1988, § 126; as amended by Ord. 180, 7/23/1991, § 10]
If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures in
the Township of North Strabane, or indirectly connected to the Municipal
Authority's public wastewater system, shall neglect or refuse to comply
with the provisions of this Part, the Municipal Authority may perform or
cause to be performed such work and labor, and furnish or cause to be
furnished such material as may be necessary to comply with the provisions
of this Part, as a result of which the property owners may be charged a
connection fee and/or customer facilities fee as appropriate. As set forth on
the schedule attached hereto and expressly incorporated herein, any such
connection fee or customer facilities fee shall be calculated on the basis
of the actual cost of the work and labor incident thereto, together with an
identified charge which shall represent the administrative and inspection
costs incurred by the Municipal Authority, in performing such work or
causing such work to be performed. Any such sum charged pursuant to
this Section shall be collected from said owner or owners for the use of
the Municipal Authority, in the same manner that other debts are by law
collectable, or the Municipal Authority may file a municipal claim or lien
therefor against said premises as otherwise provided by law.
§ 127. Wye-Branch Required. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 127; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Where a wye-branch is not available on the wastewater sewer, a wye-branch
shall be cut in with nonshear adapters for each parcel or lot in conformance
with the Municipal Authority specification. Where a wye-branch is available,
connection or tap-in shall be made through the wye-branch.
§ 128. Conditions Relative To Use Of The Municipal Authority's
Wastewater Sewers. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 128; as amended by Ord.
318, 5/29/2007]
§ 124 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 128
1:309
1. Special Uses of Wastewater Sewers. All discharges of stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or other
waters not required to be treated in the public wastewater system shall
be made to storm sewers or natural outlets designed for such
discharges. Any connection, drain or arrangement which will permit
any such waters to enter the public wastewater system shall be deemed
to be a violation of this section and this Part.
2. Restricted Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system any
substances, materials, waters or wastes in such quantities or
concentrations which will:
A. Create a fire or explosion hazard including, but not limited to,
gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas;
B. Cause corrosive damages or hazard to structures, equipment, or
personnel of the wastewater facilities;
C. No substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be discharged
which have a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 9.0. These
requirements may be modified by the Authority with the consent of
the Township for facilities designed to accommodate greater
ranges;
D. Cause obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the operation of the public wastewater system due to accumulation
of solid or viscous materials;
E. Constitute a rate of discharge or substantial deviation from normal
rates of discharge ("slug discharge"), sufficient to cause
interference in the operation and performance of the public
wastewater system;
F. Contain heat in amounts which will accelerate the biodegradation
of wastes, causing the formation of excessive amounts of hydrogen
sulfide in the wastewater sewer or inhibit biological activity in the
wastewater treatment facilities, but in no case shall the discharge
of heat cause the temperature in the Municipal Authority's public
wastewater system to exceed 58° C. (150° F.) or the temperature of
the influent to the treatment facilities to exceed 40°C. (104° F.)
unless the Authority determines that the facilities can
accommodate such heat;
G. Contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of nonbiodegradable
oils of mineral or petroleum origin;
H. Contain floatable oils, fat or grease, except for domestic kitchen
use;
§ 128 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 128
1:310
§ 129. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988, § 129; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
I. Contain noxious, malodorous gas or substance which is present in
quantities that create a public nuisance or a hazard to life;
J. Contain radioactive or other toxic wastes in harmful quantities as
defined by applicable state and federal regulations;
K. Contain any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
L. Contain any odor or color producing substances exceeding
concentration limits which may be established by the Authority
Manager for purposes of meeting the NPDES Permit of the
Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority (CHJA).
3. If, in establishing discharge restrictions, discharge limits, or
pretreatment standards pursuant to this Part and those pretreatment
standards of the Canonsburg-Houston Joint Sewer Authority (CHJA),
the Authority Manager establishes concentration limits to be met by an
industrial user, the Authority Manager, in lieu of concentration limits,
shall establish mass limits of comparable stringency for an individual
industrial user at the request of such user.
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the public
wastewater system, any wastewaters containing substances subject to
an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard promulgated
by the EPA in excess of the quantity prescribed in such applicable
pretreatment standards except as otherwise provided in this Section.
Compliance with such applicable pretreatment standards shall be
achieved within three years of the date the standard is promulgated;
provided however, compliance with a categorical pretreatment
standard for new discharges shall be required upon promulgation.
2. Upon application by a Class III user, the Authority Manager shall revise
any limitations on substances specified in the CHJA pretreatment
standards to reflect removal of the substances by the wastewater
treatment facility. The revised discharge limit for specified substances
shall be derived in accordance with Federal law.
3. Upon application by a Class III user, the Authority Manager shall adjust
any limitation on substances specified in the applicable pretreatment
standards to consider factors relating to such person which are
fundamentally different from the factors set forth in this Part
establishing pretreatment standards in North Strabane Township.
Requests for, and determinations of, a fundamentally different
adjustment shall be in accordance with Federal law.
4. The Authority Manager shall notify any Class III user affected by the
provisions of this Section and establish an enforceable compliance
schedule for each.
§ 128 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 130
1:311
§ 130. Special Agreements. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 130]
Nothing in this Part shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
between the Municipal Authority and any user of the public wastewater
system whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted
into the system and specially treated subject to any payments or user
charges as may be applicable.
§ 131. Water and Energy Conservation. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 131;
as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
The conservation of water and energy shall be encouraged by the Authority
Manager. In establishing discharge restrictions upon industrial users, he
shall take into account already implemented or planned conservation steps
revealed by the Class III user. Upon request of the Authority Manager,
each industrial user shall provide the Authority Manager with pertinent
information showing that the quantities of substances or pollutants have
not been, nor will be, increased as a result of the conservation steps.
Upon such a showing to the satisfaction of the Authority Manager, he shall
make adjustments to discharge restrictions, which have been based on
concentrations, to reflect the conservation steps.
§ 132. Class III — Industrial Discharges. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 132;
as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
§ 133. Provision For Monitoring. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 133; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
1. All Class III dischargers shall file with the Municipal Authority
wastewater information deemed necessary by the Authority Manager
for determination of compliance with this Part, the CHJA NPDES permit
conditions, and state and Federal law. Such information shall be
provided by completion of a questionnaire designed and supplied by the
CHJA and by supplements thereto as may be necessary. Information
requested in the questionnaire and designated by the discharger as
confidential is subject to the conditions of confidentiality as set out in
§ 133, Subsection 3, of this Part.
2. Where a person owns, operates or occupies properties designated as a
Class III discharger at more than one location, separate information
submittals shall be made for each location as may be required by the
Authority Manager.
3. The Authority Manager shall implement measures to ensure the
confidentiality of information provided by a Class III discharger
pursuant to this Part. In no event shall the Authority Manager delegate
this responsibility or disclose any confidential information to any person
without prior notice in writing to the owner and without providing the
owner with the opportunity to protect such confidential information,
including the right to seek judicial relief.
§ 130 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 133
1:312
§ 134. Determination of Wastewater Characteristics. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988, § 134; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
1. When required by the Authority Manager, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying Class III wastewater discharges
shall provide suitable access and such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of the wastewater. Such access shall be in a readily
and safely accessible location and shall be provided in accordance with
plans approved by the Authority Manager. The access shall be provided
and maintained at the owner's expense so as to be safe and accessible
at reasonable times.
2. The Authority Manager shall consider such factors as the volume and
strength of discharge, rate of discharge, quantities of toxic materials in
the discharge, wastewater treatment facility removal capabilities, and
cost effectiveness in determining whether or not access and equipment
for monitoring Class III wastewater discharges shall be required.
3. Where the Authority Manager determines access and equipment for
monitoring or measuring Class III wastewater discharges is not
practical, reliable, or cost effective, the Authority Manage may specify
alternative methods of determining the characteristics of the
wastewater discharge which will, in the Authority Manager's judgment,
provide an equitable measurement of such characteristics.
1. Measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
to which reference is made in this Part shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods of the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American
Public Health Association or such alternate methods approved by the
Authority Manager, and which comply with state and federal law.
Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
Authority Manager. The discharger shall have the option to use, at his
own expense, more complete sampling methods, locations, times,
durations and frequencies than those specified by the Authority
Manager.
2. Measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
required by this Part shall be performed by a National Environmental
Laboratory Accreditation Program/DEP certified laboratory. When such
analyses are required of a discharger, the discharger may, in lieu of
using the Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority laboratory, make
arrangements with any National Environmental Laboratory
Accreditation Program/DEP certified laboratory, including that of the
discharger, to perform such analyses.
3. Monitoring of wastewater characteristics necessary for determination
of compliance with applicable pretreatment standards shall be
conducted on the basis of the following schedule, unless more frequent
§ 133 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 134
1:313
§ 135. Costs of Damage. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 135; as amended by
Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
If the drainage or discharge from any establishment causes a deposit,
obstruction or damage to the Municipal Authority's public wastewater
system, the Authority Manager shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be
promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost
for such work, including materials, labor, and supervision shall be borne by
the person causing such deposit, obstruction or damage.
§ 136. Wastewater, Service Charges and Industrial Cost Recovery.
[Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 136; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
monitoring is required by authority other than this Part, or if the
Authority Manager, in his judgment, determines that the characteristics
of the specific discharge warrant a different frequency monitoring:
Average Actual Daily User
Discharge Monitoring Frequency
Less than 100,000 gpd Semiannually
100,000 to 999,999 gpd Quarterly
More than 999,999 gpd Monthly
4. Monitoring of wastewater characteristics for any purpose other than
the determination of compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
conducted on a frequency deemed necessary by the Authority Manager.
5. Upon demonstration by any person that the characteristics of the
wastewater discharged by that person are consistent, the Authority
Manager may reduce the frequency as may be required by authority
other than this Part, except in no case shall the frequency of monitoring
be less than semi-annual for the determination of compliance with
pretreatment standards.
6. In determining the discharge characteristics, factors such as
continuous or batch operation, seasonal operation, and the information
requirements of other provisions of this Part shall be considered by the
Authority Manager. The Authority Manager may obtain wastewater
samples as required to verify the consistence of discharge
characteristics.
7. Fees for any given measurement, test, or analysis of wastewater
required by this Part and performed by the CHJA shall be the same for
all classes or dischargers, regardless of the quantity or quality of the
discharge and shall reflect only direct cost. Costs of analyses performed
by an independent laboratory at the option of discharger shall be borne
directly by the discharger. All other costs shall be borne by the
discharger.
§ 134 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 136
1:314
§ 137. Penalties. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 137; as amended by Ord.
240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
1. Wastewater Service Charge. Charges and fees for the use of the public
wastewater system shall be based upon the actual use of such system or
upon contractual obligations for a level of use in excess of current
actual use. Property value may be used to collect the amount due as
permitted by Federal law.
2. Industrial Cost Recovery. Users of the Municipal Authority's public
wastewater system will also be assessed surcharges if, after the
requirements of the Part are met, the discharge from the industrial user
is considered to be different from normal domestic sewage.
3. Determination System Use.
A. The use of the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system
shall be based upon actual measurement and analysis of each
user's wastewater discharge, in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this Part, to the extent such measurement and
analysis is considered by the Authority Manager to be feasible and
cost-effective.
B. Where measurement and analysis is considered not feasible,
determination of each user's use of the public wastewater system
shall be based upon the quantity of water used, whether purchased
from a public water utility or obtained from a private source or
alternative means as provided by Subsection C below.
C. The Authority Manager, when determining actual use of the
Municipal Authority's public wastewater system based on water
use, shall consider consumptive, evaporative or other use of water
which results in a significant difference between a discharger's
water use and wastewater discharge. Where appropriate, such
consumptive water use may be metered to aid in determining
actual use of the wastewater facilities. The meters used to measure
such water shall be of a type and installed in a manner approved by
the Authority Manager. The actual average water use by each
residential user (Class I) during the three months of January,
February, and March shall be used as the measure of each
respective residential user's actual use of the sewer system
through the year. The cost of materials shall be borne by the user.
§ 136 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 137
1:315
Schedule A
Service Connection Charges for Sewer Service
Component
Method of
Calculation
Connection
to Authority
System
Connection to
Developer
System
1. Connection Fee
Inspection
Actual Cost Actual Cost
$70
Actual Cost
$70
2. Customer Facilities
Fee Inspection
Actual Cost Actual Cost
$70
Actual Cost
$70
3. Tapping Fee
– Capacity Part Reproduction
Cost
$720 $720
– Collection Part Reproduction
Cost
$990 N/C
– Special Purpose
Part
Reproduction
Cost
Established if applicable
– Reimbursement
Part
Construction
Cost
Established if applicable
* Customer facilities and connection fees are determined on a case-by-case
basis to include all costs of installation incurred by the Authority (property
owner may choose to have installation completed by a private plumber at
his own cost) plus any permit fees and costs for inspection conducted by
Authority personnel or designated representatives. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988,
Schedule A; as amended by Ord. 195, 3/22/1994, § 1; by Ord. 244, 2/
24/1998, § 1; and by Ord. 304, 6/28/2005]
§ 137 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 137
1:316
Part 2
SEWER CONNECTIONS, PETERS CREEK AREA
§ 201. Connection Required. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 1]
Every owner of property in the Peters Creek Watershed Area of the
Township of North Strabane whose property abuts upon any public sanitary
sewer presently owned and in existence or to be acquired or constructed
in the future by Peters Creek Sanitary Authority shall connect, at its own
cost, the house, building or other structure located on said property with
the aforementioned public sanitary sewers for the purpose of disposing of
all acceptable sanitary sewage emanating from said property.
§ 202. Other Disposal Systems Prohibited. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any property
in the Peters Creek Watershed Area of the Township abutting upon any
aforementioned public sanitary sewer to employ any means, either by septic
tank, cesspool, privy vault, mine hole or otherwise, for the disposal of
acceptable sanitary sewage other than into and through said public sanitary
sewers.
§ 203. Notification to Connect. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 3]
Where any house, building or structure in the Township abutting upon any
aforementioned public sanitary sewer is now or hereafter may be using any
method for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other than through
said public sanitary sewers, it shall be the duty of the Township Secretary
or the authorized representative of Peters Creek Sanitary Authority
(hereinafter called the "Authority") to notify the owner, lessee or occupier
of such structure in writing, either by personal service, certified mail or
registered mail, to disconnect the same and make proper connection of
the discharge and disposal of all acceptable sanitary sewage through the
said public sanitary sewers, as herein provided, within 60 days after receipt
of such notice. Any owner or lessee or occupier of any structure who
cannot comply with the provisions of this section as to connection within
the sixty-day period stipulated above due to causes beyond his control
shall apply to the Township or the Authority within sixty-day period for a
time extension of up to six months in duration. Said application shall be
made on a form to be furnished by the Township or the Authority and shall
contain a voluntary agreement on the part of the applicant under which the
applicant shall agree to commence paying the regular monthly sewer rates
immediately even though actual connection to the public sanitary sewers
will not be accomplished until some stated later date within the said six
months' extension period.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:317
§ 204. Other Disposal Systems Not to be Connected. [Ord. 94, 6/27/
1977, § 4]
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at the present time or at any time hereafter be
connected with the aforesaid public sanitary sewers.
§ 205. Roof Drains. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 5]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to any
aforementioned public sanitary sewers to connect any roof drain thereto or
permit any roof drain to remain connected thereto, or to permit, allow or
cause to enter into said public sanitary sewers and stormwater, foundation
drain water, spring water, surface water, or any sewage or industrial waste
from any property other than that for which a permit is issued.
§ 206. Requirements. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 6]
No person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made any
connection with any of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers until he
has fulfilled all of the following conditions:
1. He shall pay to the Authority the then required Authority tap
connection fee for each building or structure on each property
connected to the aforementioned public sanitary sewers at the time of
making application for permission to make such connection or
connections.
2. He shall pay to the Authority the then required Authority tap
connection fee for each building or structure on each property
connected to the aforementioned public sanitary sewers at the time of
making application for permission to make such connection or
connections.
3. No work shall commence before the issuance of the aforementioned
connection permit.
4. He shall give the designated Inspector of the Township or the Authority
at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such connection shall be
made in order that said Inspector can be present to inspect and approve
the work of connection. The Inspector shall signify his approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
5. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of
properties shall permit the Inspector full and complete access to all
sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each building and
in and about all parts of the property. No building sewer line shall be
covered over, or in any manner concealed, until after it is inspected and
approved by said Inspector.
§ 204 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 207
1:318
§ 207. Construction to Specifications. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 7]
The construction and number and size of all building sewer lines or house
service sewers shall be done in accordance with the specifications, plans
and procedures established by the Authority in its sewer system rules
and regulations, as the same may be from time to time published and
amended, copies of which, upon adoption, shall be maintained on file with
the Township Secretary and the Authority.
§ 208. Municipal Authority or Township May Do Work. [Ord. 94, 6/
27/1977, § 8; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures in
the Peters Creek Watershed Area of the Township shall neglect or refuse to
comply with the provisions of this Part or the written notice as prescribed
in § 203 hereof, the Township or the Authority may perform or cause to be
performed such work and labor and furnish or cause to be furnished such
material as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this Part at
the cost and expense of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional
thereof and all charges and expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall
be collected from said owner or owners for the use of the Township or the
Authority, as its agent, may be its proper officer, file a municipal claim or
lien therefore against said premises as provided by law.
§ 209. Unacceptable Sanitary Sewage. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 9]
Unacceptable sanitary sewage and other terms used herein for purposes
of this Part shall have the same definitions as those which are set forth in
said sewer system rules and regulations, said rules and regulations to be
applicable to all users of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers.
§ 210. Penalties. [Ord. 94, 6/27/1977, § 10; as amended by Ord. 147,
11/26/1985; and by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part 2 continues or each Section of this Part 2 which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 210
1:319

Part 3
SEWER RATES
§ 301. Short Title. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987, § 301]
This Part shall be known as the "Sewer Rate and Charge Ordinance of North
Strabane Township."
§ 302. Findings and Purposes. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987, § 302; as
amended by Ord. 174, 3/27/1990, § 1; and by Ord. 178, 3/12/1991,
§ 1]
The North Strabane Township Board of Supervisors finds and declares that
it is determined, based on the recommendations of the North Strabane
Township Municipal Authority ("Authority"), to consolidate the three
remaining sewer districts into one sewer district for sewer rate and charge
purposes.
§ 303. Definitions. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987, § 303; as amended by Ord.
174, 3/27/1990, § 2; by Ord. 178, 3/12/1991, § 2; by Ord. 185, 1/26/
1993, § 1; and by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this Part shall be as follows:
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
COMMERCIAL USER — Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
all retail stores, restaurants, office buildings, laundries and other private
business and service establishments of any kind or nature, except those
which are industrial users, residential users, institutional users or
governmental users, as these terms are defined herein.
EDU (EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT) — The amount of water consumed
each year for each residential use, or 58,000 gallons of water consumed per
year or estimated to be consumed per year for nonresidential use.
FIXED RATE — The charge required to be paid for debt service payments
and cover as set forth in the trust indentures securing the series of 2003
issue and resulting from any future borrowings, and the bond anticipation
notes and minimum charges required to cover other constant charges
agreed upon by the industrial users, commercial users, institutional users
and governmental users and the Township and Authority.
GOVERNMENTAL USERS — legislative, judicial, administrative and
regulatory activities of Federal, State and local governments, agencies and
authorities and similar users.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the
publicly owned treatment works and/or sewerage system, which is
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:321
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions: Division A – Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing; Division
B – MininG; Division D – Manufacturing; Division E – Transportation,
Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and Division I — Services.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Social, charitable, religious and educational
activities and organizations such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing
homes, penal institutions and similar uses.
LARGE COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL USER — Those
commercial, industrial and/or institutional users whose estimated or actual
annual water consumption equals or exceeds 10 million gallons.
NONUSER — An individual or entity, who/which has obtained a tap permit
with respect to a property, as set forth in Part 1 of this Chapter 18 of the
Township of North Strabane Code of Ordinances, but who/which has not, at
a time prior to the date occurring two years after the date of issuance of the
tap permit, physically connected the property to the Municipal Authority's
public wastewater system and satisfied the requirements of an inspection
of said connection by the Municipal Authority, as otherwise required by
Township ordinance.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater that has not more than
a biochemical oxygen, demand (BOD) concentration of 208 mg/l and
suspended solids (SS) concentration of 220 mg/l, an ammonia nitrogen
(NH3N) of 15 mg/l and a phosphate concentration (PO4) of 20 mg/l and a
pH not lower than 5.0 or greater than 9.0.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — Those functions that result in
expenditures during the useful life of the sewerage system for material,
labor, utilities and other items which are necessary for managing and
operating and maintaining the system for the purpose for which sewerage
facilities, treatment works and systems are designed and constructed. The
term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement as defined herein.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the sewerage systems to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such systems were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Any room, group of rooms or enclosure, occupied or
intended for occupancy as the separate living quarters of a person living
alone, a family or any other group of persons living together. The water
consumed each year by each residential dwelling unit within a house, in a
double house, in a row of connecting houses, in a condominium, in a motel
room, or in the separate living quarters of a congregate care facility or
congregate living facility, or in an apartment building shall be defined as
one EDU.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Any contributor of sewage to the Township's
sewerage system whose lot, parcel, real estate, or building is used for
domestic dwelling purposes only.
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 303
1:322
SEWERAGE SYSTEMS — Any devices and systems for the collection,
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal
sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These include
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping,
power and other equipment, treatment works and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof;
elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby
treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including site
acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of any treatment process
or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment
(including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such compost
and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment
systems before land application); or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing
of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined
stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
SHALL — Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
SS (SUSPENDED SOLIDS) — Solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
TREATMENT RATE — The rate paid to the Canonsburg-Houston Joint
Authority or any other treatment facility for the treatment of the
wastewater.
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which a treatment works and/
or sewerage system will be operated.
USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of any wastewater treatment
works and sewerage system.
WATER METER — A water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and/or installed by a user and approved by the Pennsylvania-
American Water Company or its successors.
§ 304. Schedule of Rates and Charges. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987, § 304;
as amended by Ord. 174, 3/27/1990, § 3; by Ord. 178, 3/12/1991, § 3;
by Ord. 262, 8/24/1999, § 1; and by Ord. 308, 4/18/2006]
The Schedule of Sewer User Rates and Charges for North Strabane
Township, as mandated by the Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority is set
forth on Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof. Said Schedule
is hereby adopted by the Township.
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304.1
1:323
§ 304.1. Consolidation of sewer districts for sewer rate and charge
purposes. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987; as added by Ord. 174, 3/27/1990,
§ 4; and amended by Ord. 178, 3/12/1991, § 4]
North Strabane Sewer Districts A, B, and C are hereby consolidated for
sewer rate and charge purposes. Sewer rates and charges are now uniform
throughout North Strabane Township.
§ 305. Collection, Deposit and Use of Rates and Charges. [Ord. 152,
9/29/1987, § 305; as amended by Ord. 178, 3/12/1991, § 5]
§ 306. Calculation of Rates and Charges. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987,
§ 306; as amended by Ord. 174, 3/27/1990, § 5; by Ord. 179, 3/12/
1991, § 6; and by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
1. The Authority or its designated agent shall collect and receive any and
all sewer rates and charges set forth in this Part.
2. The revenue collected shall be deposited into the North Strabane
Township Municipal Authority Operating Fund.
3. Fiscal year-end balances in the account shall be used for no other
purposes than those authorized.
1. Each user shall pay for the services provided by the Authority based on
use of the sewerage system.
2. For residential, industrial, institutional, governmental and commercial
users, quarterly user charges will be based on actual water usage as
recorded by water meters.
3. Where water meters are not in use, the quarterly user charge for a
residential user will be based on a fixed rate of 15,000 gallons of water
used per quarter. Where water meters are not in use, the quarterly user
charge for a nonresidential user shall be based on estimated water
usage as determined by the Authority's consulting engineer.
4. If a residential, commercial, institutional or industrial user uses water
that is not discharged into the collection system, the user may request
that his/its user charges be based on readings of a deduct meter(s)
installed and maintained at the user's expense on water lines to uses
which will not discharge to the sanitary sewer. If the Authority agrees to
such use of a deduct meter, the quarterly use charge shall initially be
based on use as reflected in the water meter readings, but shall be
subject to adjustment based on the deduct meter readings. The
Authority shall nonetheless retain the right to independently monitor:
A. The accuracy of operation of the deduct meters.
B. The accuracy of the use of such deduct meters in determining
amounts discharged into the sanitary sewerage system.
§ 304.1 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 306
1:324
C. The placement of deduct meters to measure only water consumed
that does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewer.
In the event that the Authority determines that said deduct meters
are not positioned correctly or operating accurately, or are not
accurate in determining amounts of discharge into the sanitary
sewerage system, the Authority shall return to calculating the
user's quarterly user charges on the basis of water meter
readings, until such time as the condition(s) affecting the accuracy
of the deduct meters or the accuracy of use of such meters in
determining amounts discharged into the sanitary sewerage
systems has been determined, and is mutually agreed upon by the
Authority and the user to be satisfactory.
5. A large commercial, industrial or institutional user which uses water
that is not discharged into the collection system may request that
calculation of its water usage for purposes of this Part be based on
readings of specified water meters installed or to be installed on only
those specific lines through which flows water which will be discharged
into the collection system. Upon request of such a large commercial,
industrial or institutional user, the Authority may (but shall not be
required to) agree to calculation of water usage for purposes of this
Part based on the readings of such specified water meters. In the event
that the Authority agrees to this alternated method of calculation of
sewage discharge, the Authority shall nonetheless retain the right to
independently monitor:
A. The accuracy of operation of the water meters.
B. The accuracy of the use of such water meters to determine or
estimate amounts of discharge into the sanitary sewage system.
C. The accuracy, position, and designation of specified water meters
to calculate sewage discharge into the sanitary sewerage system
pursuant to this Part.
In the event that the Authority determines that said meters are not
opening accurately, or are not accurate in determining amounts of
discharge into the sanitary sewerage system, the Authority shall
return to calculating the user's quarterly user charges on the
basis of master meter readings, until such time as the condition(s)
affecting the accuracy of the wastewater meters or the accuracy
of use of such meters in determining amounts discharged into the
sanitary sewerage system has been determined, and is mutually
agreed upon by the Authority and the user to be satisfactory.
6. Each user shall pay the rates as set forth in the Schedule of User Rates
and Charges attached to this Part as Schedule A,23 recommended by the
23.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this Part.
§ 306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 306
1:325
§ 306.1. Calculation of Charges for Nonusers. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988,
§ 306.1; as added by Ord. 185, 1/26/1993, § 2; and as amended by
Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Authority and as approved by the Township, as amended and made a
part hereof.
7. For those users whose wastewater requires more treatment than
normal domestic wastewater sewage, an extra-strength sum, in
addition to the normal charges, will be collected. The additional charge
for operation and maintenance, including replacement, shall be the
rates charged by the Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority, or the
following rates, whichever are greater.
A. One dollar per pound of BOD.
B. One dollar and $0.10 per pound of SS.
C. Fifty cents per pound of NH3N and PO4.
8. Any user who discharges any toxic pollutants (as defined in Part I of this
chapter) which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or
the sludge from the treatment plant(s), or any user who discharges any
substance which singly or by interaction with other substances causes
identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or
replacement of the sewerage systems shall pay for such increased
costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the
Township upon recommendation by the Authority.
1. For each EDU identified with an expired tap permit, a nonuser shall pay
a quarterly nonuser charge, calculated by multiplying the rate set forth
in the prevailing schedule of sewer user rates as established by duly
adopted ordinances of the Township of North Strabane by 14.5, as
follows:
(Sewer rate per 1,000 gallons) x (number of EDUs identified in expired
tap permit) x 14.5 quarterly nonuser charge
2. This charge shall be a nonrefundable charge, as it represents a
reservation, on the part of the nonuser, of a certain level of capacity in
the Municipal Authority's public wastewater system after expiration of
the natural two-year life of a tap permit. Payment of such charge shall
extend the life of the permit beyond that period during which it
otherwise would have existed, for such period of time that said nonuser
charges are timely paid; provided, however, that:
A. On or before the original expiration date of the tap permit, the
nonuser has provided written notification to the Authority of his/its
interest in extending the life of the tap permit; and
B. The nonuser agrees in writing to, and does in fact, pay to the
Authority such difference, if any, between the cost of a tap at the
§ 306 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 306.1
1:326
§ 307. Billings, Late Payments, Penalties, Fees and Liens. [Ord. 152,
9/29/1987, § 307; as amended by Ord. 174, 3/27/1990, § 6; by Ord.
178, 3/12/1991, § 7; by Ord. 187, 1/26/1993, § 1; and by Ord. 221, 1/
23/1996, § 1; by Ord. 274, 12/19/2000, § 1; and by Ord. 318, 5/29/
2007]
time originally purchased and the cost of the tap at the time the
property is actually physical connected to the Municipal Authority's
public wastewater system and appropriate inspections on behalf
of the Authority have been concluded, as otherwise required by
Township ordinance.
3. Each EDU identified within 150 feet of a public sewer system required
to connect that has not connected as per § 115 shall pay, in addition to
any liens or penalties, a quarterly nonuser charge, calculated by
multiplying the rate set forth in the prevailing schedule of sewer user
rates as adopted by the Township of North Strabane as follows:
(Sewer rate per 1,000 gallons) x (number of EDUs identified) x 14.5
quarterly nonuser charge
1. Bills or invoices (hereinafter "invoices") for said sewer service shall be
submitted in the form and manner prescribed by the Authority. As a
courtesy to the owner of the property (if different from the user), all
bills for sewer service shall be directed to the user of the premises to
which sewer service is furnished, unless the owner, in writing,
otherwise directs. The owner of the property shall, however, in all
cases, be liable for payment of such bills. As used herein, the term
"user" includes but is not limited to the owner of the property to which
service is provided.
2. All users shall be invoiced quarterly, and payment of invoices shall be
due within 28 days of the invoice date. This date shall be known as the
"due date."
3. When the invoice has not been paid on or before the due date, it shall be
considered delinquent. At such time, a late payment charge of 5% of the
amount of the invoice shall also be imposed. This late payment charge
shall be in addition to the remedies otherwise available to the Authority
hereunder.
4. If the invoice is not paid within 28 days of its date, that is, by the due
date, the following procedures shall also be utilized by the Authority:
A. Not more than 15 days after the due date, the Authority shall mail a
letter to the user (and the owner of the property at issue, if
different) requesting that the account be paid in full or,
alternatively, that the user meet with the Authority to establish a
payment plan and schedule acceptable to the Authority.
B. In the event of the failure of a user (or owner of the property at
issue, if different) to respond to the Authority's letter referred to in
§ 306.1 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 307
1:327
§ 308. Excess Users. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987, § 308; as amended by
Ord. 174, 3/27/1990, § 7; and by Ord. 178, 3/12/1991, § 8]
Users contributing more than 6,000 gallons of wastewater per month and
whose waste strength is greater than 208 mg BOD/1 or 220 mg SS/1 shall
prepare and file with the Authority a report that shall include pertinent
data relating to the wastewater characteristics of its discharges, including
the methods of sampling and measurement to obtain this data. This data
shall be used to calculate the user charges for that user. Representatives
of the Authority shall have the right to gain access to the waste stream
of the user(s) and take its own samples. In the event the Authority does
so and should the results be substantially different than those results as
determined and certified to the Authority by the user, the user charge for
that user shall be revised for the next billing cycle/period.
§ 309. Review of Charges. [Ord. 152, 9/29/1987, § 309; as amended
by Ord. 174, 3/27/1990, § 8]
§ 310. Annual Review and Revision of Rates and Charges. [Ord. 152,
9/29/1987, § 310; as amended by Ord. 174, 3/27/1990, § 9]
Subsection 4A above or to establish a payment plan and schedule
within 10 days of the date of the said letter or upon the user's
or owner's failure to timely comply with any such payment plan
and schedule so established, the Authority, at least 10 days prior
to terminating service, shall mail to the user (and owner of the
property at issue, if different), by first class mail, and also post
the main entrance to the property at issue, with a notice in
substantially the form as previously adopted by the Township and
which may be administratively updated and changed from time
to time by the Township consistent with the provisions of the
Township ordinances.
1. Any industrial user who deems his user charge is unreasonable and/or
inequitable may make written application to the Authority requesting a
review of his user charge. Said written request shall, where necessary,
show the actual or estimated average flow and/or strength of his
wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is
based, including how the measurements or estimates were made.
2. Review of the request shall be made by the Authority and, if approved,
the user charges for that user may be recomputed based on the revised
flow and/or strength data. The new charges shall be recommended to
the Township which shall determine whether this Part shall be amended
to embody the proposed changes. Upon amendment of this Part, the
new charges shall be applicable to the next billing cycle/period.
1. The Authority will review the user charges at least annually and
recommend to the Township the rates necessary to ensure that
adequate revenues are generated to pay the costs24 of operation and
§ 307 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 310
1:328
§ 311. Effective Date: § 307, Part 3, Chapter 18. [Ord. 174, 3/27/
1990, § 10; as amended by Ord. 178, 3/12/1991, § 9; by Ord. 187, 1/
26/1993, § 2; by Ord. 262, 8/24/1999, § 2; and by Ord. 274, 12/19/
2000, § 2]
The provisions of Chapter 18, Part 3, § 307, as amended herein shall become
effective on November 1, 2000, and the terms of the ordinance shall apply
to all invoices dated that same date or a later date, regardless of the actual
date of use.
§ 312. Effective Date: § 306.1. [Ord. 185, 1/26/1993, § 3]
The provisions of § 306.1 of this Part shall be retroactive to January 1, 1992,
and shall be applicable to any outstanding tap permits issued prior to that
date which as of that date had not yet expired as established by Township
ordinance or Township and/or Authority regulations.
§ 313. Effective Date: § 307(5). [Ord. 221, 1/23/1996, § 2]
The provisions of § 307(5) of this Part shall apply to all invoices dated
January 16, 1996, or a later date, regardless of the actual date of issue.
maintenance (including replacement) of the sewerage system, and that
such revenues remain sufficient to provide for the proportional
distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement
costs, among users and user classes.
2. The Authority will notify the Township and each user at least annually of
the rate being charged for operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of the new sewerage system.
24.Editor's Note: Ord. 174, original spelling was "cots."
§ 310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 313
1:329

Part 4
DYE TESTS AND CERTIFICATIONS
§ 401. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
The Board of Supervisors finds that excessive storm and/or surface waters
are illegally routed into the sanitary sewer systems leased by the Township
from the North Strabane Municipal Authority, thus requiring increased
and unnecessary treatment capacity and activity and thus curtailing the
availability of tap-ins and treatment to other users who need sanitary
sewage treatment. The Board of Supervisors finds that the procedures, fees
and penalties provided for herein are necessary to achieve the purposes of
this Part.
§ 402. Short Title. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
This Part may be known and cited as the "Dye Test Ordinance."
§ 403. Definitions. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
CODE — North Strabane Township Code of Ordinances, as the same may be
from time to time amended.
DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — An official statement from the
Township stating that there are no illegal storm or surface water
connections into the sanitary sewer connections on the property to be sold
which violate any section of the Code.
ILLEGAL STORM OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The discharge
of basement seepage or ground water or the connection of downspouts, roof
drainage or surface or areaway drainage into the sanitary sewer system.
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION — A written letter
from the Township concerning municipal liens and property taxes.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, institution, agency, authority or other entity recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
TEMPORARY DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — A temporary statement
of certification from the Township issued pursuant to the terms of § 408 of
this Part.
TOWNSHIP — North Strabane Township.
§ 404. Sale of Real Estate Without Document of Certification
Prohibited. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
After the effective date of this Part, it shall be unlawful for any person to
sell or purchase real estate within the Township on which a building or
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:331
improvement exists without first delivering to the purchaser a Document of
Certification or a Temporary Document of Certification from the Township.
§ 405. Document of Certification Application. [Ord. 164, 12/27/
1988; as amended by Ord. 165, 5/9/1989; and by Ord. 318, 5/29/
2007]
§ 406. Duration of Document of Certification. [Ord. 164, 12/27/
1988]
A Document of Certification shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance. Real estate may be sold during the one-year effective life
of such document without further dye testing or certification.
1. Any person selling real estate located as defined in § 404 of this Part
that is located within the Township (hereinafter referred to as
"applicant") shall make application on a form furnished by the Township
at least 21 days before the date of closing the sale. The applicant shall
then cause to have performed a dye test on the property to be sold. All
dye tests shall be performed by an inspector appointed by the North
Strabane Township Municipal Authority (hereinafter referred to as
"inspector").
2. The inspection fee shall be in an amount set by resolution of the
Township Board of Supervisors. The inspection fee shall be paid to the
Township at the time of making the application referred to in this
Section.
3. Such inspector shall complete the appropriate portions on the form and
certify that the property has been dye tested and certify the results of
such test. On the event there are no illegal storm or surface water
connections, the Township Manager or his designate shall issue a
Document of Certification upon payment of such fee as set by resolution
of the Township Board of Supervisors. When an illegal storm or surface
water connection is discovered by means of the abovementioned dye
test, no Document of Certification will be issued until the illegal
connections are removed and certification of such removal by an
inspector is received. An additional inspection fee shall be paid by the
applicant for each inspection subsequent to the first inspection referred
to in § 405, Subsection 1.
4. Such inspection shall include a visual review of the existing service line
for conformance with the current service line detail as outlined in the
Manual of Procedures of NSTMA. When the existing service line is
found to be in nonconformance with this standard, the owner shall
consider a new trap and fresh-air vent on the existing service line, to
ensure the safety of the existing house, unless this service line is of
sound quality.
§ 404 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 407
1:332
§ 407. Instances When Document of Certification not Required.
[Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
A Document of Certification shall not be required in the following instances:
§ 408. Temporary Document of Certification. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
A temporary Document of Certification may be issued at the Township's sole
discretion when, either:
1. When property is refinanced but no conveyance takes place.
2. When an improvement to real estate has been recently constructed in
accordance with a valid building permit and has been inspected by the
Building Inspector and the North Strabane Township Municipal
Authority and has not been formerly occupied. If such property is sold
after one year of the date of the Certificate of Occupancy, or the
inspections referred to in this subsection, compliance with this Part is
mandatory.
3. Individual apartment-type units within a single condominium building
may be sold without individual certification provided that the building
in which the units are located has been certified no longer than one
year previous to the date of the sale of the individual condominium unit.
4. When the real estate is such that tap-in to the sanitary sewer system is
not required by law or ordinance.
1. The applicant proves that dye testing cannot be performed because of
weather conditions. When such is the case, the applicant shall provide
the Township with security in such amount as the Board of Supervisors
by resolution shall establish to guarantee that the dye test will be
performed. The applicant will cause to have the dye test performed
within 14 days of written notification from the Township which will be
given at such time as weather conditions make the dye test possible. In
addition, the applicant shall provide a signed, written
acknowledgement from the purchaser agreeing to correct, at
purchaser's sole cost and expense, any violations that may be
discovered as a result of subsequent dye tests. Nothing in this
subsection shall prohibit any purchaser from requiring the applicant to
reimburse purchaser for any costs incurred; provided, however, that
primary liability shall run with the land and no such agreement shall
affect Township's enforcement powers or excuse the current owner
from compliance with this Code; or
2. When an illegal storm or surface water connection is discovered and
the necessary remedial activities to correct such connection would
require a length of time such as to create a practical hardship for the
applicant, applicant may apply to the Township Manager for a
Temporary Document of Certification which may only be issued when
the applicant provides the Township with all of the following: (i) a bona
fide, executed contract between the applicant and an inspector to
§ 407 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:333
§ 409. Municipal Lien and Tax Certification Letters. [Ord. 164, 12/
27/1988]
§ 410. Regulations. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
The Township Manager is hereby empowered to undertake the duties
imposed by this Part, including but not limited to:
§ 411. Adjustment of Fees. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, change from time to time the
fees authorized in this Part.
§ 412. Conflict with General Police Powers. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
Nothing in this Part shall limit in any fashion whatsoever the Township's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth. Nothing
in this Part shall be a defense to any citation issued by any municipal
corporation or the Commonwealth pursuant to any other law or ordinance.
complete the necessary remedial work with the Township listed therein
as a third party beneficiary; and (ii) cash security in the amount of said
contract is posted with the Township; and (iii) a written agreement by
the purchaser to be responsible for all cost over-runs and extras related
to the remedial work together with a written license to enter upon the
property to complete work in case of default of the contractor referred
to above. The Township Manager shall determine when such Temporary
Document of Certification shall expire. Upon expiration, the security
shall be forfeited and the Township may use the security to have the
necessary remedial work completed.
1. A request for a Municipal Lien or Tax Certification Letter must be
accompanied by a valid Document of Certification and payment of the
required fees which shall be delivered to the Township at least seven
days before such letters are to be provided. The amount of the fee for
each item shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
2. Where requested by a property owner or his agent and subject to time
availability as determined solely by the Township Manager, the
Township may issue Municipal Lien and Tax Certification Letters on two
days' notice upon the payment of an expedition fee in addition to the
fees set forth above. The amount of the expedition fee shall be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
1. Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees.
2. Establishing the form of (i) applications, (ii) purchaser
acknowledgements and (iii) inspector certifications.
3. Limiting the times of year in which the Temporary Document of
Certification is available for reasons of weather.
§ 408 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 413
1:334
§ 413. Penalties and Enforcement. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988; as
amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
§ 414. Effective Date. [Ord. 164, 12/27/1988]
This Part shall become effective 60 days after its enactment and adoption.
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district
justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days. Whenever any person violating any of the provisions
of this Part is notified of such violation in writing by the Township
Manager, each day that a violation of this Part continues or each
Section of this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
2. In addition to and not in lieu of the foregoing, the Township may seek
equitable and legal relief to compel compliance with this Part.
§ 413 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 414
1:335

Part 5
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A.
Purpose and Definitions.
§ 501. Purpose and Policy. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 501.1]
This Part sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the
Township of North Strabane and the Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority
and enables the Township to comply with all applicable State and Federal
laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). The objectives of this Part are:
§ 502. Abbreviations. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 501.2]
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipality
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system
or contaminate the resulting sludge;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater
system which will pass through the system inadequately treated, into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with
the system;
3. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
4. To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
This Part provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors
to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain nondomestic users. Also, through enforcement of general
requirements for the users, this Part authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing
customer's capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
This Part shall apply to the Township of North Strabane and to the
Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority who are, by contract or
agreement with the Township and the Authority, users of the
Township's or the Authority's POTW. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority shall administer,
implement and enforce all for the provisions of this Part.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:337
BOD — Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CHJA — Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations
COD — Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency
l — liter
mg — milligrams
mg/l — milligrams per liter
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW — Publicly Owned Treatment Works
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.
USC — United States Code
TSS — Total Suspended Solids
§ 503. Definitions. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 501.3; as amended by Ord.
318, 5/29/2007]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this Part, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT OR THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
AUTHORITY MANAGER — The person designated by the CHJA to supervise
the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged
with certain duties and responsibilities by this Part, or his duly authorized
representative.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An authorized
representative of an industrial user may be: (1) a principal executive officer
of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
(2) a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership
or proprietorship, respectively; (3) a duly authorized representative of the
individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of weight and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l).
§ 502 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 503
1:338
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of
a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standard.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The term "control authority" shall refer to the
"Approval Authority", defined hereinabove; or the Authority Manager or
property designated representative if the CHJA has an approved
Pretreatment Program under the provisions of 40 CFR, 403.11.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as
a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized office of said
Agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(2) or (3) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to
§ 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement
of the CHJA's NPDES Permit. The term includes prevention for sewage
sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including
those contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by
the POTW.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulations containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(2) and
§ 503 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 503
1:339
(3) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category of
Industrial Users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority
of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, § 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards
under § 307(3) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu
of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
process or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
§ 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment
Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by § 212 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. 1292, which is operated by the CHJA.
This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances
not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this
Part, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the
POTW from persons outside the CHJA who are, by contract or agreement
with the CHJA, users of the CHJA's POTW.
§ 503 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 503
1:340
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
SHALL — Is mandatory, MAY is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the CHJA's
wastewater disposal system who (i) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons
or more per average work day, (ii) has a flow greater than 5% of the flow
in the CHJA's wastewater treatment system, (iii) has in his wastes toxic
pollutants as defined pursuant to § 307 of the Act and/or all applicable State
laws and regulations, (iv) is found by the CHJA, Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality
of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the
system.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
executive office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or flowing any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307 (a) or other Acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the CHJA's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with may be present, whether treated or untreated,
which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT — As set forth in § 531 of this
Part.
§ 503 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 503
1:341

ARTICLE B.
Regulations.
§ 511. General Discharge Prohibitions. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 502.1;
as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such
users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other National, State, or local Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements. A user may not contribute the following
substances to any POTW:
1. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than
5% nor any single reading over 10% of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL)
of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the
CHJA, the State or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard
to the system.
2. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal,
glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
wastepapers, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
refining, or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud, or glass grinding
or polishing wastes.
3. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0, or higher than 9.0, unless
the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the
POTW.
4. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to
exceed the limitations set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
§ 511 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 511
1:343
A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act.
5. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance and repair.
6. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of the
Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
7. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
State Disposal System Permit or the receiving water quality standards.
8. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
9. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in Interference, but in no
case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW
which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.) unless the POTW treatment plant is
designed to accommodate such temperature.
10. Any pollutants including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no
case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or
qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15
minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation.
11. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Authority Manager in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations.
12. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance. When the Authority Manager determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in
such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the
Authority Manager shall: (1) advise the user(s) of the impact of the
contribution on the POTW; and (2) develop effluent limitation(s) for
such user to correct the interference with the POTW.
§ 511 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 512
1:344
§ 512. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988, § 502.2; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the Federal Standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this Part for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this Part. The Authority Manager shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, § 403.12.
§ 513. Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
[Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 502.3]
Where the CHJA's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by Federal Pretreatment Standards, the CHJA
may apply to the Approval Authority for modification of specific limits
in the Federal Pretreatment Standards. "Consistent Removal" shall mean
reduction in the amount of the pollutant or alteration of the nature of the
pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless
state in the effluent which is achieved by the system 95% of the samples
taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in § 403.7(c)
of (Title 40 of the Code Federal Regulations, Part 403) — "General
Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution"
promulgated pursuant to the Act. The CHJA may then modify pollutant
discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements
contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, § 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from
the approval authority is obtained.
§ 514. Specific Pollutant Limitations. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 502.4;
as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following:
0.05 mg/l of arsenic
0.01 mg/l of cadmium
0.05 mg/l of copper
0.10 mg/l of cyanide
0.05 mg/l of lead
0.002 mg/l of mercury
0.10 mg/l of nickel
0.05 mg/l of silver
0.05 mg/l of total chromium
0.30 mg/l of zinc
0.05 mg/l of total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons
0.001 mg/l of phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the
CHJA's wastewater treatment processes
§ 512 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 514
1:345
15 mg/l of ammonia, as NH3-N
§ 515. State Requirements. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 502.5]
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitation or
those in this Part.
§ 516. CHJA'S Right of Revision. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 502.6]
The CHJA reserves the right to establish by regulation more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal
system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
§ 5011.1 of this Part.
§ 517. Excessive Discharge. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 502.7]
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the CHJA or State.
§ 518. Accidental Discharges. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 502.8; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
1. Each user shall provide protection for accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Part.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall
be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and
expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the CHJA for review and
shall be approved by the CHJA before construction of the facility. All
existing users shall complete such a plan within one year of the
effective date of this Part. No user who commences contribution to the
POTW after the effective date of this Part shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge
procedures have been approved by the CHJA. Review and approval of
such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of the Part. In the case of an accidental
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone
and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.
2. Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the Authority Manager a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
§ 514 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 518
1:346
not relieve the user of any expense, loss damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
by this Part or other applicable law.
3. Notice to Employees. Notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that
all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 518 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 518
1:347

ARTICLE C.
Fees.
§ 521. Purpose. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 503.1]
It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the
program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set
forth in a written schedule of charges and fees, duly adopted by the
Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority which schedule shall, prior to
adoption, be submitted to the Township's Board of Supervisors for review
and comments.
§ 522. Charges and Fees. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 503.2]
The Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority may adopt charges and fees which
may include:
1. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the CHJA's
Pretreatment Program;
2. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
3. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
4. Fees for permit applications;
5. Fees for filing appeals;
6. Fees for consistent removal by the Canonsburg-Houston Joint Authority
of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards;
7. Other fees as the CHJA may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the CHJA.
§ 521 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 522
1:349

ARTICLE D.
Administration.
§ 531. Wastewater Contribution Permits; General. [Ord. 160, 6/7/
1988, § 504.2]
All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW
shall obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit before connecting to or
contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or
contributing to the POTW shall obtain a Wastewater Contribution Permit
within 180 days after the effective date of this Part.
§ 532. Permit Application. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.2.2; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Users required to obtain a Wastewater Contribution Permit shall complete
and file with the CHJA an application in the form prescribed by the CHJA,
and accompanied by a fee established by the CHJA. Existing users shall
apply for a Wastewater Contribution Permit within 30 days after the
effective date of this Part and proposed new users shall apply at least 90
days prior to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application,
the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
A. Name, address and location (if different from the address);
B. SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
C. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited
to, those mentioned in Subpart B of this Part as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
§ 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended;
D. Time and duration of contributions;
E. Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including
daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;
F. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to
show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation;
G. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises
including all materials which are or could be discharged;
H. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any CHJA, State or Federal
Pretreatment Standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
§ 531 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 532
1:351
additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards;
I. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard;
The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
A. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring and engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.)
B. No increment referred to in Subsection I(1) shall exceed nine
months.
C. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the Authority Manager, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date
and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being
taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse
between such progress reports to the Authority Manager.
J. Each product produced by type, amount process or processes and rate
of production;
K. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
L. Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
M. Any other information as may be deemed by the CHJA to be necessary
to evaluate the permit application.
The CHJA will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the CHJA may issue a Wastewater Contribution Permit
subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
§ 532 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 533
1:352
§ 533. Permit Modifications. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.2.3; as
amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
Within nine months of the promulgating of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject
to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standards within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required
by § 532, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within
180 days after the promulgation of the Applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater
contribution permit shall submit to the Authority Manager within 180 days
after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standard the information required by Subsections H and I of § 532.
§ 534. Permit Conditions. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.2.4]
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions
of this Part and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the CHJA. Permits may contain the following:
A. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
C. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
D. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
E. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedule;
F. Compliance schedules;
G. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports
(see § 537);
H. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the CHJA, and affording CHJA
access thereto;
I. Requirements for notification of the CHJA of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.
J. Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per § 552;
§ 533 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 534
1:353
§ 535. Permits Duration. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.2.5]
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.
A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated
to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by
the CHJA during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in § 102 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 536. Permit Transfer. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.2.6]
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned,
transferred or sold to a new owner, new users, different premises or a new
or changed operation without the approval for the CHJA. Any succeeding
owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit.
§ 537. Reporting Requirements for Permittee; Complaint Date
Report. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.3.1; as amended by Ord. 318, 5/
29/2007]
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Authority Manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by
pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum
daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited
by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state
whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being
met on a consistent basis and, of not, what additional O&M and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified
to by a qualified professional.
§ 538. Periodic Compliance Reports. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.3.2;
as amended by Ord. 318, 5/29/2007]
K. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the CHJA to ensure
compliance with this Part.
1. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date
of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after
§ 534 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 538
1:354
§ 539. Monitoring Facilities. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.4]
The CHJA shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but
the CHJA may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street
or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping
or parked vehicles.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the
Authority Manager during the months of June and December, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the
Authority Manager, a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily
flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily
flow reported in § 537 of this Part. At the discretion of the Authority
Manager and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow
rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Authority Manager may agree
to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
2. The control authority may impose mass limitations on users where the
imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report
required by Subsection 1 of this Section shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the
user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of
the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where requested by the Authority Manager, of
pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be
conducted a minimum of once every six months. All analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the
administrator pursuant to § 304(G) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR,
Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures
approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques approved by the Administrator.
(Comment: Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling
or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the EPA publication, sampling and analysis procedures for
screening of industrial effluents for priority pollutants, April, 1977,
and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the Administrator.)
§ 538 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 539
1:355
facility, sampling and measurement equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the CHJA's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the CHJA.
§ 540. Inspection and Sampling. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.5]
The CHJA shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this Part is being met and all requirements are being complied
with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the CHJA or their representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties.
The CHJA, approval authority and where the (NPDES State is the Approval
Authority). EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards to that upon presentation of
suitable identification personnel from the approval authority and EPA will
be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.
§ 541. Pretreatment. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.6]
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply
with this Part and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the
Federal Pretreatment Regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the CHJA shall be provided, operated,
and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
CHJA for review and shall be acceptable to the CHJA before construction
of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in
no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility
as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the CHJA under the
provisions of this Part. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to
the CHJA prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
The CHJA shall annually publish in a newspaper in which legal
advertisements may lawfully be placed a list of the user's which were not in
compliance with any pretreatment requirement of standards at least once
during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any
enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months.
§ 539 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 541
1:356
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request.
§ 542. Confidential Information. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 504.7]
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspection
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the CHJA that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of the
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
Part, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit,
State Disposal System permit and/or the Pretreatment Programs; provided,
however that such portion of the report shall be available for use by the
State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
Information accepted by the CHJA as confidential, shall not be transmitted
to any governmental agency or to the general public by the CHJA until and
unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
§ 541 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 542
1:357

ARTICLE E.
Enforcement.
§ 551. Harmful Contributions. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 505.1]
The CHJA may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the CHJA, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons to the environment, causes interference to
the POTW or causes the CHJA to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service
and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the CHJA shall take such steps as
deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals. The CHJA shall reinstate the wastewater contribution
permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement
submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the CHJA within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
§ 552. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 505.2]
Any user who violates the following conditions of this Part or applicable
State and Federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in
accordance with the procedures of Subpart E of this Part:
§ 553. Notification of Violation. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 505.3]
Whenever the CHJA finds that any user has violated or is violating this
Part, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation of
requirements contained herein, the CHJA may serve upon such person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the
date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be
submitted to the CHJA by the user.
§ 554. Show Cause Hearing. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 505.4]
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the users' premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or,
D. Violation of conditions of the permit.
§ 551 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 554
1:359
§ 555. Legal Action. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 505.5]
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
CHJA's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provision of this Part,
Federal or State pretreatment requirements or any order of the CHJA, the
CHJA may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
in the Common Pleas Court of Washington County.
§ 556. Penalties. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 506.1; as amended by Ord.
240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
or any user who is found to have violated an Order of the CHJA or who
1. The CHJA may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the CHJA why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by the CHJA regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show
cause before the CHJA why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
The CHJA may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or
may designate any of its members of any officer or employees of the
(assigned department) to:
A. Issue in the name of the CHJA notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
B. Take the evidence;
C. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendation to
the CHJA for action thereon.
2. At any hearing held pursuant to this Part, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the
hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
3. After the CHJA Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order
to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are property operated. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
§ 554 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 556
1:360
willfully or negligently failed to comply with a provision of this Part and the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a district justice in the manner provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to have been
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 557. Falsifying Information. [Ord. 160, 6/7/1988, § 506.2]
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part or wastewater
contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Part shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both.
§ 556 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 557
1:361

Part 6
HOLDING TANKS
§ 601. Findings and Purposes. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 1]
The purpose of this Part is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
retain sewage whether from residential or commercial uses and it is hereby
declared that the enactment of this Part is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of North Strabane Township.
§ 602. Definitions. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 2]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of North Strabane Township,
Washington County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK or RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether
permanent or temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by
a water carrying system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the
ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, or together with others of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP OF NORTH STRABANE — North Strabane Township,
Washington County, Pennsylvania.
§ 603. Rights and Privileges Granted. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 3]
The Board is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control and methods of holding tank construction,
maintenance, removal, use, sewage disposal and sewage collection and
transportation of the contents of said tanks.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 604
1:363
§ 604. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 4]
The Board is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules,
regulations and conditions concerning holding tanks that it may deem
necessary from time to time to effect the purposes of this Part.
§ 605. Rules and Regulations to be in Conformity with Applicable
Law. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 5]
All such rules, regulations and conditions adopted by the Board shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township
and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 606. Rates and Charges. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 6]
The Board shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in connection with the administration
of this Part at reasonable and uniform rates not contrary to applicable law.
§ 607. Exclusiveness of Rights and Privileges. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993,
§ 7]
§ 608. Duties of Improved Property Owner. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993,
§ 8]
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
1. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Board, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2. The Board shall receive, review and retain pumping receipts from each
permitted holding tanks.
3. The Board shall complete and retain animal inspection reports for each
permitted holding tank.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this Part or any other
ordinance of the Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules, regulations and conditions of the Board and any administrative
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Board or its agents to inspect holding tanks on an
annual basis.
C. Permit only the Board or its agents or an approved hauler to collect,
transport and dispose of the contents therein.
D. Enter into a written agreement with the Township providing for the
duties and obligations of said property owner with respect to, but not
§ 604 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 608
1:364
§ 609. Penalties. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 9; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction, thereof in an action brought before a district justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 610. Abatement of Nuisances. [Ord. 189, 3/23/1993, § 10]
In addition to any other remedies provided in this Part, any violation of
§ 608, above, shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the
Township or the Board by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
limited to, the construction, use, maintenance and removal of holding
tanks.
E. Provide such financial security for the performance of his undertakings
and obligations set forth in any written agreement with the Township.
§ 608 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 610
1:365

Part 7
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 701. Administration. [Ord. 334, 1/5/2009]
The Township reaffirms the delegation to the Washington County Sewage
Council to administer the requirements of Act 537 and the North Strabane
Township ordinances governing all aspects of on-lot sewage collection,
treatment and discharge.
§ 702. Definitions. [Ord. 334, 1/5/2009]
As used in this Part 7, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 537 — The Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, as amended, 53 P.S. §
750.1 et seq., known as the “Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.”
ALTERNATE ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEMS — Any on-lot sewage system
so designated as an alternate type by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A certified sewage enforcement officer, code
enforcement officer, professional engineer, plumbing inspector, municipal
secretary, or any other qualified or licensed person who is delegated by
the municipality to function within the specified limits as the agent of the
municipality to carry out the provisions of this Part 7.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, North Strabane Township, Washington
County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — An individual employed by the
municipality to administer and enforce other ordinances in the municipality.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for collection of sewage from two or more lots and the
treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at any other
site.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of the commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION — The condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into
groundwaters of the commonwealth, into surface waters of the
commonwealth, backs up into the building connected to the system, or
otherwise causes a nuisance hazard to the public health or pollution of
groundwater or surface water or contamination of public or private drinking
water wells. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any of the
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:367
conditions noted above occur for any length of time during any period of the
year.
MARGINAL SOIL CONDITIONS — Any time the municipality's certified
sewage enforcement officer determines a parcel or lot as having marginal
soils after properly testing said parcel or lot.
MUNICIPALITY — North Strabane Township, Washington County,
Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
provision of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted by the municipality
and approved by the Department of Environmental Resources, as described
in and required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
ON-LOT DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for disposal of sewage involving
pretreatment and subsequent disposal of the clarified sewage into the soil
for final treatment and disposal; including both individual sewage systems
and community sewage systems, including but not limited to drip irrigation
systems, AB out systems, small stream discharge systems, community on-lot
systems and any other currently DEP-approved sewage disposal systems or
systems which may be approved by the DEP in the future, it being the intent
of this Part 7 to address all such systems.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality,
district, authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty or imposing a fine or imprisonment, the
term shall include the members of an association, partnership or firm and
the officers of any local agency or municipal, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or replace
an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
REPLACEMENT AREA — A portion of a lot or a developed property, sized to
allow installation of a subsurface sewage disposal area, which is reserved
to allow that installation in the event of the malfunction of the originally
installed on-lot disposal system.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation, or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the "Clean Stream Law," as
amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The designated official of
the municipality who issues and reviews permit applications and conducts
such investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement Act 537
§ 702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 702
1:368
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, which includes the
WCSC/Council.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Any area or areas of a municipality
for which a sewage management program is recommended by the
municipality's adopted Act 537 Official Sewage Facilities Plan. A sewage
management district may or may not encompass the entire municipality.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal and
administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of this Part
7 and other administrative requirements adopted by the municipality to
effectively enforce and administer this Part 7.
WASHINGTON COUNTY SEWAGE COUNCIL (WCSC) — The Washington
County Sewage Council, an intergovernmental cooperative organization
which provides certain services to member municipalities.
§ 703. Applicability. [Ord. 334, 1/5/2009]
From the effective date of this Part 7, its provisions shall apply in any
portion of the municipality identified in the municipality's Act 537 Official
Sewage Facilities Plan as a sewage management district. Within such an
area or areas, the provisions of this Part 7 shall apply to all persons
owning any property serviced by a new on-lot sewage disposal system
and to all persons installing or rehabilitating or repairing on-lot sewage
disposal systems with new alternate type systems. If necessary, the entire
municipality may be identified as a sewage management district.
§ 704. Replacement Areas. [Ord. 334, 1/5/2009]
1. Any supplements or revisions to the municipality's Official Sewage
Facilities Plan which are prepared pursuant to the applicable
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for subdivision or development of land within an identified
sewage management district shall provide for the testing,
identification, and reservation of an area of each lot or developed
property suitable for the installation of a replacement on-lot sewage
disposal system. This requirement is in addition to the testing,
identification and reservation of an area for the primary sewage
disposal system.
2. No permit shall be issued for any proposed on-lot sewage disposal
system on any newly created or subdivided property in any sewage
management district that has any lots designated as marginal soils
unless and until a replacement area is approved, identified and
reserved for the lots with the marginal soils designation. The
replacement area must be identified on the land survey at the time of
subdivision approval.
§ 702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 705
1:369
§ 705. Inspections. [Ord. 334, 1/5/2009]
This § 705 is only when the Township revises its Official Sewage Facilities
Plan and is only applicable to the area or areas affected by such revision.
1. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by the
municipality's authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the
effective date of this Part 7.
2. The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking of
samples from surface water, wells, or other groundwater sources, the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure.
3. The municipality's authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon
land for purposes of inspection described above.
4. An initial inspection shall be conducted by the municipality's authorized
agent within one year of the effective date of this Part 7 for the purpose
of determining the type and functional status of each on-lot sewage
disposal system in the sewage management district. A written report
shall be furnished to the owner of each property inspected as evidence
of said inspection, and a copy of said report shall be maintained in the
municipal records.
5. A schedule of routine inspections may be established by the
municipality, if necessary, to assure the proper function of the on-lot
sewage disposal systems in the sewage management district.
6. The municipality and its authorized agent shall inspect systems known
to be, or alleged to be, malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal
that the system is indeed malfunctioning, the municipality and its
authorized agent shall take action to require the correction of the
malfunction. If total correction is not technically or financially feasible,
in the opinion of the authorized agent and a representative of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, then action by
the property owner to mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
7. There may arise geographic areas within the municipality where
numerous on-lot sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A
resolution of these areawide problems may necessitate detailed
planning and a municipality-sponsored revision to the area's Act 537
Official Sewage Facilities Plan. When a Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection authorized Official Sewage Facilities Plan
Revision has been undertaken by the municipality, mandatory repair or
replacement of individual malfunctioning sewage disposal systems
within the study area may be delayed, at the discretion of the
municipality, pending the outcome of the plan revision process.
However, the municipality may compel immediate corrective action
whenever a malfunction, as determined by the municipal officials and
§ 705 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 705
1:370
§ 706. Operation. [Ord. 334, 1/5/2009]
§ 707. Applicability; Enforcement; Rules and Regulations. [Ord.
334, 1/5/2009]
§ 708. Penalties. [Ord. 334, 1/5/2009]
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, represents
a serious public health or environmental threat.
1. Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot
sewage disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the
system:
A. Industrial wastes;
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil;
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners,
herbicides, gasoline and other solvents; or
D. Clean surface water or groundwater, inducing water from roof or
cellar drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
1. The provisions of this Part 7 are not applicable to conventional
leechfield and sand mound sewage systems.
2. The provisions of this Part 7 are applicable to all new alternate systems
currently listed in the DEP Alternate Systems Guidance Manual as well
as other alternate on-lot sewage systems subsequently approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
3. The provisions of this Part 7 are applicable to community on-lot disposal
systems, small stream discharge systems and holding tanks.
4. The provisions of this Part 7 are applicable to on-lot disposal systems
located in subdivisions with marginal conditions for long-term use of
on-lot sewage disposal.
5. The Township specifically delegates to WCSC the enforcement of the
provisions of this Part 7, any other Township and DEP requirements,
rules, regulations and provisions regarding municipal governance and
enforcement of on-lot sewage systems, except as to malfunction of any
such systems, which shall be addressed by the Township.
6. The Township and the WCSC shall jointly prepare and approve, by
resolution, rules, regulations and requirements for on-lot septic
systems applicable to this Part 7 including permitting approval and
maintenance of said systems.
1. Any person failing to comply with any provisions of this Part 7 shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $300 and costs, and not more than
§ 705 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 708
1:371
$500 and costs, or, in default thereof, shall be confined in the county
jail for a period of not more than 30 days. Each day of noncompliance
shall constitute a separate offense.
2. The penalty for actual malfunctions of any on-lot sewage septic system
will come under the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Code,
Title 73, Section 73.11(c), and the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
(Health and Safety) Title 35, Section 150.14, Nuisance, and Title 35,
Section 750.13, Penalties.
§ 708 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 708
1:372
Chapter 19
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
§ 708 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 708
1:373

Part 1
SOLID WASTE
§ 101. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991, § 101]
The Washington County Board of Commissioners has adopted an approved
Municipal Waste Management Plan for Washington County in accordance
with the requirements of § 501 of the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 101). Said plan
has been duly ratified by the municipalities of Washington County, including
the Township of North Strabane. Pursuant to the authority vested in the
Township by the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 and the
Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act
of 1988, and to implement its police power, the Township hereby enacts this
Part to regulate the storage, collection and disposal of rubbish, refuse and
garbage within the Township in order to implement such plan.
§ 102. Short Title. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991, § 102]
This Part shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance,"
and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991, § 103]
The following words and phrases, as used in this Part, shall have the
meanings ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980, P.L. 380,
No. 97, July 7, 1980.
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988.
BOARD — The Township of North Strabane Board of Supervisors.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including, but not limited to,
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps which
may require special handling due to size, shape or weight.
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which waste is held temporarily for
storage or transportation.
COUNTY — The County of Washington or the Washington County Board of
County Commissioners.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:375
DER — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (DER).
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste
enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised of
garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential private
household or apartment house.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or vegetable
matter that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with
sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as odors, gases or vectors.
HOMEOWNER — The person who is the legal or equitable owner or is
generally in possession and control of any dwelling.
HOUSEHOLD — The residence, habitat, home, apartment or other similar
place of residence or part thereof where an occupant, person, couple or
group of persons uses or occupies the same and where food or vegetables
are separately prepared for the use or consumption by such occupant(s) or
person(s).
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged in
service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages,
schools and universities.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — Any municipal
waste collector or hauler possessing a current, valid municipal license
issued by the Township of North Strabane pursuant to Township Ordinance
No. 182 [Chapter 20, Part 2].
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
and any sludge not meeting the definition of “residual or hazardous waste”
under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or institutional waste supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air-pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency, or any other legal entity which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of
this Part prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of
the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of
any corporation or any other legal entity having officers and directors.
§ 103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 103
1:376
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and other
decomposable matter. This category includes, but is not limited to, ashes,
bedding, crockery and wood.
SALVAGING — The controlled removal or recycling of material from a solid
waste processing or disposal facility.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of material
placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in such
a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed
that the containment of any waste in excess of one month shall constitute
disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and convincing
evidence to the contrary.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Strabane.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any time
after generation.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 104. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991, § 104]
1. For reasons of health, safety and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any
person to accumulate or permit to accumulate on any public or private
property within the Township any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, solid
waste or any other municipal or residual waste except in accordance
with all applicable DER rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act
97 and Act 101.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the
Township except in accordance with all applicable Township ordinances
and DER rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to process and/or dispose any solid
waste in the Township except in accordance with all applicable
Township ordinances and DER rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to Act 97 and Act 101.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, haul, transport or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the Township
without a current, valid license to do so issued by the Township.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
Township without prior written approval from the Township Manager.
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:377
§ 105. Standards for Storage of Solid Waste. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991,
§ 105]
§ 106. Standards and Regulations for Collection. [Ord. 181, 12/19/
1991, § 106]
6. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the Township except at an approved and permitted
resource-recovery facility pursuant to any applicable DER rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
1. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
2. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections and shall place
and store all waste materials therein. Solid containers shall be of a
capacity not less than seven nor more than 32 gallons and shall be
watertight with a close-fitting lid and have handles thereon. Every such
container shall be maintained in good condition and shall be replaced
by such person or responsible occupant of the premises when the same
becomes unsanitary or offensive. No such container or trash bag shall
be filled so full that the covers will not fit down tightly or be so full that
the waste material overflows therefrom. Such waste material that is
scattered shall not be gathered up by the hauler but shall be the
responsibility of the offending person(s) or responsible occupant of the
subject dwelling unit. Rubbish in grocery bags, loose piles, wet boxes or
containers in excess of 32 gallons or larger drums shall not be picked
up.
3. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
minimum standards for the storage of municipal waste set forth in Title
25, Chapter 285, Subchapter A, of DER regulations for the storage of
municipal waste.
4. The placement of solid waste for collection earlier than 24 hours prior
to the normally scheduled pickup time is hereby prohibited. [Added by
Ord. 336, 5/25/2010]
1. All households, homeowners, and commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments within the Township shall utilize the
services of a licensed collector for disposal of their domestic waste or
household waste and shall pay the charges billed by the licensed
collector for such services.
2. All licensed collectors and waste haulers shall comply with all
applicable Township ordinances and with the minimum standards for
collection and transportation of municipal waste set forth in Title 25,
§ 104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 106
1:378
§ 107. Licensing Requirements. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991, § 107]
No person shall collect, remove, haul or transport and solid waste upon
or through any streets or alleys of the Township without first obtaining a
license from the Township of North Strabane pursuant to Ordinance No. 182
[Chapter 20, Part 2].
§ 108. Injunction Powers. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991, § 108]
The Township shall have all the remedies normally incidental to a violation
of any Township ordinance, including the right to seek equitable relief and
the right to petition the Court of Common Pleas, Washington County, for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions
of this Part.
§ 109. Penalties. [Ord. 181, 12/19/1991, § 109; as amended by Ord.
240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
in accordance with the following schedule:
Chapter 285, Subchapter B, of DER regulations for collection and
transportation of municipal waste.
3. All municipal waste collected within the Township shall only be
conveyed or transported to a transfer station, processing facility, and/or
disposal site permitted by the Department of Environmental Resources
and/or other regulatory agencies pursuant to the approved Municipal
Waste Management Plan for Washington County.
A. First offense: $50;
B. Second offense: $100;
C. Third offense: $250;
D. Fourth offense: $500;
E. Fifth offense: $750;
F. Sixth offense and each and every offense thereafter: $1,000;
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Whenever any person
violating any of the provisions of this Part is notified of such violation
in writing by the Township Manager, each day that a violation of this
Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be found to have
been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:379

Part 2
LICENSING OF MUNICIPAL WASTE HAULERS
§ 201. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 201]
The Washington County Board of Commissioners has approved and adopted
the Municipal Waste Management Plan for Washington County, as amended
December 1989, in accordance with the requirements of Section 501 of
the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988 (hereinafter referred to as "Act 101"). Said plan has been
duly ratified by the municipalities in Washington County, including the
Township of North Strabane. The Board of Supervisors of North Strabane
has the power and duty to adopt any ordinances which it deems necessary
to implement the required elements of said plan by the authority vested
in North Strabane Township pursuant to § 304 of Act 101. One of the
requirements which North Strabane Township may impose is that all
persons obtain licenses to collect and transport municipal waste subject to
the plan to a municipal waste processing and/or disposal facility properly
permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
(DER) or other applicable regulatory agency. Therefore, in order to protect
the health and welfare of the residents and businesses of North Strabane
Township and to permit the more-effective implementation of its police
power, the Board of Supervisors finds that all haulers of municipal waste be
duly licensed by the Township.
§ 202. Short Title. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 202]
This Part shall be known and referred to as the "Waste Hauler Licensing
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 203. Definitions. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 203; as amended by
Ord. 190, 4/13/1993, § 1]
The following words and phrases, as used in this Part, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L. 380,
No. 97, July 7, 1980).
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (SB 528, Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988).
BOARD — The Township of North Strabane Board of Supervisors.
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:381
to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership, and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. For purposes of this
Part, real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in
the common elements are vested in the unit owners and unless the
condominium contains a minimum of 25 units.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT or UNIT — A portion of a condominium designated
for separate ownership, the boundaries of which are described pursuant
to § 3205(4) of the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 3205(4).
DER — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
HOMEOWNER — The person who is the legal or equitable owner or is
generally in possession and control of any dwelling.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A group of not less than 25 individuals,
each of whom owns in fee simple the residence in which he or she resides,
and the lots upon which said residences are constructed are contiguous,
one to the other. The association may or may not be incorporated; but
if the association is unincorporated, it must be in compliance with the
requirements of the laws of Pennsylvania governing unincorporated
associations and, in addition thereto, must have a written agreement
executed by each member legally binding each member of the association
to the action of the association permitted by this Part.
HOUSEHOLD — The residence, habitat, home, apartment or other similar
place of residence or part thereof where an occupant, person, couple or
group of persons uses or occupies the same and where food or vegetables
are separately prepared for the use or consumption by such occupant(s) or
person(s).
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages,
schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — Any municipal
waste collector or hauler possessing a current, valid municipal license
issued by the Township of North Strabane pursuant to this Part.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
§ 203 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 203
1:382
and any sludge not meeting the definition of “residual or hazardous waste”
under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or institutional waste supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air-pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — Any facility that is designed, operated
and maintained for the disposal of municipal waste and permitted by the
Pennsylvania DER for such purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency, or any other legal entity which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of
this Part prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of
the foregoing, the term “person” shall include the officers and directors of
any corporation or any other legal entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities
include, but are not limited to, transfer stations, composting facilities and
resource-recovery facilities.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste, or the
mechanical separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of any
material stored or placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a solid
waste processing or disposal facility.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin or generation for the
purpose of recycling.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Strabane.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any time
after generation.
For the purposes of this Part, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 204. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 204]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal
waste from any residential, public, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishment within the Township without first obtaining
a license to so in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
§ 203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:383
§ 205. Standards for Collection and Transportation. [Ord. 182, 12/
19/1991, § 205]
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal
solid waste from any sources within the Township in a manner not in
accordance with the provisions of this Part and the minimum standards
and requirements established in Chapter 285 of the DER Municipal
Waste Management Regulations.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any municipal waste
collected from within the Township to any processing and/or disposal
facility other than those facilities which are properly permitted by the
Pennsylvania DER or other applicable regulatory agency.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any
municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials that are
stored or placed for subsequent collection within the Township without
prior approval from the Board.
1. All collectors or waste haulers operating within the Township must
comply with the following minimum standards and regulations:
A. All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of
municipal waste must comply with the requirements of Act 97, Act
101 and DER regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101,
including, but not limited to, Title 25, Chapter 285, Subchapter B,
Regulations for the Collection and Transportation of Municipal
Waste.
B. All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste shall be operated
and maintained in a manner that will prevent creation of a nuisance
or a hazard to public health, safety and welfare.
C. All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal waste shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors and the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
D. All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal waste
shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent litter and
other nuisances.
E. All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste shall bear signs
identifying the name and business address of the person or
municipality which owns the vehicle and the specific type of
municipal waste transported by the vehicle. All such signs shall
have lettering which is at least six inches in height as required by
Act 101.
2. All collection vehicles and equipment used by licensed collectors or
haulers shall be subject to inspection by the Township or its authorized
agents at any reasonable hour without prior notification.
§ 204 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 206
1:384
§ 206. Licensing Requirements. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 206]
1. No person shall collect, remove, haul or transport any municipal waste
through or upon the streets of the Township without first obtaining a
license in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
2. All collectors and waste haulers shall be licensed by the Township and
designated as a "licensed waste hauler" or a "licensed collector."
3. The Township reserves the right to designate specific municipal waste
processing and/or disposal facilities where all licensed collectors must
transport and dispose of all municipal waste collected within the
Township.
4. Any person who desires to collect, haul or transport municipal waste
within the Township shall submit a license application and any
application fee to the Township or its designated licensing
representative. The Township shall have a minimum period of 30
calendar days to review any application and take approval or denial
action.
5. The license fee shall be set by resolution of the Board on an annual
basis. All licenses are nontransferable and shall be issued for a period
of one calendar year or such portion thereof as shall remain after the
initial issuance thereof. There shall be no reduction or prorated fee for
any license issued during the middle of any calendar year.
6. The license application form, which will be supplied by the Township,
shall set forth the minimum information required to establish the
applicant's qualifications for a license to collect and transport
municipal waste, including, but not limited to:
A. Name and mailing address of the applicant.
B. Name and telephone number of contact person.
C. List of all collection vehicles to be covered under the license,
including identification information for each vehicle, such as
vehicle license number and company identification number.
D. Type of municipal waste collected and transported.
E. The manner of collection.
F. The place and method of disposal.
G. Certificate(s) of insurance to present evidence that the applicant
has valid liability, automobile and workman's compensation
insurance in the minimum amounts established and required by the
Township.
7. Any collector or hauler with an existing license shall submit a new
license application and license fee to the Township at least 60 days
prior to the expiration date of the existing license, if renewal of the
§ 206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 206
1:385
license is desired. New license applicants must submit a license
application and license fee at least 30 days before beginning collecting
and transporting municipal waste in the Township.
8. No new license or license renewal shall be approved and issued to any
person who fails to satisfy the minimum standards and requirements of
this Part or is in violation of the provisions of this Part.
9. As additional consideration for the granting of a commercial hauler's
license hereunder, each licensee shall pick up and dispose of municipal
waste and recyclable material at the Township Municipal Building and
Maintenance Garage in accordance with a schedule prepared by the
Township Manager.
10. No licensed collector shall make any change in the arrangements for
municipal waste and recyclable material collection and disposal without
first receiving the written approval of the Board.
11. The costs imposed by the residential licensed hauler for collection and
removal of municipal waste and recyclable materials as required by this
Part shall be in conformity with the written contract between the
Township and the residential licensed hauler.
12. The residential licensed hauler shall prepare a schedule when
municipal waste shall be collected, removed and emptied by the hauler,
which shall occur at least once each week. The Township and the hauler
shall agree by contract as to the frequency of collection of recyclable
materials. The residential licensed hauler shall be responsible for
notifying the property owners in writing of the days when collections
will be made.
13. All licensed haulers are permitted to collect, remove and transport
municipal waste and recyclable materials on all days of the week,
except Sunday. All licensed haulers shall not be permitted to collect,
remove and transport municipal waste or recyclable materials on any
holiday as the Board, by resolution, may designate. Unless otherwise
ordered by the Township Manager, the collection of municipal waste
and recyclable materials shall not commence before 6:00 a.m. and shall
be completed by 6:00 p.m. on any single day of collection.
14. The Workmen's Compensation and Social Security Acts, as amended,
are deemed a part of the license. All licensed haulers are obliged to
provide workmen's compensation coverage and shall fulfill the terms
and conditions concerning licenses as provided by law and shall
indemnify and save harmless the Township and all its officers, agents,
employees, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, of and from all
manner of losses, suits, actions, payments, costs, charges, damages,
judgments or claims and demands of any character, name or description
brought on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by
any person or property by reason of any act, omission, negligence or
misconduct of said licensed haulers, their agents or employees in the
execution of the license.
§ 206 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 206
1:386
§ 207. Contract in Lieu of License. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 207]
In lieu of a license, the Township may seek and award one or more contracts
for the collection, transportation and lawful disposal of waste and
recyclables of any kind and nature. The award of any such contract shall
constitute a license to the recipient; provided, however, that award of a
contract pursuant hereto shall not relieve or exempt the successful bidder
from complying with this Part unless exempted from such compliance in
writing by the Township Manager or the Board.
§ 207.1. Collection from Dwelling Units, Condominium and
Homeowners' Associations. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 207A; as added
by Ord. 190, 4/13/1993, § 2]
15. Any hauler granted a license shall in no way nor in any manner be
construed as an agent, servant or employee of the Township, but shall,
at all times, be considered and remain an independent contractor.
16. All licensed haulers shall carry insurance policies providing complete
third-party comprehensive liability and property damage insurance,
covering not only the hauler but also the Township, the limits of which
shall not be less than the amounts established by the Board pursuant to
the following subsection. The haulers shall furnish the proper
certificates of insurance coverage to the Township.
17. The Board is authorized to adopt such further specifications and
regulations as reasonably may be required to effectuate and further
define the procedures, rights and duties set forth in this Part.
18. The licensed hauler shall pick up all municipal waste and recyclable
materials on the property, in accordance with specifications established
by the Township.
19. The provisions and requirements of this Part and any specification and
regulation adopted pursuant hereto shall be deemed incorporated into
each and every license. The licensed hauler, in accepting the license,
agrees to be bound thereby with the same force and effect as if said
provisions, requirements, specifications and regulations were a
contractual obligation of the licensed hauler.
20. No hauler shall assign a license in whole or in part without the written
consent of the Township. Such consent does not release any hauler from
any of his obligations and liabilities under the license.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, solid waste shall be
collected from households only by any hauler who has entered into a
contract with the Township pursuant to § 207 of this Part. Apartment
buildings with more than eight dwellings are excluded from collection
as well as business, commercial and industrial establishments which
shall arrange for their own collection, transportation and lawful
§ 206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 207.1
1:387
§ 208. Reporting Requirements. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 208]
disposal of solid waste so as to comply with all applicable requirements
and obligations imposed by this chapter.
2. Condominium associations with no less than 25 unit owners and
homeowners' associations with no less than 25 members may privately
contract for the collection, transportation and lawful disposal of solid
waste for the condominium units and the association members'
residences respectively and thus be exempt from any contract between
the Township and a hauler; provided, however, that:
A. Said associations shall certify and guarantee to the Township, in a
form acceptable to the Township, that all units and members'
residences are bound by the aforementioned private contract and
that no condominium unit owner and/or homeowners' association
member is utilizing a hauler other than the hauler with whom the
said associations have entered into a contract for the collection,
transportation and lawful disposal of solid waste;
B. Each such association must be certified by the Township Manager
as entitled to privately contract as set forth in this section at least
120 days prior to the expiration of any solid waste contract entered
into between the Township and a hauler pursuant to Chapter 20,
Part 2, § 207; and
C. Any such association must provide to the Township Manager such
documentation and other proof as reasonably required by the
Township Manager to verify the association's entitlement to the
privileges of this section.
1. All licensed collectors shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the
Township that they have equipment, by ownership or by valid lease
agreement, for collecting and disposing of materials in the performance
of their license and that all equipment complies with DER regulations.
All licensed collectors shall promptly report any significant changes in
the collection vehicles or equipment covered under the license and
insurance coverage changes to the Township.
2. All licensed collectors shall maintain current, up-to-date records of the
customers serviced within the Township. Such records and customer
lists shall be subject to inspection and shall be delivered to the
Township Manager 120 days after the granting of the license to the
collector. A revised and updated list of customers shall be delivered to
the Township Manager annually thereafter.
3. Each licensed collector shall prepare and submit a semiannual report to
the Township on forms supplied by the Township. The report for the
first half of the year (January through June) shall be submitted on or
before July 31, and the report for the second half of each year (July
through December) shall be submitted by January 31 of the following
§ 207.1 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 208
1:388
§ 209. Duty of Occupants of Property. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 209]
§ 210. Complaints and Penalties. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 210; as
amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
year. At a minimum, the following information shall be included in each
report:
A. Total weight of each type of municipal waste and recyclable
collected from all sources within the Township during each month
of the reporting period.
B. Name of each processing/disposal facility used during the
reporting period and total weight of each type of municipal waste
and recyclable delivered to each site during each month of the
reporting period.
1. It shall be the duty of every person in the Township as covered in this
Part, where any municipal waste shall be collected or removed, to
comply with all regulations pertaining to this Part. As used in this
section, the term municipal waste shall include recyclable materials.
2. During any period wherein this Part is in effect, the following shall
apply:
A. No person shall collect, remove or dispose of or permit the
collection, removal or disposal of any municipal waste other than
by having the same collected, removed or disposed of solely by a
hauler licensed by the Township.
B. All persons shall do all acts, matters and things necessary for them
and each of them to subscribe to the services provided by a
licensed hauler, including, but not limited to, payment to the
licensed hauler for services rendered.
1. The Township Manager shall have the right to determine the
justification of any complaint made by any person as to the service
being rendered by the residential licensed hauler. The Manager's
decision shall be final and binding on the hauler.
2. Every licensed hauler or a representative thereof shall be available on
short notice from the Township Manager to discuss complaints or
problems arising from the hauler's discharge of duties imposed by this
Part.
3. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District
Justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine in accordance with the following schedule:
A. First offense: $50;
§ 208 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 210
1:389
§ 211. Injunctive Powers. [Ord. 182, 12/19/1991, § 211]
The Township may petition the Court of Commons Pleas of Washington
County for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to
enforce any of the provision of this Part.
B. Second offense: $100;
C. Third offense: $250;
D. Fourth offense: $500;
E. Fifth offense: $750;
F. Sixth offense and each and every offense thereafter: $1,000;
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Whenever any
person violating any of the provisions of this Part is notified of
such violation in writing by the Township Manager, each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
4. The Township shall have the right at any time, and without refund of
any license fee, to suspend or revoke the license of any licensed
collector or hauler for any of the following causes:
A. Falsification or misrepresentation of any statements in any license
application.
B. Lapse or cancellation of any required insurance coverage.
C. Collection and/or transportation of any municipal waste or
recyclable materials in a careless or negligent manner or any other
manner that is not in compliance with the requirements of this Part.
D. Transportation and disposal of any municipal waste or recyclable
materials collected within the Township at any site that is not
properly permitted by the Pennsylvania DER or other applicable
regulatory agency.
E. Violation of any section of this Part, any other applicable Township
ordinances or any applicable Pennsylvania laws or regulations.
F. Breach of any hauling contract or bid specifications.
§ 210 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 211
1:390
Part 3
RECYCLING
§ 301. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 301]
The Act of July 28, 1988, No. 101, known as the “Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act,” provides that each municipality of
the commonwealth shall have the power and duty to adopt and implement
programs for the collection and recycling of municipal waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials. Reduction of the amount of solid waste
and conservation of recyclable materials is an important public concern by
reason of the growing problem of solid waste disposal and its impact on
our environment. The Township has determined that recycling conserves
valuable material resources and energy, promotes greater efficiency in the
regional economy and provides for local employment. Recycling will reduce
the overall amount of solid waste presently generated and thus reduce
storage, collection, transportation and disposal costs.
§ 302. Short Title. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 302]
This Part shall be known and referred to as the "Township of North Strabane
Recycling Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 303. Definitions. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 303]
The following words and phrases used throughout this Part shall have the
following meanings:
ALUMINUM — Empty all-aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
steel and aluminum.
BOARD — The Township of North Strabane Board of Supervisors.
CLEAN RECYCLABLES — Not exposed to foreign substances or conditions
rendering them unusable for recycling.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the Township to collect
recyclable materials from residences, or authorized by commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive collection
services from the Township to collect recyclable materials from those
properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple-dwelling residential
buildings containing more than four dwelling units.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel- or tin-coated food or beverage
containers.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:391
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, automotive
glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residues, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES and PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Public facilities operated by the
Township and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from the operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and any sludge
not meeting the definition of “residual or hazardous waste” in the Solid
Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air-pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as “newsprint” and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, color comics, glossy
advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other than black
and white often included with newspapers.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers. Due
to the wide variety of types of plastics, the Township may stipulate specific
types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified
by the Township and can be separated from municipal waste and returned
to commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful
products. Recyclable materials may include, but are not necessarily limited
to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, highgrade
office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics and any
other items selected by the Township or specified in future revisions to Act
101. The recyclable materials selected by the Township may be revised from
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 303
1:392
time to time by resolution of the Board as deemed necessary or useful by
the Township.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCES — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwellings having
up to four dwelling units per structure for which the Township provides
municipal waste collection service.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Strabane.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources for
beneficial use.
For the purposes of this Part, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 304. Establishment of Program; Grant of Power. [Ord. 183, 12/19/
1991, § 304]
The Township of North Strabane hereby establishes a recycling program
for the mandatory separation and collection of recyclable materials and the
separation, collection and/or composting of leaf waste from all residences
and all commercial, municipal and institutional establishments located in
the Township for which waste collection is provided by the Township or
any other collector. Collection of the recyclable materials shall be made
at least once per month by the Township, its designated agent, or any
other solid waste collectors operating in the Township and authorized to
collect recyclable materials from residences or from commercial, municipal
and institutional establishments. The recycling program shall also contain a
sustained public information and education program.
§ 305. Separation and Collection. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 305]
1. All persons who are residents of the Township shall separate all of those
recyclable materials designated by the Township from all other
municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments and other
residential establishments, store such materials for collection, and shall
place same for collection in accordance with the rules and regulations
that may be established hereunder.
A. Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:393
in containers provided by the Township for collection. Any excess
recyclables that cannot fit into the container shall be placed in
a separate rigid container not exceeding 32 gallons and shall be
clearly marked "RECYCLABLES." Any containers provided to
residences for collection of recyclable materials shall be the
property of the Township and shall be used only for the collection
of recyclable materials at the residence for which the container
is registered. Any such person shall pick up his or her container
at the Township Building and complete the registration process, if
any, therefor. After receipt of the container, such person shall be
responsible for the container and shall pay to the Township the
costs of replacement of any lost, stolen, damaged or vandalized
container. Any resident who moves within or from the Township
shall be responsible for returning the allocated container to the
Township or shall pay the replacement cost of said container. Use
of recycling containers for any purpose other than the designated
recycling program or use of the recycling containers by any person
other than the person allocated such container(s) shall be a
violation of this Part. It shall also be a violation of this Part for any
person to take or remove a container not issued to him from the
possession of the person to whom the container is issued.
B. An owner, landlord, or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily rental housing property with more than four units shall
comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a
collection system at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers, and
written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and
availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords and agents
of owners or landlords who comply with this Part shall not be liable
for noncompliance of occupants of their buildings. If recyclable
materials shall be collected by a collector other than the Township
or its authorized agent, owners, landlords and agents of owners or
landlords shall submit an annual report to the Township on a form
supplied by the Township reporting the tonnage of materials
recycled during the previous year.
2. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
establishments for collection and/or composting unless those persons
have otherwise provided for composting of leaf waste.
3. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, leaf waste and such other materials as may be designated by the
Township generated at commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and from community activities and store the recyclable
materials until collection. A person may be exempted from this
subsection if that person submits documentation to the Township
annually indicating that the designated recyclable materials are being
§ 305 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 305
1:394
§ 306. Ownership of Recyclable Materials. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991,
§ 306]
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the Township or
authorized collector pursuant to this Part shall, from the time of placement
at the curb or at other collection point, become the property of the Township
or the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided by § 308 of this
Part. Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to impair the ownership of
separated recyclable materials by the generator unless and until such
materials are placed at the curbside or at another collection point for
collection.
§ 307. Collection by Unauthorized Persons. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991,
§ 307]
It shall be a violation of this Part for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the Township or one authorized by the Board or other entity
responsible for providing for collection of recyclable materials, to collect
recyclable materials placed by residences or commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments for collection by the Township or an authorized
collector, unless such person, firm or corporation has prior written
permission from the Township to make such collection. In violation hereof,
unauthorized collection from one or more residences or commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments on one day shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as herein provided.
§ 308. Existing Recycling Operations. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 308;
as amended by Ord. 193, 12/14/1993, § 1]
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation,
whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person,
firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from
the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment within the Township prior to written permission from the
Board or other entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable
materials to make such a collection, and further provided that any such
donation or sale shall not exempt any such donor or seller from paying
fees to the hauler licensed as contracted by the Township. The Township
Manager, at his sole discretion, may require verification under oath of
recycled in an appropriate manner. If recyclable materials shall be
collected by a collector other than the Township or its authorized agent,
occupants and/or owners of said establishments shall submit an annual
report to the Township reporting the weight of materials recycled
during the previous year.
4. All persons shall pay the hauler of their recyclables unless otherwise
provided for by the Township.
§ 305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 308
1:395
any such recycling by either the recipient or generator of such recyclable
material.
§ 309. Recycling of Materials. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 309]
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with all other wastes is
prohibited and shall be a violation of this Part. The collected recyclable
materials shall be taken to a recycling facility by collectors. Disposal by
collectors or operators of recycling facilities of source-separated recyclable
materials in landfills or to be burned in incinerators is prohibited unless
markets do not exist and the collectors or operators have notified the Board
in writing.
§ 310. Enforcement and Administration. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991,
§ 310; as amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
1. The Board is hereby authorized to make, by resolution, reasonable rules
and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this Part as
deemed necessary or useful, including, but not limited to:
A. Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
B. Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
C. Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials
recycled.
D. Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and
collection of recyclable containers.
E. Establishing procedures and rules and for the separation,
collection and/or composting of leaf waste.
2. The Township Manager or his designee is authorized to take such
measures as may be required or helpful to verify compliance or
noncompliance with this Part and Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter. Such
measures shall include, but are not limited to, inspection of recycling
and solid waste containers.
3. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District
Justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine in accordance with the following schedule:
A. First offense: $50;
B. Second offense: $100;
C. Third offense: $250;
§ 308 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 310
1:396
§ 311. Franchise or License. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 311]
The Township may enter into (an) agreement(s) with public or private
agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable
materials from curbside.
§ 312. Modifications. [Ord. 183, 12/19/1991, § 313]
The Township may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the
standards and regulations herein and as authorized in § 310.
D. Fourth offense: $500;
E. Fifth offense: $750;
F. Sixth offense and each and every offense thereafter: $1,000;
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
4. The Township or its collector reserves the right not to collect municipal
waste containing recyclable materials in combination with
nonrecyclable materials.
§ 310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 312
1:397
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 312 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 312
1:398
Part 1
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 101. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
§ 102. Permit Required to Make Opening or Excavation. [Ord. 80, 5/
28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any
kind in any of the streets in the Township of North Strabane without first
securing a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 103. Application for Permit. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by
Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any
of the streets in the Township shall make application to the Township in
writing for that purpose. Such application shall be made upon blanks to be
furnished by the Township and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the
exact location of the proposed opening or excavation, and the approximate
size or depth thereof, and shall contain an agreement on the part of the
applicant that the work shall be done in full compliance with the ordinances
of the Township and the laws of the Commonwealth in relation thereto, and
that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the
Township from and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands,
payments, costs and charges for or by reason of the proposed opening or
excavation, and all damages to persons or property resulting in any manner
therefrom, or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith,
or from any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
1. The following words, when used in this Part, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street, alley,
or cartway which involves cutting, breaking, or disturbing the surface
thereof. In this Part, the term OPENING shall have essentially the same
meaning as excavation.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or municipal authority.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway,
or other public place located in the Township of North Strabane and
established for the use of vehicles, but shall not include State highways.
2. In this Part, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:399
§ 104. Permit Fee. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
The permit fee shall be in accordance with the fee schedule as established
and amended by the Township by resolution from time to time.
§ 105. Issuance of Permits Restricted. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Permits shall be issued only to persons furnishing public utility services or
the owner or owners of the real property adjoining the location where such
opening or excavation is to be made.
§ 106. Information Contained on Permit. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any permit issued hereunder shall specify the exact location where the
opening or excavation is to be made, the approximate permitted size or
depth thereof and the time within which the work for which the permit is
granted is to be completed.
§ 107. Permit Approval/Disapproval. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised
by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
A permit may be issued to the applicant after all the requirements therefor
have been filed. If the application is disapproved, written notice of
disapproval, together with reasons therefor, shall be given to the applicant.
§ 108. Responsibility to Contact Utilities. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The work authorized by the permit is subject to all the provisions of the
Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, § 1 et seq., as amended or
supplemented from time to time. It shall be the permittee's responsibility
to contact the utilities that have recorded their facilities in compliance with
said Act. A partial list of utilities providing services in the Township and
their office addresses may be obtained from the Township Offices or the
County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 109. Refilling of Opening or Excavation; Restoration of Surface.
[Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the Township shall
thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation in such a manner
as to prevent any settling thereafter and shall restore the surface to the
same condition as it was before the opening or excavation, and such
restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Department
of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are hereby
adopted as specifications of the Township for restoration of surfaces of
streets in the Township; as restored, the surface shall conform to the proper
grade and be of the same surface covering as the part of the thoroughfare
§ 104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 109
1:400
immediately adjoining the opening. If, within two years after the restoration
of the surface as herein provided, defects shall appear therein resulting
from defective backfilling by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse
the Township for the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving.
§ 110. Responsibility of Permit Holder for Certain Work. [Ord. 80,
5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by or
for the person to whom or which the permit has been issued at his or its
expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions of this Part
and to the supervision and approval of the designated official, provided that
the Manager may, if he deems it necessary to the proper performance of
the work, require that cutting of the surface of streets and the backfilling
of all excavations therein shall be done by the Township, in which event the
applicant shall pay the actual cost of the work performed by the Township.
§ 111. Requirements for Work; Correction of Unsatisfactory Work.
[Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
1. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
2. No more than 300 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
3. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
the water mains, sewers or their connections with the houses, or any
other subsurface lines or constructions, until permission of the proper
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions
shall have been obtained.
4. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Township Manager and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit.
The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the
presence of the Manager or an inspector designated by him and shall be
done only in a method approved by him.
5. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with modified
2A stones and thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which layers
shall not exceed eight inches in depth. Backfilling shall be placed to
within 10 inches of the surface.
6. A temporary paving of coldpatch premix, thoroughly bound and
compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining
paving and maintained for a period of 90 days.
§ 109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 111
1:401
§ 112. Emergency Openings. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter and that all other provisions of this
Part are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not be
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, construction, or apparatus, the Township Manager, after such notice
as he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case,
shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by such emergency
and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such owner or person.
7. On concrete base streets, such base shall be replaced with concrete,
and the minimum size of the opening or excavation shall be 16 square
feet.
8. During the making of any excavation in the street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
making the same to keep the street in a safe and passable condition
both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and
all excavating permits granted hereunder are granted under and
subject to the express condition that the person to whom the same is
issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Township from any
loss in damages, or otherwise whatsoever, which may or shall be
occasioned at any time by the said excavation, or by any leak, explosion
or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit, or any other matter
placed in the said excavation.
9. The applicant shall notify the Township Manager when the opening or
excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is done, when
backfilling work is completed, when the temporary paving has been
installed and when the street has been permanently restored so that
inspections may be made.
10. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Township Manager be unsatisfactory and the same
shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within the
time fixed by him, or in the event that the work for which the permit
was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Township
Manager, the Township may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory
work or complete any such work not completed, and charge the cost
thereof, plus 20%, to the applicant.
§ 111 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 113
1:402
§ 113. Restrictions Regarding Trees and Shrubbery. [Ord. 80, 5/28/
1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The permission herein granted does not confer upon the permittee or its
contractors the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the
legal right-of-way except under specifications, regulations and conditions as
the Township may prescribe.
§ 114. Work Necessitating Excavations to be Done Prior to Street
Improvements; Exception. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
The Township Manager shall give timely notice to all persons owning
property abutting on any street within the Township about to be paved or
improved and to all public utility companies operating in the Township,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or
sewer connections, as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the said street, within 30 days from the giving of such notice,
unless such time is extended, in writing, for cause shown, by the Township
Manager. New paving shall not be opened or excavated for a period of
five years after the completion thereof, except in case of emergency, the
existence of which emergency and the necessity for the opening or
excavating of such paving to be determined by the Township Manager. If
it is sought to excavate upon or open a sewer within five years after the
completion of the paving, the applicant shall make written application to the
Board of Supervisors, and a permit for such opening shall be issued only
after express approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 115. Permittee Responsibilities for Future Relocation of Work.
[Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the
alignment or grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change
or relocate all or any part of the structures covered by this permit which
interfere with the improvement of the roadway at its own cost and expense.
§ 116. Conditions for Laying and Extending Utility Lines. [Ord. 80,
5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
No new water, sewer, stream or gas main or electric, telephone or other
utility line shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no such existing main
or line shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Township until such
plan therefor shall have been first filed with the Township and such plan,
and the exact location of such main or line, approved by him. The Township
Manager shall not approve the locating of any such main or line at a depth
of less than 30 inches from the surface of the street unless he shall be
convicted that locating the same at a depth of more than 30 inches from the
surface is impossible or impractical.
§ 113 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 117
1:403
§ 117. Bond Required. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147,
11/26/1985]
No company, corporation or association shall dig up any street or alley
without first giving to the Township a bond, with some acceptable trust
or surety company, as surety in the sum of $10,000, conditioned for the
faithful performance of these provisions and also for any and all damages,
claims, demands, suits, costs and counsel fees occasioned or arising from
the digging up, opening or closing of said streets and alleys.
§ 118. Payment for Work Done by Township. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as
revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Payment for all work done by the Township under the provisions hereof
shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions
hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the
Township. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall
be collectible by the Township by an action in assumpsit or in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 119. Penalties. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985; as amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 120. Applicability. [Ord. 80, 5/28/1974; as revised by Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
The provisions of this Part shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs.
§ 117 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 120
1:404
Part 2
CURB CUTS AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
§ 201. Width of Driveways. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
All private driveways hereafter constructed across any pavement shall be of
a width not less than eight feet, and the curb shall be curved back to the
street edge of the footwalk on a radius of 1 1/2 feet.
§ 202. Permit Required. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Before any private driveway may be constructed across a sidewalk and
before any curb cut may be made, a permit shall be obtained from the
Township of North Strabane. All driveways shall be laid according to
specifications furnished by the Township at the time the permit is granted.
§ 203. Fee. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The fee for a driveway or curb cut permit shall be as set by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
§ 204. Sidewalk Not to be Disturbed. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
All paved portions of the sidewalk must not be disturbed, and the height
and grade of same must remain the same as before the driveway was
constructed. The balance of the pavement shall remain the same height and
grade as before the construction of the driveway.
§ 205. Rectification of Improper Work. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
In case any person shall construct a driveway or a curb cut and shall not
conform to the requirements of this Part, the Board of Supervisors may
order such person, firm or corporation to remove the improper work and
replace the same in compliance with this Part. Notice to remove and replace
improper work shall be given by registered or certified mail and shall state
that the person, firm or corporation shall have 15 days from receipt of the
notice to comply therewith. Upon noncompliance, the Municipality may do
or cause the requested repairs to be done and may levy the cost of its work
on such owner as a property lien to be collected in any manner provided by
law.
§ 206. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 206
1:405
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 206 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 206
1:406
Part 3
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION SAFETY MEASURES
§ 301. Safety Precautions to be Used During Sidewalk Construction.
[Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
When any person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, alter, repair,
roof, unroof or remove any building or perform any other work on any
building fronting on any street in the Township, whereby a risk may be
incurred by persons passing the same, it shall be the duty of the owner,
lessee, contractor, person or persons performing any work on such building
to erect a good and substantial covering over the pavement, sidewalk or
footway in front of such building, of such elevation so as not to interfere
with the free use of such pavement, sidewalk or footway.
§ 302. Temporary Bridges During Excavation. [Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
Whenever, in excavating for walls, cellars, foundations or vaults, or the
making of other improvements, on the streets and within the limits
mentioned in § 301 hereof, it becomes necessary to excavate the pavement,
sidewalk or footway, the owner, lessee, contractor or other person in charge
of the work shall, before commencing any such excavation, cause to be
erected a good and substantial bridge not less than four feet in width nor
more than four feet in height, with steps at each end, a banister on the
side next to the street, and a tight board fence or wall on the side next to
the cellar or excavation, at least seven feet high, so as to facilitate the free
and safe use of such sidewalk or bridge by pedestrians. Such owner, lessee,
contractor or builder shall also keep the said sidewalk or bridge sufficiently
lighted at night.
§ 303. Approval. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
All work done under the provisions of this Part shall be approved by the
Township.
§ 304. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304
1:407

Part 4
CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS
§ 401. Regulations on Construction and Width of Streets. [Ord. 147,
11/26/1985]
From and after the passage and approval of this Part, the following
regulations shall govern the width and construction of all streets and
highways in the Township of North Strabane, whether the same be built
and constructed by the Township or constructed by private persons, firms
or corporations in subdivisions within the limits of the Township of North
Strabane.
A. Grades. The street grades shall be submitted to the Township Engineer
for approval.
B. Preparation of streets for paving.
(1) Where slopes, fills, embankments, walls or culverts are necessary
and required, the same shall be presented to the Township
Engineer for approval.
(2) Sanitary sewers shall not be constructed or laid until a permit shall
be secured from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and plans
approved by the Township Engineer.
(3) Storm sewers shall be constructed under the supervision of the
Township Engineer only after the plans, size of pipe, pipe material,
etc., have been approved by him.
(4) All water, gas, steam pipes or conduits shall be laid prior to street
construction, and the laterals, branches or extensions of same shall
be extended to the inside lot line of the curb under the supervision
of the Township Engineer.
C. Street width. The paved surface of streets between curbs shall not be
less than 22 feet.
D. Street construction.
(1) Where bituminous paving shall be permitted for use as street
surfacing, it shall be in combination with reinforced cement
concrete; an eighteen-inch reinforced cement concrete gutter shall
be laid on each side of said street adjoining and inside the
reinforced cement concrete wedge or box-type curb.
(2) All newly constructed curbs shall be the wedge or box type, and
constructed of reinforced concrete or shall be the extruded type
constructed of precast concrete and securely fastened to the
ground.
(3) All streets shall be constructed with the materials and in
accordance with the methods and requirements as set forth under
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:409
§ 402. Manner of Assessment of Work Costs. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Every public highway, street, avenue, lane or alley or part thereof and the
sidewalks thereof, when included as part of the improvement, the setting
of curbstones and the providing for the drainage thereof, may be graded,
paved and otherwise improved; and notice of payment of the cost and
expense of the same shall be given to the owners of the real estate bounding
and abutting along the line of said improvement. Said cost and expense,
upon the abutting real estate, shall be assessed in accordance with the footfront
or benefit rule as is provided by law.
§ 403. Time Limit for Payment of Assessments. [Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
Any assessment authorized under this Part shall be paid either in full,
within 60 days after notice of such assessment shall have been given to the
party assessed, or in four equal semiannual installments, the first of which
shall be due and payable within 60 days after such notice. All assessments,
whether paid in full or in installments, shall be payable to the Township
Treasurer.
§ 404. Collection of Delinquent Assessments or Installments. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
If any assessment authorized under this Part shall not have been paid in
full, or if an installment payment of one-fourth the total amount of such
assessment shall not have been made within 60 days after notice shall have
been given to the party assessed, the entire assessment shall be due, and it
shall be the duty of the Solicitor to collect the same, with interest from the
date of the completion of the improvement, in any manner provided by law.
§ 405. Installment Payment Procedure. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
In case the party against whom an assessment shall have been made under
this Part shall have paid an installment of one-fourth of the total amount
thereof within 30 days after notice of such assessment, such party shall
pay the remaining three-fourths of such assessment in three subsequent
semiannual installments, the first of which shall be due within six months
after the first installment became due, and the remaining installments shall
become due at six-month intervals thereafter. All such installments shall
bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum, commencing 30 days
after the notice of total assessment referred to in § 402.
current specifications of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
E. Bonds. A labor and material and a maintenance bond, for a period of
two years, shall be furnished by every contractor or subdivision owner
or owners in favor of the Township prior to all street construction.
§ 401 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 406
1:410
§ 406. Property Owners to Lay Branch Pipes and Connect with
Sewer, Water and Gas Lines Before Street Improvements. [Ord. 147,
11/26/1985]
Whenever the Township of North Strabane is ready to pave or improve
any street, or part thereof, the owners of all properties, improved or
unimproved, abutting upon such street or part thereof, upon 10 days'
notice, are hereby required, at their own expense, before the paving or
improvement thereof, to connect their respective properties with all sewer,
water and gas lines laid along said street, by laying branch pipes from said
main lines to the curb.
§ 407. Municipality May Do Work and Collect Costs. [Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
Upon failure of the owners of property abutting streets to be paved or
improved to comply with the notice to make house connections with utility
pipes, the Township may do the same or cause the same to be done and
may levy the cost of its work plus 10% of the total cost on such owner as a
property lien to be collected in any manner provided by law.
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:411

Part 5
STREET ADOPTION
§ 501. Policy. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The Township of North Strabane hereby adopts the policy of accepting as
many existing roads and/or streets as is possible into the road system.
§ 502. Investigation of Existing Private Roads. [Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
Where a given road which has been heretofore classified or referred to as
a "private road" is to be considered for acceptance into the road system,
an initial investigation shall be conducted by the Township to determine
whether or not the road has ever been formally accepted by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors; whether the road or street is part of a subdivision
which has been recorded in the Recorder's Officer of Washington County
with dedications and/or releases of damages, or whether the road or street
has, in fact, been used on a regular basis by the public, giving rise to an
acceptance by implication and by public use. After this investigation has
been completed, a recommendation shall be made as to whether or not
the road can be incorporated into the road system. If the investigation
establishes that legal impediments exist which prevent the acceptance of
the road or street or which may give rise to damages in the event the
road or street is accepted, the Board of Supervisors may, if it feels such
action is appropriate, authorize and allocate funds necessary to acquire the
necessary consents, waivers, rights-of-way, or releases which will alleviate
the legal impediments and enable the Township to accept the road or street
into the road system.
§ 503. Petition. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Must precede acceptance procedure. The Township shall not consider
accepting a private road into the road system, effectuating the procedure
outlined in § 502, unless it shall receive a petition which requests the
acceptance of the street involved into the road system and which was
executed by a majority of the property owners who abut on the street or
portion of street which is being considered for acceptance.
§ 504. Justification of Expenditure of Municipal Funds. [Ord. 147,
11/26/1985]
Even though the acceptance of private roads as public roads may ultimately
result in the expenditure of Township funds, the overall objective is of such
importance to the growth of Township that the Board of Supervisors shall
be authorized to allocate from the general funds such amounts as may be
necessary to implement the project and such funds may be used to acquire
deeds of dedication, easements and rights-of-way, to obtain releases and
waivers of damage in order to remove the legal impediments preventing the
acceptance of a given street, or for any other purpose so required.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 505
1:413
§ 505. Investigation; Estimate of Costs; Report by Solicitor. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
The Township shall treat the proposed street or road which is to be
incorporated into the road system on an individual basis and shall
investigate the facts surrounding the issue of whether the Township has
a legal basis for accepting the road and/or street into its road system.
The Board of Supervisors shall then request the Solicitor to make a
recommendation as to the appropriate legal approach which can be utilized
to accomplish this objective, together with an estimate of the possible
damages and costs involved in taking over specific individual roads and/or
streets involved.
§ 506. Decision by Board of Supervisors. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Upon receipt of the information, secured pursuant to § 505 above, the Board
of Supervisors shall make a definitive decision whether, in light of the legal
problems and the estimated costs involved, the road and/or street shall be
further considered for acceptance. If an affirmative decision is reached, the
Board of Supervisors shall establish the procedure to be followed and shall
authorize the expenditure of such funds as may be necessary to carry out
this procedure.
§ 507. Review by Engineer and Solicitor. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
In arriving at its decision, the Board of Supervisors may authorize the
Township Engineer and the Township Solicitor to review each proposed
road, considering, among other things, the costs of improving the street
and/or road and of acquiring the necessary deeds of dedication, easements,
rights-of-way, releases and waivers of damages.
§ 508. Cost Responsibility. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Whenever appropriate, all of the costs of accepting the road and/or street
into the road system, including but not necessarily limited to the legal fees,
the engineering charges, the costs of securing and recording appropriate
deeds of dedication, easements, rights-of-way, releases and waivers of
damages, together with such other administrative expenses as may result,
shall be apportioned equitably against all involved property owners
pursuant to law and consistent with the Township's established policy. If this
is not possible because of legal impediments or otherwise not feasible, then
and in that event, such amounts as may be necessary may be appropriated
out of the general fund to accomplish these objectives.
§ 509. Implied Acceptance by Public User. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
When the acceptance of a particular road and/or street may be based upon
an implied acceptance by public user, the appropriate municipal officials
shall determine such facts as are available, and the Board of Supervisors
shall either hold a public hearing or place the matter on the agenda of
one of its regular meetings, at which time documentation and evidence
§ 505 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 509
1:414
may be introduced into the record on the issue. Township residents and
interested parties may offer such evidence as appropriate, and an overall
determination shall be made as to whether there has been an implied
dedication of acceptance by public user which will authorize legal
acceptance of the road and/or street into the road system.
§ 510. Acceptance Procedure. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The procedure which shall be adopted for considering whether to accept
a particular street and/or road into the road system shall conform in all
respects, except as otherwise specifically outlined herein, to the procedure
utilized in considering curative amendments submitted to the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to § 609.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 55 P.S. § 10609.1 et seq., as far as hearings, the production of
documents, the taking of testimony and the submission of evidence are
concerned.
§ 511. Record of Testimony. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
In the event a hearing is held, or the matter is placed on the agenda,
a verbatim record will be made of all testimony and comments, and all
documentation shall be appropriately marked as exhibits and kept in a
separate file pertaining to the road and/or street involved.
§ 512. Liquid Fuel Tax Requirements to be Met. [Ord. 147, 11/26/
1985]
Any street, road or part thereof, dedicated for acceptance under this Part
into the road system, shall comply with the minimum requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation covering the allocation of liquid
fuel tax receipts and the standards promulgated therewith.
§ 513. Improvements. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The Township of North Strabane, upon appropriate action by the Board
of Supervisors, may grade, curb, gutter, pave or otherwise improve with
suitable materials any public street, road, or part thereof, laid out and
opened in the Township, accepted by formal resolution or declared in
appropriate proceeding to be a public road by virtue of public user. Such
work may be done by Township employees or by contract, as the Board of
Supervisors shall determine. No street, road, or any part thereof shall be
improved under the provisions of this Part except by petitions of a majority
of the owners of property abutting on the street or road or part thereof
proposed to be improved.
§ 514. Improvement Cost Assessments. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The costs and expenses of any such improvement may be collected from the
owners of the real estate abutting on such street, road, or part thereof by
an equal assessment on the feet front. Such assessment shall be estimated
by the Township Engineer. If this standard of assessment is impracticable
§ 509 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 514
1:415
or for any reason inequitable, the Township Engineer shall adopt such other
method of assessment as may be legally acceptable and equitable in the
premises.
§ 515. Utility Line Considerations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Prior to improving any street, road, or part thereof, an investigation shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer to determine the possible existence of
utility lines under the street, road, or part thereof proposed to be improved,
and the said street, road, or part thereof shall not be improved unless or
until appropriate steps are taken to either remove the utility lines or to
otherwise alleviate the problem in a manner satisfactory to the Township
Engineer.
§ 516. Additional Regulations. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
The Board of Supervisors shall also establish such other procedures and
adopt such regulations as may be appropriate in the premises to effectuate
the general intent of this Part.
§ 514 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 516
1:416
Part 6
DRIVING OVER CURBS AND/OR SIDEWALKS
§ 601. Procedure for Driving on Curbs or Sidewalks. [Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to drive
or cause to be driven any vehicle on, over and across any curb or sidewalk
before first obtaining permission of the abutting property owner and the
placing of a proper platform, covering or other device for the protection of
the sidewalk and curb.
§ 602. Report Required of Damage to Curbs or Sidewalks. [Ord.
147, 11/26/1985]
Any depression, break or damage caused to any curb or sidewalk by any
vehicle or by any other agency shall be reported to the Township within 24
hours after the damage has occurred, and emergency repairs must be made
by the property owner, tenant or agent within 48 hours after such report.
§ 603. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:417

Part 7
BEFOULING STREETS
§ 701. Proper Operation of Vehicles. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
Any vehicle transporting or carrying soil, sand, stone, dirt, debris, refuse,
litter or other substance of any kind, over streets, alleys and thoroughfares
shall be so operated as to prevent said materials from being scattered,
spilled, dropped or blown from the vehicle or from the wheels, tires, or
undercarriage thereof.
§ 702. Befouling of Streets Unlawful. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985]
It shall be unlawful to scatter, spill, dump or drop, or permit to be scattered,
spilled, dumped or dropped, any soil, sand, stone, dirt, debris, refuse, litter
or other substance of any kind, from any vehicle or from the wheels, tires,
or undercarriage thereof, upon streets, alleys and thoroughfares.
§ 703. Penalties. [Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; as amended by Ord. 240,
10/28/1997]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a District Justice in
the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this Part continues or each section of this Part which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 703
1:419

Part 8
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 801. Purpose. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
The purpose of this Right-of-Way Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as "this
Part") is to:
§ 802. Singular Point of Contact. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
§ 803. Definitions. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
APPLICANT — The person who has applied for a right-of-way permit or a
construction permit.
APPLICATION — The form, prescribed by the Township, which the applicant
must complete in order to obtain a right-of-way or construction permit.
CONSTRUCTION — The building, erection, or installation in, on, over or
under a right-of-way. It does not include, as part of the ordinary course of
A. Assist North Strabane Township (hereinafter referred to as the
"Township") in managing its public rights-of-way with respect to
telecommunications services providers in accordance with applicable
law.
B. Regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, maintenance, repair and removal of a telecommunications
system in, upon, along, across, above, over, under or in any manner
connected with the public rights-of-way of the Township as now or in
the future may exist.
C. Provide the Township with appropriate compensation for occupation
and use of the Township's rights-of-way for a telecommunications
system and for the cost of regulating providers of telecommunications
services on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis
consistent with this Part and applicable law.
1. The Township Manager, or the Township Manager's designated
representative, shall serve as the single point of contact within the
Township for all persons regulated under this Part.
2. The Township Manager shall coordinate all contacts with other
Township departments as necessary to facilitate issuance of any and all
permits required by the North Strabane Code of Ordinances.
3. The Township Manager shall coordinate the preparation of all policies
and forms as necessary for the implementation of this Part with the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 803
1:421
business, maintenance or repair of existing aerial cables or equipment in a
right-of-way or a single line extension from equipment in the right-of-way.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — The written authorization granted by the
Township to an applicant in order to perform construction in a right-of-way.
EMERGENCY — A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life
or health or significant loss of property.
EQUIPMENT — Any tangible property located or proposed to be located
in a right-of-way, including but not limited to wires, lines, cables, conduits,
pipes, supporting structures or other facilities.
MAINTENANCE — Work of a minor nature that will keep an existing
condition from failure or decline.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person who has obtained a right-of-way permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other business entity.
RESTORE or RESTORATION — The process by which a right-of-way is
returned to a state that is as good or better as its condition before
construction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT or PERMIT — A written authorization granted by
the Township to an applicant for use of the rights-of-way in the Township
for wires, lines, cables, conduits, pipes, supporting structures and other
facilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface and space in, on
and above any real property in which the Township has an interest in law or
in equity, including but not limited to any public street, boulevard, avenue,
road, highway, easement, freeway, alley, court or any other place, other than
real property owned in fee by the Township.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the users choosing, without change
in form or content of the information sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The offering of
telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the
facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A system that offers
telecommunication services.
UNDERGROUND EQUIPMENT — all equipment that is located wholly or
partially underneath a right-of-way.
§ 804. Requirement for a Right-of-Way Permit. [Ord. 309, 5/23/
2006]
1. No person shall enter upon or occupy any right-of-way for the purpose
of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a
telecommunications system without first having obtained a right-of-way
§ 803 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 804
1:422
§ 805. Application for a Right-of-Way Permit. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
permit. Any person maintaining or operating a telecommunications
system as of the effective date of this Part shall also obtain a right-ofway
permit.
2. Before a right-of-way permit is issued, the holder of or applicant for a
right-of-way permit shall have applied for any and all regulatory
approvals, permits or authorizations from the appropriate federal and
state authorities, if required. Upon the request of the Township, the
applicant shall submit written evidence of its applications for or receipt
of all such approvals, permits or authorizations.
3. Nothing in this Part shall be construed as a waiver of any other
ordinances or regulations of the Township or the Township's right to
require prospective or current right-of-way permit holders to secure
and remit payment for any and all other required permits or
authorizations.
1. A right-of-way permit shall only be granted after an applicant has
completed an application in the form that has been prescribed by the
Township, which form may be revised from time to time. Upon request,
an applicant shall be provided with a copy of the then current
application for a right-of-way permit. The application shall request
information regarding the applicant's proposed or actual physical use
and occupation of the rights-of-way. The applicant shall provide specific
information regarding the equipment it proposes to place or currently
maintains in the rights-of-way. If the completed application does not
fully provide such requested information, the Township may request
such additional information as is necessary to enable it to make a
determination regarding the physical use and occupation of the rightsof-
way by the applicant. The application may request less information
from a permit holder applying for a renewal of a right-of-way permit.
2. Upon submission of a fully completed application to the Township and
the accompanying fee, the Township shall review the application as
follows. The Township shall grant or deny such applications within 60
days. If the Township denies the application, it will provide a written
response to the applicant explaining the basis for denial. If the
Township fails to grant or reject such application within the time period
specified above, the application shall be deemed approved. In each
case, the Township shall review the application to determine whether
such use would have a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to
the rights-of-way or would place an undue physical burden on the
rights-of-way.
3. In considering an application, the Township may use such outside
experts as it deems necessary to assist in determining whether the use
proposed by the applicant would have a detrimental effect on the rightof-
way or the health, safety and/or welfare of the residents of the
Township. In the event the Township deems it necessary to employ an
§ 804 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 805
1:423
§ 806. Duration and Suspension of Right-of-Way Permits. [Ord. 309,
5/23/2006]
outside expert or experts to advise the Township with respect to a
particular application, the reasonable costs of such expert or experts
shall be borne by the applicant.
1. The right-of-way permit shall be issued for a period of one year. Permit
Holders shall apply for a renewal of a right-of-way permit at least 60
days prior to its expiration. The Township may suspend such right-ofway
permit in the event any one or more of the following has occurred:
A. The permit holder shall have caused damage to Township property
or the right-of-way without the prior consent of the Township
(except in the case of an emergency) and without completing
proper restoration.
B. The permit holder or the permit holder's equipment in the right-ofway
has had a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the
permit holder's use of the rights-of-way.
C. The permit holder failed to pay any of the fees required under this
Part.
D. The permit holder failed to comply with construction standards in
accordance with the provisions contained in § 811 below.
E. The permit holder failed to indemnify, hold harmless and insure the
Township in accordance with the provisions contained in § 812
below.
F. The permit holder failed to procure and/or maintain a performance
or construction bond for the benefit of the Township in accordance
with the provisions contained in § 815 below.
G. The permit holder provided false, incomplete or misleading
information on the rights-of-way or construction permit application.
2. If the Township has reason to believe that one or more of the above
events has occurred, it shall notify the permit holder in writing. The
permit holder shall have 30 days to cure the violation, unless the
Township reasonably determines that the event is an emergency, in
which case the Township may impose a shorter time period to cure the
violation.
3. If the permit holder fails to cure the violation within the specified time
period, the Township shall be permitted to immediately suspend the
right-of-way permit. A suspension shall be brought to the attention of
the Board of Supervisors at its next meeting, at which time the Board
shall be permitted to uphold or withdraw the suspension. The permit
holder shall be provided an opportunity to be heard at such meeting.
§ 805 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 807
1:424
§ 807. Requirement for a Construction Permit. [Ord. 309, 5/23/
2006]
§ 808. Notification Requirements. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
Except in cases of emergency, before commencing any activity in the rightsof-
way that is expected to last more than 45 hours in duration, a person
must notify the Township of the activity and the general nature of the
project. The "activity" referred to in this section pertains to any activity,
including but not limited to construction or maintenance activity.
§ 809. Fees and Expenses. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
1. Except in the case of an emergency, before commencing any
construction in the rights-of-way, a person shall apply for and obtain a
construction permit. A construction permit shall only be granted after
an applicant has completed an application in the form that has been
prescribed by the Township, which form may be revised from time to
time. Upon request, an applicant shall be provided with a copy of the
current application for a construction permit. Such application shall
request detailed plans of the proposed construction activity. Such plans
shall describe:
A. The type of construction activity.
B. The equipment proposed to be installed or erected.
C. The specific locations of the construction activity.
D. The scheduled beginning and ending dates of all planned
construction.
2. Upon submission of all such information required in Subsection 1
above, the Township shall review such information and either grant or
deny a construction permit within 60 days. If the Township denies the
construction permit application, the Township will provide a written
response to the applicant explaining the basis of the denial. If the
Township fails to grant or deny the construction permit within the time
period specified above, the application shall be deemed granted. In
each case, the Township shall review the application to determine
whether such construction would have a detrimental impact on public
safety as it relates to the rights-of-way. The Township may impose
conditions on the construction permit regulating the times, locations,
and manner of construction to preserve effective traffic flow, prevent
hazardous road conditions and/or minimize noise impacts.
1. Each new and renewing applicant for a right-of-way permit shall
include with its application an application fee, which shall be
established by the Board of Supervisors by separate resolution and
which may be adjusted from time to time. This fee shall be directly
related to the Township's costs in reviewing the application (excluding
expert costs) and managing the rights-of-way with respect to each
§ 807 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 809
1:425
§ 810. Management of Rights-of-Way. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
permit holder. Such costs in managing the rights-of-way include but
are not limited to costs of maintaining the rights-of-way; costs of
degradation of streets and right-of-way way property; administrative
costs related to the rights-of-way; traffic control costs pertaining to
work in the rights-of-way; and inspection costs. This fee will not be
refunded in the event the application is denied. If the application is
granted, the application fee will apply to the full term of the right-ofway
permit of one year.
2. Each applicant for a construction permit shall include with its
application an application fee, which shall be established by the Board
of Supervisors by separate resolution and which may be adjusted from
time to time. This fee shall be directly related to the Township's costs in
reviewing the application and determining time, place and manner
restrictions on the construction activity. If the application for a
construction permit is denied, this fee shall not be refunded. If the
application is granted, then the applicant shall also pay, within 30 days
of the presentation of a statement, the Township's actual costs directly
related to the applicant's construction project, based on the hourly rate
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Such actual costs
include but are not limited to costs of disruption and rerouting of traffic,
inspection costs and administrative costs. A construction permit shall
apply to a specific construction project in the Township, and each
succeeding construction project shall require the issuance of a separate
construction permit.
3. Extraordinary expenses. In addition to the fees set forth above, a permit
holder shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, any
extraordinary or unusual expenses reasonably incurred by the
Township as a result of the permit holder's use of the rights-of-way,
provided that the Township notifies the permit holder of the expected
expenses prior to them being incurred and provides the permit holder
with an opportunity to mitigate such expenses. Examples of
extraordinary or unusual costs include but are not limited to the cost of
obtaining and operating a backhoe, dump truck or other heavy
equipment used to repair the right-of-way, overtime or special pay for
public safety personnel and/or the cost of hazardous waste cleanup or
other emergency services. The statement of such expenses presented to
the permit holder shall be directly related to the Township's actual
costs.
4. In the event that payment of any of the fees identified above is not made
upon submission of the application or by the date due, the applicant or
permit holder shall pay a late payment penalty of simple interest at 10%
annual percentage rate of the total amount past due. Such penalty shall
be in lieu of any other monetary penalty. Acceptance of payment under
this section shall not in any way limit or waive the Township's right to
suspend or terminate the permit according to the terms of this Part.
§ 809 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 810
1:426
§ 811. Construction Standards. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
1. The Township shall have the right to limit the placement of new or
additional equipment in the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to
reasonably accommodate all requests to occupy and use the rights-ofway.
The Township shall consider requests for occupying and using the
rights-of-way in the order of receipt of fully completed applications for
right-of-way permits. The Township shall strive, to the extent possible,
to accommodate all requests but shall be guided by the physical
condition of the right-of-way and whether such use would have a
detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the right-of-way.
2. The Township shall have the right to monitor the telecommunications
systems and the equipment related thereto located in the rights-of-way
in order to prevent interference between and among such systems and
equipment.
3. A permit holder shall allow the Township to make inspections of any
part of the permit holders telecommunications system located in the
rights-of-way at any time, upon three days notice, or in case of an
emergency, upon demand.
1. Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall disturb any
pavement, sidewalk or other public property in order to perform any
underground activities, the permit holder will fully comply by
registering with Pennsylvania's "One Call" system pursuant to 73 P.S.
§ 176 et seq. Such permit holder shall provide the Township with
information showing planned locations and reference points for
equipment to be installed. Each permit holder shall perform
construction activity in a manner consistent and in compliance with the
detailed plans it submitted to the Township pursuant to § 807,
Subsection 1, above and all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
2. Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall cause
damage to the right-of-way or to Township property in the right-of-way,
the permit holder shall restore such right-of-way or property within 30
days, weather permitting. In the event that the permit holder fails to
restore the right-of-way or Township property to its former condition,
the Township may repair such damage and assess all such costs to the
permit holder.
3. The telecommunications system shall not endanger or interfere with
the safety of persons or property within the Township. All operating,
maintenance, construction and repair personnel shall be thoroughly
trained in the safe use of all equipment and in the safe operation of
vehicles. Such personnel shall follow all safety procedures required by
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. The permit
holder shall routinely inspect and maintain all areas of the
telecommunications system so that conditions that could develop into
safety hazards shall be corrected before they become a hazard.
§ 810 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 811
1:427
§ 812. Indemnification and Insurance. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
4. Except in the case of an emergency, at least three days prior to the
commencement of any construction activity, permit holder shall notify
nearby residents of such construction activity in a manner that is
satisfactory to the Township. The name of the permit holder shall be
clearly disclosed to such residents.
5. All construction activity shall be performed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner and in close coordination with public utilities
serving the Township, following accepted industry construction
procedures and practices.
6. Any vehicle used for construction activity in the Township by the permit
holder, including vehicles of any contractor or subcontractor of the
permit holder, shall prominently display a company logo. Any employee
or agent of the permit holder, including any contractor of subcontractor,
who personally visits any residential dwelling in the Township shall
display a photo identification badge.
7. All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundles with due
respect for engineering considerations.
8. All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed underground
where required by municipal ordinance or regulation, consistent with
the same requirement being imposed on all other similarly situated
companies, including public utilities.
1. A permit holder shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising out of the
permit holder's use or occupancy of the rights- of-way. A permit holder
shall defend any actions or proceedings against the Township in which
it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage
was caused by the permit holder's use or occupancy of the rights-ofway.
The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall
include but not be limited to the obligation to pay judgments, injuries,
liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification. A permit holder shall
not be required to indemnify and hold the Township harmless for claims
caused by the Township's negligence, gross negligence or willful
misconduct.
2. A permit holder shall, at all times during the life of a permit, carry and
require its subcontractors to carry liability, property damage, workers'
disability, and vehicle insurance issued to the permit holder by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in an amount and form acceptable to the Township as set
§ 811 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 812
1:428
§ 813. Reporting Requirements. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
§ 814. Sale or Transfer of Rights of Permit Holder. [Ord. 309, 5/23/
2006]
A right-of-way permit may be transferred or assigned, upon 30 days' written
notice to the Township, provided that the transferee/assignee agrees, in
writing, prior to the transfer or assignment to comply with all of the
obligations and requirements contained in this Part.
§ 815. Performance Bond. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
forth in the permit. A permit holder shall name the Township as an
additional insured on its liability insurance policies, for whom defense
will be provided as to all such coverages. All required insurance
coverage shall provide for 30 days' notice to the Township in the
event of material alteration or cancellation of such coverage prior to
the effective date of such material alteration or cancellation. A permit
holder shall provide appropriate insurance certificates to the Township
within 30 days after the execution of a permit and annually with an
application for a renewal permit. Any certificate of insurance presented
to the Township shall verify that the Applicant is insured against claims
for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the applicant's use and occupancy of the rightsof-
Way.
3. In lieu of the certificate of insurance required under Subsection 2, proof
of self-insuring insuring status that demonstrates adequate financial
resources to defend and cover any and all potential claims will be
acceptable to the Township.
1. A permit holder shall annually provide the Township, upon application
for renewal of the permit or upon request, a current map of the
locations of its existing equipment and facilities and a summary of all
additions and deletions of equipment and facilities in the rights-of-way,
unless no changes have occurred in the previous year. If no changes
have occurred in the previous year, the permit holder shall so inform
the Township in writing.
2. A permit holder shall submit to the Township such reasonable
information directly related to the permit holder's use and occupation
of the rights-of-way as the Township may request. All information
provided to the Township shall be maintained by the Township as
proprietary and confidential if such information is designated in good
faith as such prior to the time it is provided to the Township.
1. All persons submitting a request for a permit to construct or maintain a
telecommunications system in accordance herewith shall file with their
request a bond, solely for the protection of the Township, with a surety
company or trust company as surety in the amount of $25,000, to
protect the Township from any and all damages or costs suffered or
§ 812 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 815
1:429
§ 816. Termination. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
§ 817. Removal. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
incurred by the Township as a result thereof, including but not limited
to attorneys' fees and costs of any action or proceeding, the full amount
of compensation, indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of
any property, or other costs resulting from a default. The bond shall
be a continuing obligation during the entire term of any right-of-way
permit or construction permit issued in accordance herewith.
2. None of the provisions of this § 815, nor any bond accepted by the
Township pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the Township
thereunder shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or
limit the liability of the permit holder under this Part or any permit
issued in accordance herewith or for damages either to the full amount
of the bond or otherwise.
1. In addition to all other rights and powers reserved by the Township, the
Township reserves the right to terminate a permit and all rights and
privileges of a permit holder for any of the following reasons:
A. A permit holder fails, after 30 days prior written notice, to comply
with any of the material provisions of the permit or this Part.
B. A permit holder attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in
its conduct or relations with the Township under the permit.
C. The Township condemns all of the property of a permit holder
within the Township by the lawful exercise of eminent domain.
D. The permit holder abandons the telecommunication system.
2. A termination shall be declared only by a written decision of the Board
of Supervisors after an appropriate public hearing that shall afford the
permit holder due process and a full opportunity to be heard and to
respond to any notice of grounds to terminate in accordance with
applicable law. All notice requirements shall be met by providing the
permit holder at least 60 days' prior written notice of a public hearing
concerning the proposed termination. Such notice shall state grounds
for termination. The Board of Supervisors, after a public hearing and
upon finding the existence of grounds for termination, may either
declare the permit terminated or excuse such grounds upon a showing
by the permit holder of mitigating circumstances or good cause for the
existence of such grounds.
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permit, if the permit is not
renewed, the permit holder shall, upon 60 days' prior written notice to
the permit holder, commence to remove its equipment from the rightsof-
way and shall restore said areas. If such removal is not completed
within six months of such notice, the Township may deem any property
not removed as abandoned, and the Township may remove it at the
§ 815 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 817
1:430
§ 818. Enforcement. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
Any person who has violated any of the terms of this Part shall, upon being
found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township,
pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
The District Justice shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought
pursuant to this Part. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied
or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the appropriate rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the
person violating this Part to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation
until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation
by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for the violation of this Part shall be paid over to
North Strabane Township.
§ 819. Police Powers. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
The Township, by granting any permit under this Part, does not waive,
lessen, impair or surrender the lawful police powers vested in the Township
under applicable federal, state and local laws pertaining to the regulation
or use of the rights-of-way.
former permit holder's expense. In the event that the permit holder
installed and/or operated any underground conduit or pipe which is six
inches or more in diameter, the permit holder shall fill said conduit or
pipe with material in a manner satisfactory to Township.
2. During the term of the permit, if the permit holder decides to abandon
or no longer use all or part of its telecommunications system, it shall
provide the Township with written notice of its abandonment at least 30
days prior to such decision, which notice shall describe the equipment
and its location.
3. The Township may request the permit holder to declare the permit
holder's intention as to abandonment to all or part of the
telecommunications system during the term of the permit. The permit
holder shall respond to such request within 90 days, or such portions of
the telecommunications system shall be deemed abandoned.
4. The Township shall have the right to require the permit holder to
commence to remove the abandoned telecommunications system, in
part or in total, upon 60 days' prior written notice to the permit holder.
If such removal is not completed within six months of such notice, the
Township may remove it at the permit holder's expense.
§ 817 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 820
1:431
§ 820. Equal Application. [Ord. 309, 5/23/2006]
The provisions of this Part shall be imposed upon and enforced against all
persons requiring a permit for the provision of telecommunications services
or construction of a telecommunications system within the Township.
§ 820 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 820
1:432
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 820 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 820
1:433

Part 1
TITLE, SCOPE AND PURPOSE
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 101]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "North Strabane
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 102]
This Chapter is adopted to achieve the following purposes:
§ 103. Grant of Power. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 103]
A. To comply with the requirements of Act 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
B. To promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
residents.
C. To assure that the arrangement of each subdivision or mobile home
park conforms to the Township's Comprehensive Plan and furthers the
harmonious and orderly development of the Township.
D. To guarantee that streets in and bordering each subdivision or mobile
home park are coordinated with the Township circulation system and
are of such widths, grades and locations as to accommodate
prospective traffic and facilitate fire protection.
E. To make certain that sewage disposal and water supply utilities are
provided in sufficient capacity to serve future needs in and near each
subdivision or land development.
F. To provide easements of adequate size and in the proper locations for
storm drainage and public utilities.
G. To safeguard land which is subject to flooding, periodic high water table
or subsidence from uses that would aggravate these circumstances.
H. To prevent erosion damage, unnecessary destruction of natural plant
material or unnecessary movement of earth.
I. To establish a pattern for development of mobile home parks that will
insure maximum living conditions for park residents, as well as protect
surrounding properties.
J. To assure the residents of the Township that all subdivisions, land
developments and mobile home park plans will be approved based on
an established public policy, objectively and uniformly enforced.
K. To provide a precise, simple procedure for review of subdivision, land
development and mobile home park plan proposals by the Township and
ease the process of conveyance of title of tracts of land.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:435
§ 104. Application of Regulations. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 104]
1. Section 501 of Article V, "Subdivision and Land Development," of Act
247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended by Act
170 of 1988 (53 P.S. § 101011 et seq.) allows municipalities to regulate
subdivision and land development within their boundaries.
2. The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to administer, enforce
and amend this Chapter, subject to the review and recommendation of
the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures prescribed
by Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended
by Act 170 of 1988 (53 P.S. § 10101, et seq.).
3. Any challenges by a landowner to the validity or interpretation of any
portion of this Chapter, and any appeals from disapproval of a proposed
subdivision, land development or mobile home park plan by a
landowner, shall be taken directly to the County Court of Common
Pleas. Any challenge by any aggrieved party, other than a landowner, to
the validity or interpretation of any portion of this Chapter, any appeal
from approval or disapproval of a proposed subdivision land
development or mobile home park plan or any allegation that a
subdivision, land development or mobile home park plan approved by
the Township has not been or is not being carried out in accordance
with the approved documents shall be taken to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the event satisfaction is not gained by appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
1. On and after the effective date of this Chapter, no lot in a subdivision
may be sold, no permit to erect, alter, repair or remove any building
upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued and no
building may be erected in a subdivision or land development or mobile
home placed in a mobile home park unless and until a subdivision plan
or land development plan has been approved by the Board of
Supervisors, after recommendation of the Planning Commission, and
recorded, and until the improvements required by this Chapter have
either been constructed or guaranteed, as required by this Chapter.
2. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
3. This Chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots, plan of lots or
development or mobile home park plan created and recorded prior to
the enactment of this Chapter. Nor is this Chapter intended to annul or
interfere with existing laws or ordinances or with private restrictions
placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or
with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the Township
is a party, except that where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions
upon land and land development than are imposed or required by such
existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, it shall be
§ 103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 104
1:436
§ 105. Types of Subdivision and Land Developments Governed by
this Chapter. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 105]
A subdivision plat, consolidation plat or land development plan approved in
accordance with this Chapter shall be required for:
§ 106. Exclusion of Certain Land Developments. [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 106]
The following types of land developments are hereby excluded from the
provisions of this Chapter governing land developments, as defined herein:
interpreted that they are in addition to the restrictions of such other
existing regulation or ordinance.
A. The subdivision, as defined by this Chapter, of any parcel, lot or tract of
land in the Township.
B. The consolidation, as defined by this Chapter, of two or more lots, tracts
or parcels of land for the purpose of one land development.
C. Any land development consisting of the construction or reconstruction
on a lot for a nonresidential use in which one or more structures will be
constructed for separate ownership or for leasehold.
D. Any land development consisting of two or more principal buildings on
one lot, regardless of the proposed use.
E. Any land development consisting of townhouse units or multifamily
dwellings or commercial, business or industrial structures and/or
buildings in which one or more units or areas will be under separate
and independent ownership or lease including, but not limited to,
condominiums and the like. Plats and plans, including declaration
plans, required by any statute of the Commonwealth for condominium
developments may qualify as a plat or plan pursuant to this Chapter.
F. Any development in which the developer proposes or intends to
construct streets or any other public improvement to be dedicated to
the Township for public use.
A. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or twofamily
dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such
units are intended to be a condominium.
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For
purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or
area used principally as a location for permanent amusement
structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired
§ 104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:437
acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area
have been approved by proper authorities.
§ 106 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 106
1:438
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. General Terms. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 201]
For the purposes of these regulations, certain terms or words used herein
are defined as follows:
§ 202. Specific Terms. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 202]
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the specific
meanings indicated:
ALIGNMENT — The vertical or horizontal line described by bearings, angles
and distances to which a street, road or utility adheres in its passage across,
over or under the land surface.
ALLEY — A private right-of-way not less than 30 feet in width which
provides secondary access to a property or properties and which is not the
only means of access for any property.
AMENDMENT — A change in these regulations, including addition of new
requirements, revision of existing requirements or deletion of obsolete
requirements adopted in accordance with the procedures specified in Part
9 of this Chapter and Act 247, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
AMENITIES BOND — Surety in a form approved by the Township after
recommendation by the Township Solicitor including, but not limited to,
cash, a certified check, an irrevocable letter of credit or a labor and material
payment bond which guarantees the satisfactory completion of
improvements which are not to be dedicated to the public, but which
improvements are required by this Chapter or as a condition of the approval
of an application submitted under this Chapter.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed a completed
application for a subdivision or land development, including his or her heirs,
successors and assigns.
A. The word "person" or "developer" includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an
individual.
B. The present tense includes the future tense.
C. The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes
the singular.
D. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
E. Words generally found in legal terminology not otherwise defined in
this Part shall be considered to have meanings in this Chapter similar to
their generally held definition in a court of law.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:439
APPLICATION — A complete and properly filed formal request in writing
by a person or developer for consideration of a proposal to develop land in
accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
North Strabane, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
BLOCK — An area of land, generally in a plan of lots, or a parcel or tract
bounded by streets, or a combination of streets and public lands, railroad
rights-of-way, waterways, municipal boundaries or any other barrier to the
continuity of development.
BOUNDARY — A line that demarcates the geographic limits of a
municipality, development plan, zoning district or other land area.
BUILDING — Any man-made structure having a roof and walls which are
continuous from ground to roof placed upon the land for any purpose.
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the Township attesting that
a proposal for construction of a structure meets all requirements of these
regulations and other applicable development ordinances in force and
allowing such proposed construction to commence.
CARTWAY — The area, usually hard surfaced, within a vehicular right-ofway
for passage of vehicles, excluding curbs or berms.
COMMISSION — Unless indicated specifically as the County Planning
Commission, the term refers to the Township Planning Commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a development site and
designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the planned
residential development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and
areas set aside for public facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A document based on study and analysis of past
trends in the Township, projecting future change, recommending measures
to cope with such change and representing the official policy of the
Township towards physical change.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements of
a condominium.
CONSOLIDATION — The combination of two or more lots, tracts or parcels
of land for the purpose of development or sale or lease of a building or lot.
CONTOUR — An imaginary line connecting all points with the same
elevation above or below a fixed base point whose elevation is known.
§ 202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 202
1:440
CORNER LOT — A property that abuts two adjacent streets that intersect
at one corner of the lot.
COVENANT — An agreement legally binding successor owners of a
property to certain conditions regarding use of the property stipulated by
the original owner.
CROSS-SECTION — A drawing showing the relation of component parts as
if the object being examined had been cut through; usually a cut through
of a road or utility at right angles to its length revealing materials and
dimensions of components of construction.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with connection to other streets at only one end
and having a permanent vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
CURB — An asphalt or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of the
roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curbline at which point vehicles may
enter or leave the roadway.
CURVE — A rounded change of direction of an alignment that can be
described by bearings, angles and distances; a sag curve describes the
lowest point in a vertical alignment and a crest curve the highest point.
CUT — An excavation into earth material that has laid dormant for at least
two years.
DEDICATION — The designation of property, formerly privately owned, for
public purposes, such designation stipulated in writing by the private owner
and accepted by the Township.
DENSITY — A measure of the intensity of the use of the land, usually
measured by the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who undertakes a subdivision or land
development in accordance with these regulations with approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A sewage facility system other than an onlot septic
system for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of sewage or
other wastes as provided by the Department of Environmental Protection in
25 Pa. Code § 71.1 et seq.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot that abuts two streets that do not
intersect adjacent to the lot.
DRAINAGE —
(1) Surface water runoff.
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction of
development, the means for preserving the water supply and the
prevention of alleviation of flooding.
(2)
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:441
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer or other
structure designated, intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting
surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-ofway,
parks, recreational areas or any part of any subdivision or contiguous
land areas.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designated to carry drainage.
DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE — A vehicular access route serving only one parcel
or lot which provides access to a public street, but which does not provide
access to any other lot or parcel under separate ownership.
DWELLING — A building designed exclusively for residential purposes for
one or more families on a permanent basis.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted across private property generally
for public utility lines or storm drainage or for access to another property
beyond, passage over which is guaranteed by the grantor to those using the
easement.
ENGINEER, MUNICIPAL — A registered professional engineer in
Pennsylvania designated by the Township to perform the duties of engineer
as herein specified.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of the Commonwealth to engage in the practice of
engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land surveying
unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 534, No. 230; however, a professional
engineer may perform engineering land survey.
EROSION — The process of breaking down and carrying away of exposed
ground surfaces by action of wind, water and temperature change.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FEE — The required charge established, from time to time, by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors to defray the cost of processing an application
submitted for approval under the terms of this Chapter and which shall be
payable to the Township at the time an application is filed.
FILL — Earth material excavated elsewhere and deposited upon the ground
surface in the process of grading, or the excavation of earth that has laid
dormant less than two years.
FINISHED GRADE — The proposed elevation of the land surface of a site
after completion of all site preparation work.
FINAL APPLICATION — The written and graphic materials specified by this
Chapter to be submitted to the Township in order to obtain final approval of
a proposed subdivision or land development plan.
§ 202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 202
1:442
FINAL PLAT — See "plat, final."
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD, BASE (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance
of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOOD PROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to proposed and existing structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this
Chapter the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the onehundred-
year magnitude.
FRONT BUILDING LINE — An imaginary line parallel to the street rightof-
way line extending across a property between side lot lines a minimum
distance from the right-of-way line prescribed by the Township Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27] which describes the limit of construction on the
property relative to the street.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GOVERNING BODY — The North Strabane Township Board of Supervisors.
GROSS AREA — The total area within the site of a subdivision, land
development or mobile home park plan, including internal streets and other
public or semi-public land areas recorded in the plan.
HALF STREET — A right-of-way, established in certain plans of lots
approved prior to adoption of this Chapter, running parallel to and abutting
the plan boundary and recorded as 1/2 the width required for a public street
on the presumption that developers of the abutting tract of land will provide
the other half width to create a street of the required width.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation.
(1)
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
(2)
Right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
(1)
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
(2)
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:443
HIGH WATER TABLE — A condition, often chronic, caused by the
impermeability of the soil, poor drainage characteristics or unusually heavy
precipitation that brings the level of water in the ground close to the
surface.
IDENTIFICATION NUMBER — A number assigned to a lot in a subdivision
so that all the lots in a plan presented for preliminary approval are
numbered consecutively and in order beginning with one, such numbers to
be retained through recording of the plan.
IMPROVEMENT BOND — Surety, in a form approved by the Township after
recommendation by the Township Solicitor including, but not limited to,
cash, a certified check, an irrevocable letter of credit or a labor and material
payment bond from an approved surety company which guarantees the
satisfactory completion of improvements required by this Chapter to be
dedicated to the public.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part
of place upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING — Any structure designed primarily for
residential occupancy, except a mobile home, which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation on the building site in
such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot
be inspected at the site without disassembly, damage or destruction.
INSPECTOR — The Township Engineer or his or any other authorized
representative assigned by the Board of Supervisors to make any or all
necessary inspections of the work performed and materials furnished by the
developer or the contractors selected to install the improvements required
by this Chapter.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Developments authorized to be excluded from the regulation of land
development by § 106 of this Chapter.
(3)
§ 202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 202
1:444
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan which encompasses a proposed land
development which, in addition to a plat of subdivision, if required, includes
all covenants relating to the use of the land; the proposed use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures; the intensity of use or density of
development; streets, ways and parking facilities; common open space and
public facilities. The land development plan shall include all of the written
and graphic information required by this Chapter.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other persons having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purpose of this Chapter.
LOT — A tract of land in a plan of subdivision recorded in compliance with
the regulations of this Chapter or recorded legally prior to the adoption of
this Chapter, intended to be used as a unit for development or transfer of
ownership.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot as
shown on a subdivision plan excluding space within any rights-of-way, but
including the area of any easement.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured along the
front building line of a lot.
MAINTENANCE BOND — Surety, in a form approved by the Township after
recommendation by the Township Solicitor including, but not limited to,
cash, a certified check, an irrevocable letter of credit or a labor and material
bond from an approved surety company which guarantees the repair or
maintenance of any improvements required by this Chapter for a specified
period after their completion and approval or acceptance by the Township.
MARKER — A permanent indication, established by a registered surveyor,
of specified points in a subdivision or land development, in accordance with
these regulations.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy contained in one unit, or in two units designated
to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for
repeated towing which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:445
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of or contiguous parcels of land under
single ownership which has been so designated and improved that it
contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile
homes.
MODIFICATION — A deviation from the regulations of this Chapter granted
by the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the criteria established by this Chapter.
MONUMENT — A permanent indication, established by a registered
surveyor, of points in the boundary of a subdivision or land development
plan, or at points of intersection or changes of direction in street rights-ofway
within the plan.
MULTIPLE FAMILY BUILDING — A residential structure designed to
accommodate more than two families, with access to the outside via
common halls, stairways and, where approved, elevators.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — The Municipal Authority of the Township of
North Strabane Township.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of North Strabane, Washington County,
Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL PLAN or PLAN REVISION OF A SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN
(ACT 537 PLAN) — A comprehensive plan or revision to such plan for
the provision of adequate sewage systems, adopted by North Strabane
Township and submitted to and approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection as provided by 25 Pa. Code § 71.1 et seq.
ON-LOT SEPTIC SYSTEM — An individual sewage system, whether publicly
or privately owned, located on a single lot and serving one equivalent
dwelling unit and collecting, treating and disposing of sewage into the soil
or into water of this Commonwealth.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space owned by a public agency and
maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
OPEN CHANNEL — A depression in the ground surface designed to collect
and convey stormwater through or around areas. An open channel may
include wet weather swales or bodies of water that consist of the flow of
water at all times during the year. Creeks, streams, etc.
ORDINANCE — All references to "ordinance" or "this ordinance" refer to
this Chapter.
OWNER OF RECORD — The individual or corporation whose name appears
on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds as the current owner of the
property.
PERPETUAL MAINTENANCE BOND — Surety, in a form approved by the
Township after recommendation by the Township Solicitor including, but
not limited to, cash, a certified check or an irrevocable letter of credit which
guarantees, in perpetuity, the repair or maintenance of the stormwater
management facilities required by this Chapter.
§ 202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 202
1:446
PLAN SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the
general layout of a proposed subdivision.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PLAT, FINAL — The map or plan of a proposed subdivision or land
development containing all the information required by this Chapter and
the Washington County subdivision regulations for final plat approval and
in a form acceptable for recording in the office of the Washington County
Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The map or plan of a proposed subdivision or land
development which contains all of the information required by this Chapter
for approval of a preliminary plat.
PRELIMINARY APPLICATION — The written and graphic material specified
by this Chapter to be submitted to the Township in order to obtain
preliminary approval of a proposed subdivision or land development.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — See "plat, preliminary."
PRIVATE LANE — An access to a second property over the property from
which the second property was subdivided, approved in accordance with
the requirements of these regulations.
PROFILE — A drawing following the center line of a street or utility line
indicating the vertical alignment of the street or utility line, the vertical
dimension often exaggerated to clarify the relation between horizontal and
vertical measurements.
PROPERTY — An area or tract of land, all portions of which are in the same
ownership and the boundary of which closes on itself; also a parcel.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
Chapter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — All improvements including, but not limited to,
roads, streets, gutters, curbs, sewers and other facilities to be dedicated to
and officially adopted by the Township for which plans and specifications
must comply with the standards of this Chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
(1) Parks, playgrounds and other public areas.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
(2)
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:447
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A community sewage
facility for the collection of sewage from two or more lots or two or more
equivalent dwelling units, conveyance, treatment and disposal to a central
treatment and disposal plant other than renovation in a subsurface
absorption area or retention in a retaining tank.
PUBLIC STREET — A right-of-way dedicated for and open to public use
which may or may not have been accepted for maintenance by the
Township.
RECORDING — The act of registering with the County Recorder of Deeds a
subdivision or land development plan which has received final approval by
the Township.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot whose frontage is at right angles or
nearly so to the other lots in the vicinity, typified by corner lots or lots
fronting on the end rather than the side of a rectangular or curvilinear
block.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land which has been dedicated for public use
and provides access to private property abutting it, connecting with other
rights-of-way to form a vehicular and pedestrian circulation pattern; or an
easement across private property for the passage of public utilities, the
disposal of stormwater, or access to private property as a private lane.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWER, (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection method in
which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a central
treatment and disposal plant.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually
referred to as "sediment."
SEMIPUBLIC — A community facility or use generally open to the public,
often with constraints, but not publicly owned or controlled.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank used for the
decomposition of domestic wastes. Also referred to as an onlot system.
SETBACK LINES — Imaginary lines describing the boundary of the area
on a property within which construction can occur, the lines being parallel
with the front, side and rear property boundaries and set back from them a
distance prescribed by the Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
SIDEWALK — A paved concrete surface or leveled area, paralleling and
usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
§ 202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 202
1:448
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance that an automobile driver can see ahead
and/or to either side unobstructed by changes in alignment or roadside
structures or topography, as required by the latest edition of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
Manual.
SIMPLE SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a single lot, tract or
parcel of land into no more than five contiguous lots, tracts or parcels all
of which abut a public street in existence prior to the presentation of the
subdivision, each lot with the required frontage thereon; and further, no
extension of public sewer or water lines is required to serve any or all of the
proposed lots, tracts or parcels.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet or horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A procedure for measuring the ability of
soil to absorb moisture as an indication of problems that will occur in
connection with onlot sewage disposal, conducted by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff, such as detention or retention basin, parking lot
storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any combination
thereof.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Stormwater management through the use
of facilities which hold back water temporarily and release it over a period
of time.
STORMWATER RETENTION — Stormwater management through the use
of a facility that retains a certain level of water and provides for additional
storage to manage any control of stormwater. A lake or pond.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks and
channel through which water flows at least periodically.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot front or in its absence the established grade of the other streets upon
which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at
such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET, MAJOR —
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic volumes of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic
artery for intercommunications among large areas.
(1)
COLLECTOR — A major street or highway which carries traffic from
minor streets to the major system of arterial streets, including principal
entrance streets of a residential, commercial or industrial development
and streets for major circulation within such developments.
(2)
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:449
STREET, MINOR — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of
land including changes in existing lot lines or consolidation of parcels for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court
for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, SIMPLE — See "simple subdivision."
SURVEYOR — A registered professional land surveyor licensed as such by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
collect or carry surface runoff (also characterized as an open channel).
THROUGH TRAFFIC — Traffic that is passing through an area because
there is no more feasible way for it to move between its origin and
destination.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map delineating by contours the surface
elevations of a land area.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Strabane, Washington County,
Pennsylvania.
UTILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE —
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A major street or highway which
carries large volumes of traffic at comparatively high speed with access
at designated points and not from abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street which is parallel and
adjacent to limited access highways or arterial streets and which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.
(1)
Any agency which under public franchise or ownership, or under
certificate or convenience and necessity, provided the public with
electricity, gas, heat, stream, communication, rail transportation, water,
sewage collection or other similar service.
(1)
A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for
providing a public service.
(2)
§ 202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 202
1:450
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs or other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on
the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
ZONING ORDINANCE — Document adopted by the Township establishing
zone districts throughout the Township, specifying uses permitted as well as
other regulations in each district, and the means to administer and enforce
the regulations [Chapter 27].
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:451

Part 3
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
§ 301. Preapplication Procedure. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 301]
§ 302. Preliminary Application. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 302]
1. Prior to submission of an application for preliminary approval of a
subdivision, land development or mobile home park plan, the developer
shall meet with the Township Zoning Officer and/or Planning
Coordinator and any other appropriate staff persons to discuss the
applicable regulations governing the proposed development,
application submission requirements and the feasibility and timing of
the proposed development.
2. Any developer of land within North Strabane Township desiring
approval of a subdivision, land development or a mobile home park
shall notify the Zoning Officer of North Strabane Township at least 20
days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting of
his intention to attend a preapplication conference with the Planning
Commission.
3. The purpose of the preapplication meeting is to acquaint the Planning
Commission with the proposed development, to indicate to the
developer the constraints upon development contained in this and other
ordinances of North Strabane Township that may bear upon his
proposal and to discuss the impact of the proposal upon the Township's
Comprehensive Plan.
4. The preapplication conference with the Planning Commission is
voluntary and no formal application or fee is required. This opportunity
is afforded to the developer to obtain information and guidance before
entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expenses
for plan preparation.
1. Application Procedure. Having completed the preapplication
procedure, any developer of land within the Township desiring
preliminary approval of a subdivision, land development or a mobile
home park plan shall submit not less than seven copies of the
documentation required in subsection (1), below, to the Zoning Officer
and/or Planning Coordinator of North Strabane Township at least 20
days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting at
which such submission will be considered. All drawings submitted shall
be folded so that the title block is visible on the outside and so that the
folded drawing has a maximum dimension of nine inches by 12 inches.
The applicant shall be present or be represented at the meeting to
answer questions raised by the Commission relative to the application.
The preliminary plan application procedures may be waived and the
developer may proceed with final plan application provided the plan
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:453
presented as a final plan includes the entire property to be ultimately
developed and the requirements of § 701 of this Chapter have been met.
2. Review and Referral by the Zoning Officer and or Planning Coordinator.
Prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission for which an
application has been submitted, the Zoning Officer and or Planning
Coordinator shall review the submitted documents as to conformance
with the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable Township
regulations upon development and as to incorporation of requests and
suggestions made at the preapplication procedure meeting, if any. If the
Zoning Officer and or Planning Coordinator is satisfied that all
ordinances and other requirements have been met in the application,
he shall submit copies to the applicable parties in the Township,
including one copy to the Municipal Authority for its review if sanitary
sewage facilities or system are involved. If the Zoning Officer and or
Planning Coordinator is not satisfied that all ordinance and other
requirements have been met in the application, he shall return the
application to the developer as incomplete or improperly filed,
indicating to the developer, in writing, the specific discrepancies and
citing the specific ordinance provisions which have not been met, and
require the developer to correct the documents to conform before again
starting the preliminary approval procedure. An application shall not be
considered complete and properly filed, unless and until, all items
required by subsection (10) of this Section for a preliminary
application, including the filing fee, have been received by the
Township. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit plans
to the Washington Planning Commission as required.
3. Public Hearing. The Planning Commission may call and hold a public
hearing to gather testimony relative to the development proposal but
such a hearing shall be concluded within the sixty-day period for
preliminary plan consideration. Public notice, as defined by this
Chapter, of such a hearing shall be given.
4. Recommendation by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall recommend to the Board of Supervisors approval, approval with
specific conditions or disapproval of the proposed preliminary
application and shall communicate its decision, in writing, to the Board
of Supervisors not later than 60 days after the date of the meeting at
which the preliminary application was first considered and accepted as
complete and properly filed. The recommendation shall be based upon
the Township Planning Commission's own review and the review and
comments submitted by the Township Engineer. If plan revisions are
necessitated by the Planning Commission's recommendation, the
developer shall submit seven copies of the revised preliminary plat at
least five working days before the meeting of the Board of Supervisors
at which the application is to be considered.
5. Approval by Board of Supervisors. Within 90 days of the date of the
Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary application is
accepted as complete and properly filed, the Board of Supervisors shall
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:454
approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the proposed
preliminary application at a public meeting and shall communicate the
official decision, in writing, to the developer at his address of record not
later than 15 days after the decision is reached indicating specifically,
if the approval is denied, the reasons for denial, citing the appropriate
ordinance Sections. However, the action shall not be taken until at least
30 days after the date that the preliminary plan was sent to the County
Planning Commission or until the County recommendations on the plan
are received by the Township, whichever is earlier.
6. Failure to Render a Decision. Failure of the Board of Supervisors to
render a decision and/or to communicate it to the developer within the
time and in the manner required in subsection (5), above, shall be
deemed an approval of the application as presented, unless the
developer has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation of the decision, in which case failure
to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation or
communication shall have the same effect.
7. Conditional Approval. If the Board of Supervisors determines that
certain conditions are warranted to be attached to preliminary approval
to protect the public interest and guarantee compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter, the conditions of approval shall be
specified, in writing, in the notice of the official decision required by
subsection (5) of this Section. The applicant shall accept or reject the
conditions attached to the approval by giving written notice to the
Township Secretary within 30 days of the date at which preliminary
approval with conditions is granted. If the applicant fails to give written
notice to the Township regarding acceptance of the conditions attached
to preliminary approval within the required 30 days, preliminary
approval shall automatically be rescinded without written notice to the
applicant.
8. Amendment of Ordinances Affection Application.
A. From the time an application for approval of a subdivision, land
development or mobile home park is duly filed with the Zoning
Officer and or Planning Coordinator of the Township and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this Chapter or others affecting development in the
Township shall influence the decision on such application adversely
to the developer and the developer shall be entitled to a decision in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and others affecting
development in the Township as they stood at the time the
application was duly filed. However, if an application is properly
and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to
any intervening changes in this or other ordinances.
B. When an application has been approved or approved subject to
conditions acceptable to the developer, no subsequent change or
amendment to this or other ordinance affecting development in the
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:455
Township shall be applied to influence the right of the developer
to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved
development in accordance with the terms of such approval within
five years from the date of such preliminary approval or in the
case of a plan proposed to be developed in phases, within the time
required and subject to the conditions specified in § 508(4) of Act
247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended
by Act 170 of 1988 (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
9. Interpretation of Approval. Except in the case where preliminary
approval is waived under § 701 of this Chapter, approval of a
preliminary application shall not be construed to constitute final
approval, but only an authorization to proceed with preparation of the
final plan application for presentation to the Planning Commission
within one year of the date of the grant of preliminary approval by the
Board of Supervisors. After one year, if the developer has not proceeded
to final application submission, he shall resubmit the preliminary
application.
10. Application Submission Requirements. The preliminary application
shall include, but not be limited to, the following with all drawings
submitted on sheets not exceeding 30 inches by 42 inches in seven
copies:
A. Completed application form supplied by the Township.
B. Application filing fee as required by § 905 of this Chapter.
C. An existing conditions map at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or
larger showing:
(1) Contours at two foot intervals throughout the property and
datum to which the elevations relate.
(2) Boundary of the property indicating bearings and distances of
each line enclosing the property.
(3) Area of the property in acres.
(4) Boundaries of all abutting unplatted land with names of
owners, all abutting subdivisions with name of subdivision and
plat book reference; and any abutting municipal boundaries.
(5) Existing streets or roads abutting the property or within 50
feet of it, indicating name, surfacing, right-of-way width and
pavement or cartway width.
(6) Existing easements, if any, indicating width, bearings,
distances, use and lessee.
(7) Existing public sewer, gas and water lines in the property or
within 50 feet of it, indicating line size, manholes, invert and
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:456
top-of-manhole elevations, valves, fire hydrants and other
appurtenances.
(8) Existing streams and watercourses in the property or within
fifty 50 feet of it, together with culverts and storm drain lines
indicating line size, direction of flow, location of culverts and
storm inlets.
(9) Existing tree masses and other significant natural features
within the property.
(10) Existing structures or other significant man-made features
such as driveways or walls within the property or within 50 feet
of it.
(11) North arrow, linear scale, date that map was prepared, name
of registered surveyor who prepared the map (including his
Pennsylvania seal), name of the subdivision or development
and names and addresses of owners of record of the property
together with the developer's name and address if not the
owner.
(12) Location map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet showing
the property, the road it abuts, major roads in the vicinity and
other major physical features nearby.
D. Affidavit in which the owner of the property to be divided or
developed, if he is not the developer, concurs in the development
plan.
E. Proposed subdivision and/or land development plan map at a scale
of one inch to 100 feet or larger of the entire property showing:
(1) Proposed lot plan indicating minimum lot size in square feet,
minimum lot width at front building line, setback line from
street right-of-way and lot numbering plan.
(2) Proposed street plan, indicating right-of-way width, pavement
widths, pedestrian circulation and connection to existing
public roads; new street names shall be subject to approval by
the Township, and in no case shall they duplicate street or road
names in the Postal Zip Code Zone or other street names in the
Township.
(3) Proposed location of sewer, water and all other utility lines,
including any major facilities related thereto on or near the site
and connection to existing systems.
(4) Proposed easements, licenses, consents, rights-of-way and
other requirements necessary for approval.
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:457
(5) Proposed solution to surface storm drainage showing storm
sewers, any necessary easements and major facilities related
to drainage, if any.
(6) Location and approximate size of area or areas to be set aside
for recreational or community use, if any.
(7) Proposed grading of the site.
(8) Where multiple-family or townhouse structures are proposed,
the locations of these buildings shall be indicated showing
approximate number of dwelling units proposed in each and
minimum distances between road right-of-way or property
lines and nearest structures and between building.
(9) Proposed parking plan indicating location of each area to be
used for parking, general arrangement of spaces, access lanes
and number of cars to be accommodated in each area.
F. In addition to the information required by subsection (E), above,
the following information shall be provided for all land
developments:
(1) Area location map.
(2) Bearings and distances of all property lines and area in square
feet of the property.
(3) Location and name of street or streets abutting the property,
showing curbs or edge of paving on both sides of street,
existing curb cuts or access points on both sides, and proposed
curb cuts into the property.
(4) Approximate location, in or adjacent to the property, of
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water lines, gas lines and
electric lines, with direction of sewer flow, line sizes and
location of stormwater inlets, sewer manholes and hydrants
shown.
(5) Topography of the site, indicating existing contours and
proposed regrading at two foot intervals or, if property has a
fall of less than five feet from high to low point, spot elevations
at property corner points.
(6) Location, height and use of all existing structures on the
property and proposed structures, indicating structures to be
removed, if any, and the distances between proposed
structures or additions to existing structures and adjacent
property boundary lines, and approximate location of existing
structures on adjacent properties within 50 feet of the property
boundaries.
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:458
(7) Paved areas, showing edges of proposed paving and
arrangement of parking spaces and aisles, servicing areas,
lighting of paved areas, pedestrian walkways and sloping of
paved surfaces to storm drainage system.
(8) Traffic circulation on the site, ingress and egress to and from
the site and the layout of proposed parking and loading areas.
(9) Storm drainage plan, indicating inlets, storm drain piping,
holding ponds where necessary, methods of retarding run-off
on the property, and points of entrance into public storm
drains, streams and drainage swales, together with
calculations prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor
justifying the storm drainage plan.
(10) Proposed landscaping and screening plan, showing types of
materials to be used and approximate arrangement.
(11) Proposed free-standing signs, including sketch of one face,
area of each face, distances to property boundary lines, height
to top of sign and method of lighting; and signs to be attached
to building or buildings, indicating type of sign, dimensions,
sketch of face, location on building and method of lighting.
(12) Garbage container storage area and means of screening.
(13) Architectural sketch of the wall of the principal building which
faces the street, indicating building materials and
arrangement of door and window openings, as well as
architectural features.
(14) Names and addresses of property owner and/or developer and
names, addresses and seals of architect and/or engineer or
surveyor employed in the preparation of the site plan.
(15) North arrow, scale of the land development plan, name of
proposed land development, date of and preparation and all
revision dates.
(16) The title page of the set of drawings to be presented shall be
drawn upon a mylar original containing the required signature
blocks available at the Township Building. Any subsequent
sheets in the set shall be the same size as the title page.
G. Traffic Report. All applications for subdivisions and land
developments which propose more than 50 dwelling units or which,
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE)
standards, will generate in excess of 500 trips per day shall be
accompanied by a traffic report prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer which contains the following information:
(1) General description of the site proposed for development,
including a detailed description of the roadway network within
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:459
one thousand 1,000 feet of the site, a description of the
proposed land uses, the anticipated stages of construction and
anticipated completion of the proposed development. This
description may be in the form of a map which shall include the
following items:
(a) All major intersections.
(b) All existing and proposed ingress and egress locations.
(c) All existing roadway widths and rights-of-way.
(d) All existing traffic control signals and traffic control
devices.
(e) Any changes in the roadway network proposed by a
governmental agency.
(f) All existing and proposed public transportation services
and facilities within a one mile radius of the site.
(2) Description of existing capacities and levels of service of all
streets and intersections within 1,000 feet of the site.
(3) Determination of the trip generation expected to result from
the proposed development based on the ratios and
methodology contained in the current edition of the manuals of
the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).
(4) Impact of the proposed development on the existing roadway
and intersection service levels within 1,000 feet of the site.
H. Developer's engineer's report containing:
(1) Feasibility of sewage disposal system in terms of connection to
existing public system based on remaining line and plant
capacity or if onsite disposal system based on permeability of
the ground at the proposed location of each disposal unit and
impact upon discharge of treated effluent to receiving streams
or drainage ways.
(2) Feasibility of storm drainage plan in terms of impact upon
adjacent properties and proposals to control soil erosion and
stream pollution during and after construction.
(3) Feasibility of water supply plan in terms of available capacity
in public system, if connection is made to it, or reliability,
anticipated flow and quality of wells if they are to be used, as
well as documentation regarding adequacy of water pressure
available for fire-fighting.
(4) Feasibility of solutions to problems related to soil, mineral or
water conditions underlying the property.
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:460
(5) Feasibility of proposed grading of the property and justification
for consideration of slopes in excess of those permitted by the
Township Grading Ordinance [Chapter 9].
(6) A registered engineer's estimate of costs of installation of
required improvements in the proposed plan.
(7) Engineer's and/or surveyor's seal and date report was
completed.
I. Public utilities and facilities plan map, prepared at the same scale
as the final plan map, shall show the following:
(1) Sewage disposal system, including:
(a) Location of all interceptor, collection and building
connection lines, indicating line size, line length, direction
of flow, slope and pipe material.
(b) Location of all manholes and lampholes, indicating invert,
and top of lid casting elevations.
(c) Location of point of connection to existing system, or if
individual septic system is to be utilized, location and size
of approved system.
(d) Data on expected sewage flow, capacity of collection
system or capacity of septic system.
(2) Water supply system, including:
(a) Location of all supply lines by size and material, hydrants,
valves, pumping stations, etc.
(b) Location of supply source, either connection to existing
system or source on the property indicating, if a well or
wells, their depth, water quantity expected and chemical
analysis of a sample taken from the well.
(3) Gas service, including:
(a) Location of lines by size, pressure and material and name
of supplier.
(b) Location of point of connection to existing system and any
reducing, meter or other appurtenances to be placed on or
near the property.
(4) Electric and telephone service, including:
(a) Location of distribution lines by design electrical load with
notation of whether overhead or underground and location
of transformers in vaults, pad-mounted or on poles to serve
the developed property.
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:461
(5) Recreation facilities, if proposed, including:
(a) Arrangement of areas on the property to be developed for
recreational use, indicating specific structures and
equipment to be placed, access paths to and through the
areas, grading of area and treatment of ground surfaces.
(6) Parking areas, if proposed, including:
(a) Location of group parking areas indicating limits of paved
areas, arrangement of parking spaces, size of typical
space, width across access lanes and method of stopping
car wheels.
(7) Streetlights, if proposed, including:
(a) Location of each streetlight, whether on a street right-ofway,
a pedestrian way or in a recreation or parking area.
(b) Electrical supply network if separate from electrical
distribution system.
(c) Types of poles and types and characteristics of
illuminaries to be used.
(8) Letter from a Public Utility in Lieu of Map.
(a) Where improvements are to be constructed to meet
requirements of a public utility and are to be taken over as
part of the utility's distribution or collection system upon
completion, a letter from the utility agreeing to accept the
improvements upon completion to its satisfaction, will
suffice in lieu of a map to meet requirements of this
Section.
(b) Portions of any public utility not to be taken over as part of
the public system, such as extensions into a developer's
property, shall meet the requirements of this Section.
J. Grading plan, stormwater management plan and erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be prepared at the same scale as
the final plat.
K. Street Profiles and Cross Sections.
(1) Profile along center line of each section of street to be
constructed showing existing ground elevation, street grades,
vertical curves including length of arcs, angle of connected
grades and points of tangent extending for 100 feet beyond the
property to indicate connection to existing streets.
(2) Typical cross-section through street between right-of-way lines
showing thicknesses and widths of materials to be used in
§ 302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 302
1:462
§ 303. Final Application. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 303]
construction of roads and sidewalks as well as drainage and
grading to be carried out in the right-of-way.
(3) Vertical dimensions may be exaggerated in relation to
horizontal dimensions but profiles and cross-sections shall be
drawn on same size sheet as plan maps.
1. Application Procedure. Having successfully completed the preliminary
application procedure, any developer of land within North Strabane
Township desiring final approval of a subdivision, land development or
a mobile home park shall, within one year of the grant of preliminary
approval by the Board of Supervisors, submit not less than seven copies
of the documentation required in subsection (9), below, to the Zoning
Officer and or Planning Coordinator of North Strabane Township at
least 20 days prior to the regularly scheduled Commission meeting at
which such submission will be considered. The drawings submitted
shall be folded so that the title block is visible on the outside and so that
the folded drawing has a maximum dimension of nine inches by 12
inches. The developer shall be present or be represented at the meeting
to answer questions raised by the Commission relative to the
application. Such final application may be for all or a part of a plan
already given preliminary approval, in accordance with subsection (9),
below.
2. Review and Referral by the Zoning Officer and or Planning Coordinator.
Prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission for which an
application is submitted, the Zoning Officer and or Planning
Coordinator shall review the submitted documents as to conformance
with the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable Township
regulations upon development and as to incorporation of required
conditions, addition, deletions and/or changes resulting from the
preliminary approval. If the Zoning Officer and or Planning Coordinator
is satisfied that all requirements have been met in the application, he
shall submit copies to the applicable parties in the Township. If the
Zoning Officer and or Planning Coordinator is not satisfied that all
requirements have been met in the final application, he shall return the
application to the developer as incomplete or improperly filed,
indicating to the developer, in writing, the specific discrepancies and
citing the specific provisions of the Chapter which have not been met
and request the developer to correct the documents to conform before
again starting the final application approval procedure. An application
for final approval shall not be considered complete and properly filed
unless and until all items required by subsection (9) of this Section for a
final application, including the filing fee, having been received by the
Township.
3. Recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed
final application to the Board of Supervisors, in writing, not later than
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:463
60 days after the date of the meeting at which the final application was
accepted as complete and properly filed. The recommendation shall
be based upon the Commission's own review including, if needed, a
field visit to the property and the review comments submitted by the
Township Engineer.
4. Approval by Board of Supervisors. Within 90 days of the date of the
Planning Commission meeting at which the final application is accepted
as complete and properly filed, the Board of Supervisors shall approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the proposed final application at
a public meeting and shall communicate the official decision, in writing,
to the developer at his address of record not later than 15 days after the
decision is reached indicating specifically, if the approval is denied, the
reasons for denial citing the appropriate ordinance Sections. However,
the action shall not be taken until at least 30 days after the plan was
sent to the County Planning Commission or until the County
recommendations on the plan are received by the Township, whichever
is earlier.
5. Public Hearing, Failure to Render a Decision and Amendment of
Ordinance Affecting Applications. The regulations contained in
§ 302(3), § 302(6) and § 302(8), entitled "Public Hearing," "Failure to
Render a Decision" and "Amendment of Ordinance Affecting
Applications," governing preliminary applications, shall also apply to
the final application procedure.
6. Conditional Approval. If the Board of Supervisors determines that
certain conditions are warranted to be attached to final approval to
protect the public interest and guarantee compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter, the conditions of approval shall be
specified, in writing, in the notice of the official decision required by
subsection (4) of this Section. The applicant shall accept the conditions
attached to the approval either by giving written notice to the Township
Secretary or executing the development agreement required by
subsection (8) of this Section within 30 days of the date at which final
approval with conditions is granted. If the applicant fails to execute the
development agreement or to give written notice to the Township
regarding acceptance of the conditions attached to final approval
within the required 30 days, final approval shall automatically be
rescinded without written notice to the applicant.
7. Resolution Indicating Approval. When requested by the developer, in
order to facilitate financing, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the
developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the
final plat contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory
financial security. The final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor
recorded until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The
resolution or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed
to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within
90 days, unless a written extension is granted by the Board of
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 303
1:464
Supervisors. Such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and
shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
8. Guarantee That Improvements Will Be Completed. As a condition of
final approval, the developer has two options. The developer may
either:
A. Deposit with North Strabane Township an improvement bond, as
defined by this Chapter, after bond review by the Township
Solicitor, to be held in escrow and equal to 110% of the total
estimate cost, determined and posted in accordance with the
procedure specified in § 304(1) of this Chapter, for all
improvements to be constructed to serve the approved final plan
(and not to be guaranteed by requirements of other authorities),
agreed to by the developer and Township.
B. Waive the improvements bond and construct all improvements
agreed to between himself and the Township, but relinquish the
right to be issued any building permits for construction on lots
served by the improvements until all improvements have been
completed, inspected and approved by the Township. The
procedure for inspection and approval of the improvements shall
be in accordance with §§ 305 through 311 of this Chapter; however,
in lieu of release of the improvement bond, the proper officers of
the Township shall be authorized to execute the final plat for
recording purposes upon satisfactory completion of the
improvements. Building permits shall not be authorized for any lot
in the plan until all required improvements have been accepted by
the Township and the final plat has been recorded in the County
Recorder of Deeds Office in accordance with § 304(5) and § 304(6)
of this Chapter.
9. Final Application Submission Requirements. The final plan application
shall include, but not be limited to, the following, with all drawings
submitted on sheets not exceeding 30 inches by 42 inches in seven
copies:
A. Completed application form supplied by the Township.
B. Application filing fee as required by § 904 of this Chapter.
C. One copy of preliminary plan granted approval.
D. Final plat, prepared in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) The map scale shall be a minimum of one inch equals 100 feet.
(2) The map shall be prepared in ink on tracing cloth or stable
dimension film material.
(3) Indexed sheets may be used for large tracts provided a key
map is prepared and, if final plan approval is sought for only a
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:465
part of the area for which preliminary plan approval has been
granted, a key map shall be provided showing the relationship
of the area granted preliminary approval to that for which final
approval is sought.
(4) A title block in the lower right hand corner of each sheet
containing:
(a) A title approved by the Planning Commission under which
the subdivision or development plan is to be recorded.
(b) Date of plan submission.
(c) Graphic scale.
(d) Name and address of owner of land and developer, if
different from the owner.
(e) Name and address of professional engineer or surveyor
who prepared the plan with seal affixed.
(5) Certificates and acknowledgments on one sheet, including the
following as needed:
(a) Individual or corporate adoption, notarized.
(b) Individual or corporate acknowledgment, notarized.
(c) Guarantee of title and mortgagee's consent to recording
when applicable, notarized.
(d) Surveyor's certificate, signed and sealed.
(e) Approval by Board of Supervisors.
(f) Approval by Planning Commission.
(g) Local municipality release from obligations to construct
improvements.
(h) Offers of dedication of public streets and/or land areas for
public or community purposes.
(i) Ownership and maintenance of common areas not
proposed to be dedicated to the public.
(j) Notation of approval of any zoning variances granted or
modifications to the provisions of this Chapter granted, if
applicable.
(k) Review by County Planning Commission.
(l) Proof or recording.
E. All of the following general information shall be shown on the final
plat:
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 303
1:466
(1) Perimeter boundary line of the property for which approval of
subdivision and/or land development is sought.
(2) Street right-of-way lines.
(3) Subdivision lines within the property to be divided.
(4) Building set-back line from adjacent streets within each lot.
(5) Easement right-of-way lines within the property.
(6) Accurate dimensions by bearings and distances of all property,
subdivision and easement lines.
(7) Accurate dimensions by bearings and distances of all street
right-of-way lines as well as all curve data, deflection angles,
lengths of arcs, points of tangent and deflection and angles of
all corner.
(8) Widths of all rights-of-way, streets and easements.
(9) Names of all streets.
(10) Numbered lots and blocks to identify each parcel to be
subdivided, such numbering system to be continuous over the
entire property for which preliminary approval was granted, if
different from final approval application.
(11) Location of all monuments and markers, related to an existing
official monument by bearings and distances.
(12) Location of any lands within the property to be dedicated for
public use or for use of the residents of the plan, such land to
be designated for a specific use and dimensioned as for other
lots.
(13) Area of each parcel of land in the property to be subdivided.
(14) Names of owners of unplatted adjacent property and names of
adjacent lot plans or development plans.
(15) Information pertaining to the property to be developed or
subdivided, including the boundary shall be shown in heavier
ink lines than the information relating to the area surrounding
the property.
(16) North arrow.
(17) If applicable, a notation on the plat that access to a State
highway shall only be authorized by a highway occupancy
permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation under § 420 of the State Highway Law (P.L.
1242, No. 428, of June 1, 1945).
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:467
F. Titles and Approvals. Before final approval can be granted the
developer, he shall present to the Township the following
documents:
(1) Letters from the public suppliers of water and sewage disposal
stating that they can handle the requirements of the
development plan when completed. Alternatively, the
developer may submit a certificate from the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer attesting that the proposed sewage
disposal system to be provided by the developer meets all State
Department of Environmental Protection requirements.
(2) Certificate from the Washington County Soil Conservation
District or the State Department of Environmental Protection
that an acceptable plan for erosion and sedimentation control
and stormwater drainage has been submitted and approved by
the appropriate agency.
(3) Any covenants and/or rights of easement in the form in which
they will be filed as legal documents.
G. An improvement bond, unless waived in accordance with
§ 303(8)(B) of this Chapter.
10. Phased Approval. In the case where development of a subdivision or
land development is projected over a period of years, the Township
authorizes submission of final applications by sections or phases of
development, subject to such requirements or guarantees for public
improvements in future sections or phases of the development which
are essential for the protection of the public welfare and any existing or
proposed section or phase of the plan. All sections or phases must
conform to the preliminary application as previously approved by the
Township. Any phase that contains substantive changes in the number
of lots or buildings proposed or in the layout of the lots, buildings or
streets previously approved in the preliminary application will require
complete resubmission of the preliminary application in accordance
with § 302 of this Chapter. No phase or section of a plan shall be
approved unless the phase or section can function as a cohesive and
self-supporting unit and all improvements necessary to support that
phase are provided or guaranteed to be provided.
11. Mediation Option. The Board of Supervisors may offer the mediation
option as an aid in completing the proceedings authorized by this Part.
Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those procedures in this Part
once they have been formally initiated. Nothing in this Section shall be
interpreted as expanding or limiting Township police powers or as
modifying any principles of substantive law. Participation in mediation
shall be wholly voluntary. The appropriateness of mediation shall be
determined by the particulars of each case and the willingness of the
parties to negotiate. In offering the mediation option, the Board of
Supervisors shall assure that in each case, the mediating parties
§ 303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 303
1:468
§ 304. Requirements for Final Approval. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 304]
assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions
for:
A. Funding mediation.
B. Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
C. Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
D. Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this Chapter or in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended), provided there is written consent by the mediating
parties, and by an applicant or the Board of Supervisors, if either is
not a party to the mediation.
E. Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
F. Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
G. Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties, and become subject to review and approval by the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to the authorized procedures set forth in this
Chapter. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions,
excluding the final written mediated agreement, shall be
admissible as evidence in any subsequent judicial or administrative
proceedings.
1. Improvement Bond.
A. In lieu of the completion of any improvement required prior to and
as a condition for final approval of a plat, the applicant shall deposit
an improvement bond, as defined by this Chapter, in favor of the
Township, in an amount equal to 110% of the cost of completion of
the improvements estimated as of 90 days following the date
scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually the Township
may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the
actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and
the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining
improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after either the
original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of
completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may
require the developer to post additional security in order to assure
that the financial security equals said 110%. Any additional
security shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this
subsection.
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304
1:469
B. The amount of the improvement bond required shall be based upon
an estimate of the cost of completion of the required
improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and
prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this
Commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The Township, upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer
and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the
estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Township and the applicant or developer.
The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair
and reasonable, and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a
third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer
shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant or
developer.
C. If the party posting the improvement bond requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of the improvement bond or
to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the
required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration
of the preceding one year period by using the above procedure.
2. Amenities Bond. In lieu of completion of any improvement which is not
proposed to be dedicated to the public, but which is required prior to,
or as a condition for, final plat approval, the applicant may be required
"at the discretion of the Township" to deposit with the Township, an
amenities bond, as defined by this Chapter, in favor of the Township, in
an amount sufficient to cover the costs of all such required
improvements. The amenities bond shall be in an amount equal to 110%
of the cost of the improvements for which the amenities bond is posted.
The procedure for determining the amount of the amenities bond and
for extending the amenities bond for a period beyond one year shall be
the same as the procedures specified in subsection (1), above, for
determining and extending the improvement bond.
3. Development Agreement. Before granting final approval, the Board of
Supervisors shall require that the developer execute a development
agreement with the Township, in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, containing any conditions of approval, provisions that are
reasonably required to guarantee the proper installation of onsite and
off-site improvements related to the subdivision and/or land
development and provisions necessary to indemnify the Township in
connection therewith. Said agreement shall be executed, the
improvement bond required by subsection (1) of this Section shall be
posted, the amenities bond required by subsection (2) of this Section, if
§ 304 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 304
1:470
§ 305. Construction Review and Approval. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 305]
required, and the perpetual maintenance bond required by § 512(F) of
this Chapter, if required, shall be posted and all required fees shall be
paid before the Township Manager shall affix his or her signature and
the Township seal to the final plat for recording purposes.
4. Approval by Other Agencies. Approval of final plats by the Board of
Supervisors shall not be binding if County, State or Federal agencies
find just cause to disapprove the development. It shall be the
developer's responsibility to obtain all necessary approvals from
County, State or Federal agencies.
5. Recording of Final Plat. Upon approval of a final plat by the Township,
the developer shall, within 90 days of such final approval, record such
plat in the office of the Washington County Recorder of Deeds or the
Township's approval shall be null and void. Final plats for land
development plans which are proposed for lots within a previously
recorded plat, shall not be required by this Chapter to be recorded in
the Washington County Recorder of Deeds Office, provided there is no
change to any lot line, easement, right-of-way or other recorded feature
of the previously recorded plan. If a land development plan is proposed
which includes a subdivision, resubdivision or consolidation, the final
plat for the subdivision, resubdivision or consolidation shall be
recorded. In no case shall building locations, parking areas,
landscaping and other private improvements proposed in any land
development plan be required to be recorded; however, all information
specified by § 303(8) for a final application shall be required to be
submitted for approval by the Township, whether or not a final plat is
recorded.
6. Filing of Copies. Within five days of recording of the final plat in the
Office of the County Recorder of Deeds, the developer shall submit a
copy of the recording receipt to the Township Zoning Officer or Code
Enforcement Officer and or Planning Coordinator. As soon as is
practical after recording of the final plat in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds, the developer shall deliver to the Township Zoning
Officer or Code Enforcement Officer and or Planning Coordinator one
reproducible and two paper prints of the plat as recorded, containing
all required signatures and dates of approval. Proof of recording shall
be required prior to the issuance of any building permit for any lot
shown on the final plat.
1. Prior to initiating any construction in an approved plan, the developer
shall attend a preconstruction meeting with the Township Zoning
Officer or Code Enforcement Officer, and or Planning Coordinator, Road
Superintendent and other appropriate Township officials to discuss
inspection procedures and the schedule for construction.
§ 304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:471
§ 306. Notice of Completion. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 306]
When the developer has completed the required public improvements in
a plan, the developer shall notify the Township, in writing, by certified
or registered mail. Within 10 days of the receipt of such notification, the
Board of Supervisors shall authorize the Township Engineer to inspect the
public improvements in the plan to determine compliance with the design
standards and standards for construction specified in Parts 4 and 5 of this
Chapter.
§ 307. Filing of Plans. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 307]
Upon completion of the public improvements in a plan, "as-built" plans
and profiles of the public improvements, as constructed, shall be filed
with the Township by the developer within 10 days of the mailing of the
notice of completion. In addition, the developer's engineer shall submit a
certification, under the engineer's seal, that the improvements have been
installed and completed in accordance with the plans and specifications
designed by the engineer.
2. The developer shall notify the inspector at least 72 hours prior to
beginning any installation of public improvements in an approved plan.
While work is in progress, the developer shall notify the inspector at
least 72 hours prior to the time that the following minimum required
progress inspections are desired. The Township reserves the right to
perform inspections in addition to the minimum required progress
inspections listed below at the discretion of the inspector, if conditions
warrant:
A. Review and approval of subgrade of streets prior to laying of base.
B. Review and approval of base prior to final paving of streets.
C. Review and approval of streets after wearing course or seal coat is
applied.
D. Review and approval of trenches for installation of all underground
utilities, including water lines, gas lines, electric/telephone/TV
cables, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewers and drainage facilities
before they are covered.
3. Inspector shall prepare a written report of all inspections.
4. All construction materials used in sewers, streets, sidewalks and other
required improvements shall be tested by a qualified testing laboratory,
if required by the Township Engineer. The cost for such tests shall be
borne by the developer.
5. The developer shall be responsible for the payment of inspection fees in
accordance with the procedure specified by this Chapter.
§ 305 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 308
1:472
§ 308. Inspection and Release from Improvement Bond. [Ord. 234,
5/27/1997, § 308]
1. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of the
notice of completion, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to
inspect all the improvements to determine compliance with the design
standards and standards for construction specified in Parts 4 and 5 of
this Chapter.
2. Having made his inspection, the Township Engineer shall file a detailed
report, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors, not later than 30 days
after receipt of the authorization to proceed, with a copy of the report
sent by registered mail to the developer. The report shall indicate
approval or rejection of the improvements either in whole or in part. In
the event that the Township Engineer shall not approve or shall reject
any or all of the improvements, his report shall contain a statement of
specific reasons for each such failure to approve or rejection. Upon
receipt of the Township Engineer's report and its acceptance by the
Board of Supervisors shall, within 15 days after its regular monthly
meeting next succeeding receipt of the report, notify the developer in
writing by certified mail of its action relative to the Township
Engineer's report.
3. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions of this Section, all improvements will
be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability pursuant to the improvement bond posted with the
Township.
4. If any portion of the improvements are not approved or are rejected by
the Board, the developer shall proceed to complete the improvements
so designated and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, inspection and approval shall be initiated as outlined in this
Part shall be followed.
5. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to limit the developer's right to
contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise any
determination of the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
6. If any improvement covered by the improvement bond have not been
installed during the time that the improvement bond remains in effect,
the Board shall have the power to enforce the improvement bond by
appropriate legal action and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such
improvement bond are insufficient to cover the cost of installing or
making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by the
improvement bond and found unacceptable or left uninstalled, the
Board at its option, may install such improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the satisfying of the improvement bond or from
any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of improvements covered by
such security and for no other municipal purpose.
§ 308 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 308
1:473
§ 309. Status of Improvements Prior to Acceptance. [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 309]
§ 310. Acceptance of Public Improvements. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 310]
7. The developer and the Board may agree to a program of partial release
of the improvement bond as the installation of improvements is
completed. Such procedure shall leave remaining under the
improvement bond at least enough credit to complete all improvements
not yet accepted. The Township shall authorize the release of funds
upon receipt of written certification from the Township Engineer that
the work for which release is requested has been completed in
accordance with the approved plat. The Township shall authorize
release of funds in an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer
that fairly represents the value of the improvements completed, less
10% retainage.
1. Approval of improvements shall not constitute an acceptance for
repairs or maintenance by the Board of Supervisors. All improvements
shall remain in private ownership until such time as their dedication
shall have been accepted by resolution, as provided for in § 310 of this
Part or until condemned for public use. The costs of advertising and
filing, if any, for the adoption of the resolution shall be borne by the
developer or the corporation requesting the adoption, except in the
case of condemnation, in which case the Township shall bear such
costs.
2. As a condition of immediate acceptance by resolution, the developer
shall post a maintenance bond, as defined by this Chapter, in
accordance with the requirements of § 311, below.
3. The recording of a plan shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land.
1. Upon completion of the inspection and approval of the public
improvements, the developer shall submit a request to the Board of
Supervisors, in writing, to accept the dedication of the public
improvements. The request for acceptance shall be submitted at least
10 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board and shall include legal
descriptions of all rights-of-way for streets to be dedicated to the
Township. At the regular meeting, the Board shall adopt a resolution
accepting the public improvements as part of the Township's public
facilities, subject to the posting of the maintenance bond required by
§ 311 of this Chapter.
2. No property or public improvement shown on a final plat shall be
considered to have been finally accepted by the Township until the
dedication thereof has been officially accepted by adoption of a
§ 308 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 310
1:474
§ 311. Posting of Maintenance Bond. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 311]
§ 312. Release of Amenities Bond. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 312]
Upon written notice by the Township Engineer that the improvements
guaranteed by the amenities bond have been satisfactorily completed, the
Township shall authorize release of the amenities bond. Since the amenities
bond is posted to guarantee completion of required improvements that are
not to be dedicated to the public, release of the amenities bond shall not
imply approval by the Township of the method of construction or structural
integrity of the improvements, nor shall there be any liability associated
with or responsibility for maintenance of the improvements.
resolution of the Township, duly enacted and advertised in accordance
with law.
1. When the Board of Supervisors accepts the dedication of all or some of
the required public improvements in a plan, following their completion,
the Board shall require the posting of a maintenance bond, as defined
by this Chapter, to secure the structural integrity of the improvements
and to guarantee the proper functioning of those improvements in
accordance with the design and standards for construction specified in
Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter, and the specifications of the final plat.
2. The term of the maintenance bond shall be for a period of 18 months
from the date of the acceptance of the public improvements by the
Board of Supervisors. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be
15% of the actual cost of installation of the public improvements.
§ 310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 312
1:475

Part 4
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
§ 401. Applicability. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 401]
§ 402. Street Standards. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 402]
1. The design standards herein specified are minimum standards. When
restrictive covenants or deed restrictions imposed by the developer are
more restrictive, they shall govern.
2. Where the literal compliance with the standards specified is clearly
impractical, a modification may be granted in accordance with the
procedures and criteria specified in Part 7 of this Chapter.
3. Land susceptible to flooding, exceptionally high water table, unstable
subsurface conditions, steep or unstable slopes, presence of high
voltage or high pressure overhead or underground utilities, etc., shall
not be approved for subdivision or development unless the hazards
have been eliminated or unless the proposed plan shows safeguards
adequate, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, to protect the
proposed use of the land.
4. The subdivision or land development plan shall conform to the
Township's Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]
and shall represent a logical extension of the municipal street, sewer
and water networks or, if extending across municipal boundaries, to
these networks in the adjoining municipalities.
1. Layout and Continuity.
A. The layout of streets in a subdivision or plan shall be logically
related to topography in order to produce usable lots or areas for
development, reasonable grades and preserve the amenities of the
site.
B. Local streets in a subdivision or plan shall be designed to
discourage through traffic.
C. Streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision or
plan where such extension will connect to an existing or recorded
street in an adjacent subdivision or plan or shall represent a logical
connection into undeveloped adjacent land because of topography
or shape of the adjacent land.
D. Where a subdivision or plan abuts a major highway, the
arrangement within the subdivision or plan shall be oriented away
from the major highway and the number of access points to the
highway shall be kept to a minimum.
E. Where a subdivision or plan abuts an already existing public road
whose right-of-way is less than 50 feet, the right-of-way may be
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:477
widened so that the portion abutting the subdivision or plan is
25 feet from the established road center line, except in the case
of major highways when the right-of-way may be required to be
widened further at the direction of the Township and/or
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
F. Half streets or partial streets shall be prohibited, except where a
proposed subdivision or plan abuts property along such a public
street on the abutting property, the proposed subdivision or plan
shall complete the street and it shall be recorded in the plan. At
least 25 feet of right-of-way width, measured from the center line of
the public street, shall be provided on the property proposed for
subdivision.
G. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential developments, but may
be provided in commercial or industrial developments where
needed for loading, unloading or secondary access. Where
authorized by the Township, alleys shall have a minimum right-ofway
width of 30 feet and shall be paved with a minimum base which
meets the standards of construction and specifications adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors for a Township street.
2. Street Alignment.
A. Street Alignment and Intersections. All streets and intersections
shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the latest
edition of "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets"
issued by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
B. Street Grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum center line grade of 2%.
(2) Center line grades shall not exceed the following:
Minor street: 12%
Connector
street:
8%
Collector street: 6%
Arterial street: 5%
(3) Center line grades on culs-de-sac shall not exceed 6%, unless
modified in accordance with § 702.
C. Street Widths. Minimum right-of-way and cartway (pavement)
widths shall be:
Arterial Street:
Right-ofway
80 feet
§ 402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 402
1:478
Cartway 60 feet
Collector
Street:
4 Lane 2 Lane
Right-ofway
60 feet 60 feet
Cartway 48 feet 24 feet
All Other
Streets:
Right-ofway
50 feet
Cartway 24 feet
D. Culs-de-sac.
(1) Unless modified by § 702, cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed
1,200 feet in length. All culs-de-sac shall be provided at the
closed end with a circular turnaround having a paved area at
least 84 feet in diameter within a right-of-way whose diameter
is at least 100 feet. Alternate means of ingress and egress are
encouraged from a planning perspective rather than dead end
culs-de-sac.
(2) If a subdivision or plan is developed over several stages and
roads are to be extended as development proceeds, cul-de-sac
streets produced in one stage to be extended in a later stage
shall be provided within the limits of the first phase of the plan
or on the adjacent remnant parcel on which the next phase is
proposed, provided that the right-of-way for the cul-de-sac is
recorded with the approved phase of the plan and the
construction of the cul-de-sac is guaranteed by the
improvement bond posted for the approved phase. In the event
that the street is extended in the future, the abandonment of
the right-of-way for the cul-de-sac shall be subject to the
concurrence of the owners in the recorded plan on which the
right-of-way is recorded and so detailed for recording on the
plan for the street extension.
E. Vertical Curves. The following K values shall be used to compute
minimum curve length. Curve length equals the algebraic
difference of the tangent grades times the K value:
K Values
Design Speed Crest Curves Sag Curves
15 mph 8 12
20 mph 9 15
25 mph 15 22
30 mph 24 31
§ 402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:479
K Values
Design Speed Crest Curves Sag Curves
35 mph 36 41
40 mph 55 55
45 mph 77 70
50 mph 107 90
F. Horizontal Curves.
(1) The following minimum horizontal curves shall be provided for
each design speed:
Design Speed
Minimum Desirable
Horizontal Curvature on
Center line
15 mph 50-95
20 mph 100-180
25 mph 180-280
30 mph 300-430
35 mph 475-585
40 mph 750-825
45 mph 1040
50 mph 1390
(2) A minimum tangent length of 50 feet must be provided
between reverse curves when no superelevation is used. If
superelevation is required, a tangent must be provided such
that a smooth superelevation transition is provided.
G. Intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No
more than two streets shall intersect at the same point. The
following minimum spacing requirements shall be provided
from center line to center line of an intersection:
Classification
Minimum Spacing Between
Intersections
Arterial street 1,000 feet
Collector street 300 feet
Connector street 200 feet
Minor local street 200 feet
(2) Intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of:
§ 402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 402
1:480
(a) Twenty-five feet for intersections involving only minor
streets.
(b) Thirty feet for intersections involving a connector or
collector street.
(c) Forty feet for all intersections involving an arterial street.
(3) All intersections of streets and driveways with State highways
shall require a highway occupancy permit issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
H. Sight Distance at Intersections.
(1) All intersections on Township streets shall have a minimum
sight distance as described below, corresponding to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations, Title
67, 441.8(h).
(2) Safe sight distance for passenger cars and single unit trucks
exiting from streets onto two lane streets, as measured from a
point 10 feet back from the edge of the cartway:
Posted
Speed
Safe Sight
Distance –
Left Safe Sight Distance – Right
25 mph 250 feet 195 feet
30 mph 250 feet 195 feet
35 mph 440 feet 350 feet
45 mph 635 feet 570 feet
55 mph 945 feet 875 feet
(3) Safe sight distance for buses and combinations exiting from
streets onto two lane streets, as measured from a point 10 feet
back from the edge of the cartway:
Posted
Speed
Safe Sight
Distance –
Left
Safe Sight Distance – Right
25 mph 400 feet 300 feet
30 mph 400 feet 300 feet
35 mph 675 feet 625 feet
45 mph 1,225 feet 1,225 feet
55 mph 2,050 feet 2,050 feet
I. Split Streets. Developers who propose split streets with islands of
any type within the right-of-way shall be required to submit a
landscaping plan subject to approval by the Township. The plan
shall show the location, quantity, size and type of all planting
§ 402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:481
materials, soil preparation details and planting instructions. All
selected plant material shall be appropriate for the site, be able
to withstand adverse typical climatic conditions for this area and
be as maintenance free as possible. Guidelines for plant selection
are available from the Township. The landscaping shall be installed
at the developer's expense in accordance with the planting
procedures established by the American Association of
Nurserymen.
J. Street Names.
(1) Streets that are extensions of existing streets or are
substantially in alignment with them shall bear the name of the
existing street.
(2) Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors and shall not duplicate names already in use
within the same postal zip code zone.
(3) Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of § 504 of this Chapter.
K. Private Lanes.
(1) A private lane, as defined by this Chapter, may be permitted
only when such lane serves only two lots that have no other
access to a public street, provided that the property from
which the lot is subdivided has frontage on a public street.
(2) Such a lane shall not be subject to the standards of this
Chapter for construction of a public street, unless any lot or
parcel it serves is proposed to be further subdivided into three
or more lots. Any further subdivision of a lot or parcel into
three or more lots with frontage on a private lane shall
mandate construction of a public street in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter for constructing a public street.
The plan for recording shall contain a notation regarding this
requirement to provide a public street if the property is
resubdivided.
(3) No more than one private lane shall be permitted on any
property legally existing prior to the adoption of this Chapter.
(4) Private lanes shall be named and noted on the subdivision plan;
house numbers for dwellings located on the private lanes shall
be in accordance with the Township Ordinances.
(5) The minimum width of the required right-of-way for a private
lane shall be 15 feet, unless there is a possibility that the
property fronting on the private lane can be further
subdivided, then the minimum width of the required right-ofway
for the private lane shall be 50 feet.
§ 402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 402
1:482
§ 403. Easements and Dedications. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 403]
(6) The required width of the cartway shall be not less than 10 feet
and shall have a mud-free, dust-free surface. The maximum
permitted grade of a private lane shall be 12%.
(7) Approval of a private lane shall be subject to the execution and
recording of an agreement between the adjoining property
owners and the Township, where the Township is a third party
beneficiary, to maintain the private lane and placement of a
notation on the plan for recording indicating that the Township
has no maintenance responsibilities for the private lane.
(8) The required front and side yard setback shall be provided
from the right-of-way line for the private lane for all existing
and proposed structures, as prescribed by the Township
Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
1. Public Utilities.
A. Where possible, utilities shall be placed within the street rights-ofway,
but where that is not possible they shall be placed except to
accommodate unusual sanitary or storm sewerage conditions,
within easements centered on side or rear lot lines.
B. Easements shall be not less than 15 feet in width and shall be
aligned across blocks and across plans, but may be increased in
width to meet the requirements of individual utilities using them.
C. A minimum distance of 20 feet shall be maintained between any
point of a residential building and the nearest petroleum products
or natural gas transmission line.
2. Drainage.
A. Where a subdivision or plan is traversed by a watercourse or storm
drainage line, a drainage easement or right-of-way shall be
provided and recorded on the plan.
B. The easement shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the
watercourse or line as well as areas adjacent to the watercourse
subject to frequent high water table conditions or utilized as
detention ponds, etc., and to allow access for work crews to
maintain the drainage way.
3. Dedications. Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public
use areas are required for conformance with objectives of the
Township's Comprehensive Plan within the subdivision plan, or open
areas are proposed for dedication to the Township or a private
association by the developer, such dedication shall be designated as
"dedicated" or "reserved" on the final plat, together with the name of
the agency responsible for their maintenance.
§ 402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:483
§ 404. Lots. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 404]
1. Every lot in a subdivision shall abut a public street, except in
accordance with § 402 (2)(K) of this Part.
2. Lots shall not be less in depth than their width nor greater in depth than
two 2 1/2 times their width, unless a modification to this requirement is
granted because of unusual topographic, drainage or other special
conditions in accordance with the procedures and criteria specified in
Part 7 of this Chapter.
3. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to street lines as
nearly as possible.
4. Corner lots shall be increased in width to allow a buildable area
comparable to an interior lot.
5. Double frontage lots shall be discouraged except where such lots abut a
major highway along their rear line, in which case the rear building line
of the lots shall be 75 feet from the major highway right-of-way line.
6. Minimum lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than those specified
in the Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] for the zoning district
containing the lot.
7. Within a subdivision or plan where public or community sewage
disposal is not contemplated, soil percolation tests in accordance with
procedures of the State regulatory agency shall be undertaken. Results
of the tests shall be made available to the Planning Commission.
8. The arrangement within a subdivision or land development plan and
areas set aside for community facilities and nonresidential uses shall be
approved by the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors based
on circulation, parking and location relative to the residential uses in
the plan.
9. All land in a subdivision shall be platted for a specific purpose.
10. Lot lines within a subdivision shall be arranged to minimize the amount
of drainage passing from one lot directly onto a neighboring lot. The
Board of Supervisors may direct the developer to provide drainage
easements, grade swales or yard and roof drain collector sewers along
lot lines to control drainage across lots.
11. Existing natural features, existing topography and significant trees
shall be retained wherever possible and clearance of ground cover shall
be minimized to reduce erosion and maintain drainage patterns.
§ 404 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 404
1:484
Part 5
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 501. General. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 501]
§ 502. Monuments and Markers. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 502]
§ 503. Streets, Curbs and Gutters. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 503]
1. The developer shall install, at no expense to the Township, all the
improvements shown on the final plat and required by this Chapter or
any condition attached to the Township's approval in accordance with
the standards outlined in Part 4 and with the requirements of this Part.
2. The Board of Supervisors, at its discretion, may modify the
improvements required of the developer, in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Part 7 of this Chapter for granting modifications,
where unusual conditions are present and where normal application of
the requirements would jeopardize the public safety or the safety of any
occupants of the plan or subdivision or abutting properties.
1. Monuments and markers cannot be set within the plan prior to grading
of the streets. Monuments shall be set permanently at the intersections
of all lines forming angles in the boundary of any subdivision, land
development or mobile home park. Prior to acceptance of the streets,
monuments shall be set at points of changes of direction along all street
lines. The cost of the placement of the monuments shall be included in
the preparation of development costs.
2. Monuments shall be made of precast concrete 30 inches long by six
inches square in cross section and shall be set flush with the ground
level. A brass pin shall be set in the top of each monument and scored or
marked to indicate the exact point of crossing of the intersection lines.
3. Markers may be of solid metal at least 30 inches long and 3/4 of an inch
in outside diameter and shall be driven into the ground to finished
grade. They shall be scored to indicate the exact point of crossing of
intersecting lines.
4. Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be replaced by a
registered surveyor at the developer's expense until such time as the
developer's involvement in the subdivision or land development plan
ceases, after which abutting property owners shall share the expense.
1. Streets shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the widths and
dimensions shown on plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted by
the developer and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
2. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of
construction and specifications as adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and the design standards of § 402 of this Chapter.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 503
1:485
§ 504. Street Name Signs. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 504]
§ 505. Streetlights. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 505]
§ 506. Sidewalks. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 506]
3. The size of the storm drainage structures shall be computed by using
"Rational Method" or other comparable contemporary engineering
standard.
4. Slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center line of the street
shall not exceed 2:1.
5. All cement concrete shall be Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Class AA and shall be installed in accordance with
current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specification,
Publication 408.
1. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections within the
plan and at the intersections of all existing and proposed streets. The
street name signs are to be provided by the developer and conform to
the Township specifications.
2. Signs and supports may be provided by the Township at the developer's
expense and installed by the developer, although the Township and
developer may mutually agree on an alternative sign type in accordance
with the Township standards.
1. Streetlights shall be provided by the developer in all major
subdivisions, land development plans or mobile home parks.
Streetlights shall also be provided where the Township determines that
lighting will improve a dangerous traffic situation.
2. Lights shall be on their own standards and shall be served from an
underground source. The developer shall be responsible for payment of
the installation as determined by the electric utility.
3. Lights and standards shall be mutually acceptable to the Township, the
developer and the electric company.
4. The Township shall assume the costs of electric power after installation,
except that owners of subdivisions, land developments or mobile home
parks in which streets remain as private thoroughfares shall bear the
costs of electric power.
1. Sidewalks shall be required to be constructed on one side of all arterial
and collector streets. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to
require sidewalks on any other streets it deems necessary.
2. On sidewalks constructed on grades exceeding 10%, steps, step ramps,
landings and suitable railing shall be installed.
§ 503 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 506
1:486
§ 507. Sanitary Sewage Disposal. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 507]
3. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet in width or, if pedestrian traffic
appears to warrant it, wider, at the direction of the Planning
Commission.
4. Sidewalks shall be concrete at least four inches thick on four inches of
crushed stone and reinforced with six-inch by six-inch grid #8 welded
wire fabric. Cut joints shall occur not less frequently than every six feet
and expansion joints not less frequently than once every 30 feet.
Surfaces shall receive a nonskid finish, and be sloped for drainage.
Cement concrete shall be Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Class AA and shall be installed in accordance with current Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specification 408.
5. Sidewalks shall be placed in the street right-of-way, preferably
separated from the street curb by at least two feet, or in their own
rights-of-way when crossing blocks.
6. Standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be
applicable to the design and construction of sidewalks.
1. Every structure in any subdivision, land development plan or mobile
home park shall be connected to a public sanitary sewerage disposal
system, when available.
2. A public sanitary sewerage disposal system shall be considered
"available" to a subdivision, land development plan or mobile home
park when the interceptors, collectors, laterals or sewerage treatment
plant of the existing public system are within the appropriate distance,
as defined by the Township Code of Ordinances, of the subdivision, land
development plan or mobile home park and all necessary rights-of-way
can be obtained.
3. When a subdivision, land development plan or mobile home park is
proposed in an area of the Township that has been designated by the
Township or by the Authority serving it by an official plan or plan
revision of a Sewage Facilities Plan (Act 537 Plan) as an area to be
connected to the public sanitary sewerage disposal system in the
future, the developer may elect to construct, in accordance with the
standards of the Authority, the necessary interceptors, collectors,
laterals or other facilities connecting to the public sanitary sewerage
disposal system.
4. Where a subdivision, land development plan or mobile home park is
proposed beyond the future reach of the public sanitary sewerage
disposal system, as described in the official plan or plan revision of the
Sewage Facilities Plan (Act 537, most recent update) of the Township,
the developer shall provide individual on lot septic systems as agreed
upon by the Township or a disposal system acceptable to the
§ 506 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 507
1:487
§ 508. Water Supply and Hydrants. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 508]
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the North Strabane Township Municipal Authority.
5. Before any sewer interceptor, collector or lateral which will become a
part of the public sanitary sewerage disposal system is covered with
dirt or other material, it shall be inspected by the Authority and shall
not be covered until authorized by the Authority. On-lot septic systems
shall be inspected before covering by the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer, and he shall authorize covering of such system.
6. Storm sewers, footer drains and down spouts shall not be connected to
the sanitary sewers.
7. Sanitary sewers shall not be less than eight inches' inside diameter, and
lateral lines shall not be less than four inches' inside diameter.
1. The developer shall provide within his subdivision, land development
plan or mobile home park a complete water supply system acceptable to
the Authority or company providing service in the area, when available.
A water supply system shall be considered available where adjacent to,
or within a reasonable distance of, the proposed plan and all necessary
rights-of-way can be obtained.
2. Where the plan is proposed in an area that has been designated by the
Township or by the Authority or company serving it as an area to be
connected in the future, the developer may elect to construct the
necessary water distribution system to meet the Authority or company
standards and connect to the then-existing public system.
3. Where a plan is proposed beyond the likely future reach of the public
water supply system the developer shall provide individual systems on
each lot or a supply system acceptable to the State Department of
Environmental Protection in the case of a development plan or mobile
home park, if permitted by the Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter
27].
4. Before any waterline is covered, it shall be inspected by the Authority
or company which will supply the water. No line shall be covered until
directed by the Authority or company.
5. All water supply systems shall meet the requirements of the State
Department of Environmental Protection as to quality, quantity and
pressure.
6. Where connection has been or will be made to a public system, the
installation shall include fire hydrants at street intersections or at a
reasonable distance from all existing structures, measured along the
most likely route that the fire company would utilize to lay its lines,
following established roadways or other reasonable means of access.
The location of fire hydrants shall be reviewed by the fire company in
§ 507 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 508
1:488
§ 509. Underground Utilities. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 509]
§ 510. Flood-Prone Areas. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 510]
In any areas of the Township where maps or data prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Flood Insurance
Administration (Flood Hazard Area Maps), indicate a floodplain exists,
development of any kind proposed to take place within or adjacent to such
floodplain shall not be approved and no building permits for construction
shall be issued until the requirements of the North Strabane Township
Floodplain Management Ordinance [Chapter 8] have been met.
§ 511. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 511]
whose coverage the plan lies, and its recommendations shall guide
approval of the location of hydrants. The installation of hydrants, where
required, shall be guaranteed to the Township under the bond covering
installation of other improvements in the plan or by a separate surety
bond or certified check. The type of hydrant shall be subject to approval
by the Township.
7. Water distribution lines shall be not less than eight inches' inside
diameter.
8. Water supply shall be adequate for the size of the structures proposed
as specified by the Insurance Service Office (ISO) Standards for
Required Fire Flows.
1. All electric and telephone lines serving any subdivision, land
development plan or mobile home park not in the rights-of-way of
streets existing prior to the development shall be placed underground
in street rights-of-way or other recorded easements, in accordance with
P.U.C. Order of July 8, 1970. Any exceptions shall be made only after
successful appeal to the P.U.C.
2. Where easements or rights-of-way are shared by several utilities, each
shall be placed with respect to the requirements of the others relative
to separation, depth, etc.
3. Transformers, switch gear and other appurtenances to electric and
telephone systems shall be placed either in secured vaults in the ground
or pad mounted in secured steel containers made as inconspicuous as
possible by landscaping.
4. The developer shall submit his utility plans to each utility involved. No
final approval for a subdivision or land development plan may be given
until written approval has been received from each utility.
1. Where a subdivision, land development or mobile home park plan
includes earth disturbance, the appropriate Department of
Environmental Protection land disturbance permit and/or National
§ 508 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 511
1:489
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits shall be
obtained prior to final approval by the Township. All regulations and
guidelines of the regulatory agencies shall be complied with. In
development exempt from receipt of formal permits, approval by the
Washington County Soil Conservation District shall be obtained prior
to final plan approval by the Township. The plan shall include as a
minimum:
A. The topography of the project area.
B. Types, depth, slope and area extent of the soils throughout the
project area.
C. Proposed alteration of the area.
D. Amount of runoff from the project area and the upstream
watershed.
E. The proposed staging of earthmoving activities.
F. Temporary and permanent control measures and facilities for use
while earthmoving is in progress and after work is completed as
permanent installation.
G. Proposed construction schedule.
2. The preparer of the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall use as
a guide the Chapter 102 regulations and the "Erosion and
Sedimentation Pollution Control Manual" of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
3. The developer shall be responsible for the following:
A. Restoration of disturbed areas including off-site borrow or spoil
areas until surface stabilization is accomplished. Restoration shall
include maintenance of sedimentation control facilities during
stabilization period and removal of unnecessary control facilities at
end of stabilization period with planting of disturbed areas
resulting from such removal.
B. Removal of sedimentation created by the project from all adjoining
surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and repair of damage
thus created.
C. Maintenance of all watercourses and drainage facilities within his
development until stabilization of surfaces is achieved.
D. Prevention of any alteration of flow in established watercourses
crossing his development unless approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
E. Provision of drainage easements or rights-of-way to contain
watercourses crossing his development in approximately the
§ 511 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 511
1:490
§ 512. Drainage and Stormwater Management. [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 512]
existing alignment of such watercourses and of sufficient width to
preserve natural drainage.
4. Where a developer proposes to alter the land surface drainage patterns,
he shall:
A. Collect runoff from the development for discharge at stabilized
points entering the natural watercourse of the drainage area.
B. Design his drainage system to accommodate stormwater runoff
generated from the potential full development of the area upstream
from his property.
C. Provide and install all erosion and sedimentation control measures
and facilities at his expense in accordance with the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
1. All areas of a subdivision, land development plan or mobile home park
to be developed with streets, residential lots or sites, recreation areas
or other uses shall be graded to assure positive drainage.
2. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided to
ensure the controlled flow of natural watercourses and to guarantee the
drainage of all low points along the curb or gutter lines, as well as at
intervals related to slope, of all streets in or adjacent to the plan. Where
driveways cross gutter lines or on streets without curbs, they shall be
designed to allow passage of stormwater along the gutter line or
passage via a pipe below the driveway entrance of proper type and size
to carry the run-off. In no case shall stormwater flowing down a
driveway be permitted to cross a public street.
3. In designing the storm drainage system, the developer shall use as his
guide the publication "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,"
Technical Release No. 55, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, June 1986, and as amended. The predevelopment
condition of the parcel to be developed shall consider the state of the
land surface on the date that the developer entered into an agreement
to purchase the property. The developer may pass through stormwater
originating upstream of his property, but if he elects to control it,
bypass devices he installs shall be capable of handling the one-hundredyear
twenty-four-hour peak flow, and he may trade off, as compensation
for such installations, control measures that would normally be
required on his property, provided that the total control system results
in equal or better protection for downstream properties. If a property is
to be laid out in lots, no reduction in lot size shall be permitted to
accommodate storm drainage detention structures. The developer shall
consult with the Washington County office of the Soil Conservation
Service before developing his storm drainage plans. The Township and
§ 511 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 512
1:491
others reviewing a stormwater control plan will use discretion in
considering unusual conditions, such as drainage from several basins
on the same property under development.
4. The stormwater drainage plan of a subdivision, land development plan
or mobile home park shall be designed to assure that, after
development, stormwater does not leave the property at a greater
velocity or volume per second than before development commenced.
A. Volumes of runoff from the drainage area(s) must be calculated to
determine the sizing of temporary and permanent facilities to
control stormwater and erosion. For the purpose of this Part, storm
events are based on the amount of runoff during a period of 24
hours, as follows:
Storm Frequency Inches of Rainfall
2-year 2.3
5-year 3.3
10-year 3.9
25-year 4.4
one-hundred-year 5.2
B. Storm sewer system within a development shall be designed to
handle the peak rate of runoff from a twenty-five-year frequency
storm. Where the provisions of federal and state laws impose a
greater design frequency, particularly in areas where drainage
systems cross highways, they shall prevail.
C. All stormwater retention/detention facilities shall be designed on
the basis of providing adequate control for all storm frequencies of
a twenty-four-hour duration up to and including the twenty-fiveyear
storm. All designs shall provide emergency overflow facilities
for the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour duration storm, unless
positive measures are installed to control the inflow so as not to
exceed the safe capacity of the retention/detention facility.
D. The retention volume required shall be that necessary to handle
runoff of a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour duration storm from
the development, less that volume discharged during the same
duration at the approved release rate.
E. The approved peak release rate of stormwater from all retention/
detention facilities for any storm event shall be that which was
experienced prior to development for the twenty-four-hour
duration of the same storm event up to and including the twentyfive-
year storm.
F. Storm sewers shall be designed utilizing the Rational Method with
a Pennsylvania Department of Transportation twenty-five-year
storm from their intensity duration charts.
§ 512 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 512
1:492
5. Detention areas, where required to impede runoff, shall be designed to
meet or exceed the following standards:
A. Except where a permanent pond is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, detention areas shall be designed to drain completely.
B. The area to be occupied by the dam shall be cleared of all topsoil
and organic materials prior to construction. The dam shall be built
up in layers not to exceed six inches in depth with equipment
providing 95% compaction at optimum moisture conditions. The
top of the dam shall be constructed 10% higher than its designed
height to allow for settlement.
C. The settled elevation of the top of the dam at its lowest point shall
be not less than one foot above the maximum water level to be
impounded behind the dam and not less than two feet above the
elevation of the emergency spillway.
D. The surfaces of the dam shall be planted in a mixture of perennial
quick-catching grasses and crown vetch.
E. The face of the dam shall not slope on either face less than one foot
of vertical rise for each two feet of horizontal run and not more
than a total on both faces of one foot of vertical rise for each five
feet of horizontal run.
F. The horizontal drainpipe passing through the dam shall be smooth
steel, Schedule 40 or heavier, or reinforced concrete pipe with
equivalent strength and hydraulic characteristics. Anti-seepage
collars shall be placed not less than 28 feet apart along the length
of the pipe. Each collar shall be fabricated of not less than onefourth-
inch steel plate, shall extend not less than two feet in all
directions at right angles from the outer face of the pipe, shall be
welded in place all around, and shall be completely enclosed within
the dam fill.
G. The top of the outlet structure to drain the pond shall be not less
than three feet in height above the invert elevation of the horizontal
pipe, shall have openings not less than four inches in diameter, and
shall be fitted with an anti-vortex device and a trash rack. All outlet
structures shall be constructed of concrete. Metal structures are
not permitted.
H. The emergency spillway shall be capable of passing the flow
created by one-hundred-year storm.
I. The low edge of a parking area, curbed or not, may serve the
purpose of an emergency spillway to pass the overflow from a
stormwater detention area, provided that the embankment below
the edge is well stabilized with planting materials and the angle of
the slope will not encourage erosion, in the opinion of the Township
and other reviewing agencies. The maximum depth of water on a
§ 512 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 512
1:493
parking area used for stormwater management purposes shall not
exceed eight inches.
6. The owner or developer, when required by the Township, shall enter
into a legal agreement approved by the Township Solicitor which shall
hold the Township harmless from any and all liability relating to storm
drainage collection and its discharge during construction of the system
and thereafter. The agreement shall also make provisions for
maintenance of the system(s) constructed. The owner or developer
shall secure, where necessary, off-site easements for storm drainage.
7. Maintenance Standards for Stormwater Management Facilities. The
following requirements are established for the ownership and
maintenance of the of said facilities:
A. Nonresidential facilities and maintenance thereof shall become the
responsibility of the owner of the property owner.
B. In any case where a homeowners' association is established,
operation and maintenance of retention or detention facilities shall
become the responsibility of that entity.
C. In cases where there is no homeowners' association, and
stormwater facilities are constructed that are "detention" in
nature, and constructed in accordance with the Township
standards, and approved by the Township Engineer, the Township
may consider acceptance of the facility as a part of the public
improvements. The developer shall provide (to the permanent
North Strabane Township Perpetual Maintenance and Repair Fund
for Stormwater Facilities) an amount determined by the Township
Engineer which, at a rate of 6% per annum, will provide sufficient
interest income per year to the annual maintenance of such
facilities.
Example: Maintenance $250 per year = $4,166.67 deposit
$500 per year = $8,333.33 deposit
Prior to the Township approving the final plan upon which
stormwater facilities are shown for dedication to the Township,
the developer or owner shall provide to the Township satisfactory
surety as approved by the Township Solicitor to ensure the
payment of said required maintenance amount to North Strabane
Township Perpetual Maintenance and Repair Fund for Stormwater
Facilities, at the completion of construction and prior to
acceptance by the Township Engineer. Under no circumstances
will the Township accept facilities that are considered to be
"retention" in nature.
8. The costs of review and inspection by the Township Engineer of the
stormwater management system as proposed by the developer shall be
borne by the developer, whether or not the plan is ultimately approved.
The Engineer shall review such changes as the developer may make in
§ 512 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 512
1:494
§ 513. Additional Design Standards for Land Developments. [Ord.
234, 5/27/1997, § 513; as amended by Ord. 326, 1/22/2008]
In addition to all applicable standards specified in §§ 501 through 512,
land developments, as defined herein, which propose multifamily dwelling
units or any nonresidential development shall comply with the following
standards:
his plan for compliance with the Engineer's recommendations and shall
advise the Board of Supervisors whether the revised plan is in
compliance or not. The Board shall direct the Engineer to inspect an
approved dam during its various stages of construction and to point
out to the contractor, the developer and Board any deviations from the
design as approved.
9. Catch basins shall be pre-cast concrete meeting at least the standards
of the current edition of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's
specification sheet RC-52. Catch basins shall be located no further
apart than 400 feet, measured between catch basins on the same side of
the street.
10. Graded areas shall be stabilized with erosion resisting plantings placed
immediately after the completion of grading. Graded slopes produced
by placing fill earth over the preexisting surface shall be keyed into the
original grade.
11. Swales or open channels intended to provide drainage between lots
shall be established and easements provided where necessary. No
property owner shall be permitted to alter, fill or disrupt the operation
of an open channel.
12. All persons, partnerships or corporations intending to excavate, fill or
grade land in the Township shall be required to apply for a grading
permit under the terms of Township Ord. 162, as amended [Chapter 9],
and shall have a valid grading permit in their possession prior to the
start of any grading work. Work shall be undertaken in conformance
with the requirements of Ord. 162 [Chapter 9].
A. Coverage of the Property by Buildings. The property shall contain
adequate space for required off-street parking, truck servicing and
landscaping and shall meet the minimum lot coverage requirements of
the Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
B. Setbacks of Buildings. Buildings shall be set back as required by the
Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
C. Parking on the Property. Automobile parking spaces on the property
shall be provided as required by the Township Zoning Ordinance
[Chapter 27]. Circulation into and through the parking area shall be the
simplest possible, given the property size and shape. Advantage within
the parking area shall be given the pedestrian. A fire lane shall be
maintained around those sides of the building abutting the parking
§ 512 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 513
1:495
areas not less than 30 feet in depth, such distance measured from
the face of the building to the edge of the nearest row of parking
spaces. Where the ground beyond the edge of the parking area slopes
downward and cars are to be parked at right angles to the slope, wheel
stops or a curb shall be provided at the edge of the pavement. Parking
spaces shall be marked off in traffic paint with lines not less than six
inches wide.
D. Access into the Property.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall determine the number of and
location of required access areas to the property. This may include
more than one access area/curb cut.
(2) Access into the property shall only be made at curb cut locations
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Not more than two such
access points shall be permitted if the property frontage is less
than 400 feet on one street or more than three access points if
frontage length is greater than 400 feet. Where a property fronts
on two or more streets, one access point may be required on each
secondary street in addition to those on the principal access street.
A PennDOT highway occupancy permit shall be obtained for all
points of access onto a state highway, and all site plans shall have
this requirement noted on the plan.
(3) Access points shall be located to provide maximum sight distances
for car drivers leaving the property and those on the abutting
street. A sight distance of not less than 200 feet in each direction
along the street at each access point shall be considered an
optimum condition, measured between three feet and eight feet
above the pavement at the access point. Obstructions on the
property reducing sight distances shall be removed.
(4) Developers shall be responsible for providing permanent
structures, in the form of curbs, landscaped areas or other barriers,
to limit access to the approved locations. Access points shall not be
less than 24 feet nor more than 35 feet wide. Where curbing is
employed, a curb radius of not less than 25 feet shall be provided at
the intersection of the public street and access drive. The Board of
Supervisors may require, at its option, that certain access points be
limited to specific movements into or out of the property in order to
assure maximum public safety. Further, the Board may require, in
the case of large parking areas, that entering traffic must proceed
at least 60 feet along the access drive into the property before
turning into a parking lane.
(5) In lieu of and solely at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors,
the Township may accept one of the aforesaid access points, if more
than one access is required, to be from an adjacent property,
provided that an express, permanent grant of access is provided by
the adjacent property owner to the applicant.
§ 513 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 513
1:496
E. Truck Loading Areas. When businesses receive and/or ship goods on
the property, a loading area or areas for that purpose shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance
[Chapter 27]. Loading areas shall be set aside independent of off-street
parking areas and arranged so that delivery vehicles may enter and
leave the servicing area moving in a forward direction. Loading areas
shall be to the side or rear of the commercial or industrial building.
F. Pedestrian Walkways. Where parking spaces on a property are located
in excess of 140 feet from the building they are designed to serve, a
pedestrian walkway shall be provided in the parking area not less than
four feet in width connecting the parking spaces to the entrances to the
building. Such pedestrian walkways may occur between rows of
parking spaces where the spaces are at right angles to the building or
along the ends of rows where the spaces are arranged parallel to the
building. A walkway along the edge of the parking area adjacent to the
building, raised six inches above the parking area shall be provided
connecting to the building entrances. A handicapped ramp or ramps
shall be constructed between the parking area and raised walkway
adjacent to the building.
G. Stormwater.
(1) Stormwater shall be controlled on the property or properties upon
which it falls. Stormwater shall not be allowed to leave the property
at a greater velocity or volume per second than prior to
development nor to create erosion of ground surfaces either on the
property or downstream of it. Where easements must be secured
for passage of stormwater over downstream properties, they shall
be secured by the developer in writing.
(2) Stormwater management facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of § 512 of this Chapter.
(3) Where an already developed property is to be further improved and
a sever stormwater problem exists, the Board of Supervisors shall
require remedial action to be taken by the developer to relieve the
problem as a condition of approving the plan. In addition to
providing for storm drainage, the developer shall prepare an
erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with § 511 of
this Chapter.
H. Lighting of Property. In addition to those requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27], the following conditions apply:
(1) Parking and pedestrian areas on the property shall be lighted to
create a level of not less than 0.5 footcandle when measured three
feet above the pavement throughout the paved areas on the
property. Such lighting may be from freestanding lampposts within
the parking areas, from nearby streetlights or from lights as not to
create glare conditions on adjacent streets or properties. Light
§ 513 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 513
1:497
standards in parking areas shall be protected from accidental
damage by vehicles.
I. Landscaping. In addition to those requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27], the following conditions apply:
(1) All areas of the property not paved or occupied by buildings shall
be landscaped and maintained. At least 5% of the area of the
property lying between the abutting street and the principal
building or buildings on the property shall be set aside for
landscaping. Where the property abuts two streets, at least 8% of
the area between the streets and principal building or buildings
shall be set aside for landscaping. Lot areas not covered by
buildings, sidewalks, pavement or other improvements shall be
seeded with grass or other appropriate ground cover material
compatible with the landscape and architectural design and
condition of the surrounding areas.
(2) Landscaping may take the form of grassed areas, shrubbery, trees,
ground cover, mulching materials, boulders or other features in
combination and shall conform to accepted minimum standards.
Landscaping materials shall not obstruct sight distances at access
points to the property.
(3) The developer shall post a performance bond and a maintenance
bond or other security satisfactory to the Township Solicitor in an
amount approved by the Township Engineer, equal to the estimated
cost of the landscaping to guarantee implementation of the
landscaping plan and a percentage of the amount of the
landscaping bond to be held for two complete growing seasons to
assure stabilization and growth of the landscaping materials.
J. Garbage and Trash Containers. In addition to those requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], the following conditions apply:
(1) All organic rubbish and discarded materials shall be placed in tight,
verminproof containers on the property and shall be secured in side
or rear yards screened from public view by means of a solid face
fence or wall. Containers shall be emptied not less frequently than
once a week. On properties where food is served in paper
containers, covered waste receptacles shall be conspicuously
located on the premises for use by patrons. The management shall
be responsible for maintaining the property free of litter.
K. Appearance of Buildings. Where several commercial or industrial
buildings occupy the same property, or several commercial or industrial
enterprises occupy the same building, there shall be an architectural
continuity in the design of the facades of the building or buildings
facing the street or streets to which the property has access. Evidence
of continuity may be shown by the use of a common wall finishing
material, common size, height and lettering style of signs, and similar
window and door sizes, heights and arrangements. Unpainted concrete
§ 513 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 513
1:498
block walls will be permitted only where they are hidden from public
view and from the view from nearby residential properties.
L. Use of Trailers on a Commercial or Industrial Property. No vehicle
towed to a site or driven there shall be used for purposes of storage of
materials or goods, for temporary expansion of a business, or for sales
or display of goods.
§ 513 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 513
1:499

Part 6
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 601. General Requirements. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 601]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or extend any
mobile home park within North Strabane Township unless he holds a
valid permit issued by the Township and also valid permits issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Washington County Planning Commission in the name of the owner of
the mobile home park for the specific construction, operation or
extension proposed.
2. All application procedures for preliminary and final approval shall be in
accordance with § 302 and § 303 of these regulations.
3. Before the Zoning Officer may issue a permit, the owner shall show that
he has in his possession, valid permits issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Washington County
Planning Commission.
4. Permits shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed
annually upon application, contingent upon compliance with these
regulations and those of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Washington County Planning
Commission.
5. Each original application and each application for a renewal permit
shall be accompanied by payment of an inspection fee in an amount
established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
made payable to North Strabane Township. Each application for
renewal licenses shall list the name of each owner and/or tenant who
owns and/or occupies each mobile home or each mobile home lot;
identifying and stating for each owner and/or tenant his address and
the mobile home lot number on which the mobile home in which he
resides and/or owns is located.
6. Mobile home parks in existence prior to adoption of this Chapter shall
be required to meet only the standards of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection as a prerequisite to the issuing of a
Township permit.
7. No annual renewal permit shall be issued to any mobile home park in
the Township unless the owner proves he has a valid permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
8. The Township Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall not be
denied access to any mobile home park at reasonable hours in order to
determine compliance with these regulations.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 601
1:501
§ 602. Development Standards. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 602]
9. No mobile home lacking its own toilet, bathing, cooking and food
storage facilities, all in working condition, shall be permitted in a
mobile home park.
1. Bulk and Dimensional Requirements.
A. Minimum size of park, five contiguous acres.
B. Minimum size of lot, 6,000) square feet.
C. Maximum number of lots per gross acre of a park (including streets
and community and recreation areas), seven per gross acre.
D. Minimum lot width, 60 feet.
E. Minimum setback from park property line or adjacent public road
right-of-way outside the park to side or end of nearest mobile home,
40 feet.
F. Minimum setback of mobile home from internal park street, 30
feet.
G. Minimum distance between ends of adjacent mobile homes, 30
feet.
H. Minimum distance between parallel sides of adjacent mobile
homes, 40 feet.
I. Minimum distance between the end of one mobile home and the
parallel side of an adjacent mobile home, 35 feet.
J. Minimum distance between parallel sides of adjacent mobile homes
when they overlap by no more than 15 feet if extended towards one
another along a plane at right angles to their parallel sides, 20 feet.
K. Sides or ends of adjacent mobile homes shall be considered parallel
if they form an angle, when the adjacent sides or ends are extended
to intersect, of not less than 45° nor more than 135°.
2. Circulation.
A. All streets for vehicular traffic within the park shall be at least 24
feet in width and paved the full width. They shall conform with
§ 503 of this chapter for maximum and minimum street grades,
intersection grade-s and minimum paving requirements, and shall
be maintained in perpetuity by the owner of the park or his agent.
B. No streets shall dead-end within the park; cul-de-sac streets shall
conform to § 402 (2) (D) of this Chapter.
§ 601 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 602
1:502
§ 603. Utilities. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 603]
C. Each mobile home lot on the site shall abut an access street which
shall lead directly to the public street serving the property. No lot in
a park shall have direct access to a public street abutting the park.
D. Parking, if provided in group areas serving several mobile homes,
shall be no further distant than 100 feet from the farthest mobile
home thus served. Otherwise, each mobile home lot shall be
provided with two off-street parking spaces with dust-free
stabilized surfaces, each at least nine feet by (18) feet in size. No
parking shall occur on any park street.
3. Development of Mobile Home Lots.
A. Mobile homes shall be supported on masonry or concrete
foundation piers extending at least three feet below finished grade,
such foundations capable of bearing the mobile home weight
without settlement. Such installation shall be completed within 30
days of arrival of the mobile home on the lot.
B. Mobile homes shall be securely fastened to their foundation and
the area below the mobile home extending to the ground shall be
enclosed with a continuous metal or other skirting, ventilated to
inhibit structural deterioration.
C. No enclosed permanent addition to a mobile home shall be
permitted in a park. Concrete slabs on grade covered by overhead
structures attached to a mobile home to provide an open sided
patio are allowed, provided such structures are securely fastened
to the mobile home and the ground.
D. The detached accessory structure shall be located on lot no closer
than five feet from a mobile home and shall comply with all
required setbacks.
4. Other Uses Within the Park. No part of any park shall be used for any
other uses except mobile home lots, office or residence of the manager,
a central clothes laundry facility and/or recreation facilities, both
outdoor and enclosed.
5. Sale of Portions of the Mobile Home Park. No portion of an approved
mobile home park shall be severed for separate sale unless the portion
to be sold and the remaining tract each have frontage on a public street
and each severed tract meets the minimum standards for a mobile
home park.
1. Utilities. All utilities including, but not limited to, the following shall be
provided in accordance with State or Federal statutes, rules and/or
regulations and the developer shall provide written statements from
each applicable utility or service provider that the proposed services
will comply with the minimum standards:
§ 602 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:503
§ 604. Responsibilities of the Management. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 604]
A. Water supply.
B. Sewage disposal.
C. Electrical distribution.
D. Fuel supply and storage.
2. Fire Protection.
A. Fire hydrants shall be provided by the developer and shall be
provided at street intersections or at a reasonable distance from all
existing structures, measured along the most likely route that the
fire company would utilize to lay its lines, following established
roadways or other reasonable means of access. The location of the
fire hydrants shall be reviewed by the fire company in whose
coverage the plan lies and its recommendations shall guide the
approval of the location of hydrants. The installation of hydrants
shall be guaranteed to the Township under the bond covering
installation of other improvements in the plan or by separate surety
bond or certified check. The type of hydrant shall be subject to
approval by the Township.
B. Water supply shall be adequate for the structures proposed as
specified by the Insurance Service Office (ISO) standards for
required fire flows.
1. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with these regulations and those of the
applicable State regulatory agency and shall maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
2. The park management shall supervise and be responsible for the
placement of each mobile home on its lot, including all utility
connections.
3. The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all
park occupants, such register being available to any member of the
Board of Supervisors or the Board's authorized representative upon
demand at any reasonable hour.
4. No mobile home may be moved, either within the Township or from the
Township, without the owner first obtaining a permit from the Township
Tax Collector. Such permit will be issued upon notice of the Tax
Collector and the Zoning Officer verifying payment of any outstanding
taxes owed and local taxing jurisdiction by anyone occupying the
mobile home to be moved.
§ 603 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 605
1:504
§ 605. Violations. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 605]
1. Wherever the Township Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer, or
his designated agent, determines by personal inspection that a violation
exists in any mobile home park, he shall immediately inform by certified
mail the person, firm, partnership, corporation, shareholders, principal
officers or other entity to whom the permit to operate has been issued,
of the nature of the violation by specific Section of these regulations,
what corrective action is required, the time limit within which repair
shall be made and the penalty for failure to correct.
2. The permittee may request, within 30 days of notice, a hearing before
the Zoning Hearing Board. Such hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the requirements of § 908 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
3. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, shareholder, principal
officer or other entity who or which violates any provision of this
Chapter after expiration of the time period in which he has been
ordered to correct a violation shall be guilty of a summary offense and,
upon conviction before a district magistrate, shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 per violation, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each lot and each day that a violation continues may be
counted as a separate violation and fines collected shall be paid over to
the Township.
4. While action is pending following the Township Zoning Officer's or Code
Enforcement Officer's notification, or before the Zoning Officer is
satisfied that a violation has been corrected, no parking permits shall
be issued for any new mobile homes to be located in the mobile home
park containing the violation and the park's Township permit shall be
suspended.
§ 605 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 605
1:505

Part 7
WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 701. Waivers of Application Requirements for Simple Subdivision.
[Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 701]
§ 702. Cases of Physical Hardship. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 702]
1. In the case of a simple subdivision, as defined by this Chapter, which
will not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property, the preliminary application and filing fee as
required by § 302 of this Chapter shall not be required, provided that all
requirements for submission of a final application specified in § 303 of
this Chapter are met.
2. In the case of these simple subdivisions, preliminary approval shall be
combined with final approval and the procedure for granting approval
shall comply with the provisions of §§ 303 and 304 of this Chapter.
1. In any particular case where the developer can show by plan and
written statement that, by reason of exceptional topographic or other
physical conditions, strict compliance with any requirement of this
Chapter would cause practical difficulty or exceptional and undue
hardship, the Board of Supervisors may relax such requirement to the
extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or
hardship, provided that such relief may be granted without detriment to
the public good and without impairing the intent and purpose of this
Chapter of the desirable general development of the neighborhood and
the community in accordance with the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
2. No such modification from the provisions of these regulations shall be
authorized by the Board of Supervisors unless all of the following
conditions pertain:
A. There are unique physical circumstances or conditions present on
the property including peculiar shape or exceptional topographical
or other physical conditions and the reasons for which a
modification is sought are due to these conditions and not the
provisions of these subdivision regulations.
B. Because of the physical circumstances there is no possibility that
the property can be developed in strict conformity with these
regulations, if reasonable use is to be made of it.
C. The reasons for request of a modification have not been created by
the applicant.
D. The modification, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:507
§ 703. Other Modifications. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 703]
When, owing to special site or engineering conditions, the developer can
demonstrate by plan and written statement that an equal or better method
or material is available to meet the intent of the design standards in Part
5 of this Chapter, the Board of Supervisors may make such reasonable
modifications to any of the requirements of this Chapter as will not be
contrary to the public interest and may approve a subdivision or land
development plan subject to conditions necessary to assure adequate public
improvements.
§ 704. Procedure for Authorizing Modifications. [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 704]
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
E. The modification, if authorized, will represent the minimum
modification that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulations in issue.
F. Economic hardship, alone, shall not be sufficient justification for
granting a modification.
3. Any request for a variance to the requirements of this Township Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27], including, but not limited to, lot area, lot width
and front, side or rear yards shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the procedure specified for variances in the
Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
1. The owner and/or developer of a subdivision or land development
proposal shall submit to the Township Zoning Officer or Planning
Coordinator at least 20 days prior to a regular Planning Commission
meeting any application for a modification to the provisions of this
Chapter, citing specifically the deviations from a particular Section or
Sections of these regulations requested.
2. The Planning Commission shall consider the application and may call a
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, as defined by this Chapter, to
obtain additional information and public comment regarding the
request.
3. The procedure for review and approval, approval with conditions or
denial of the request shall be the same as the procedure specified in
§§ 302 and 303 of this Chapter governing preliminary and final
application approval, whichever is applicable.
4. Any request for a modification or exception to this Chapter authorized
by this Part shall be considered by the Board of Supervisors at a public
meeting. If the Planning Commission or Township Engineer has made a
recommendation on the request, the recommendations shall be entered
into the official record of the meeting. The reasons relied upon by the
§ 702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 704
1:508
Board of Supervisors in approving or disapproving the request shall
be entered into the minutes of the meeting and any resolution or
ordinance adopted governing an application which contains a request
for a modification shall include reference to the modification and the
reasons for approval or disapproval.
5. The landowner and/or developer may appeal an unfavorable decision to
the Washington County Court of Common Pleas or may modify the
application for another submission to the Planning Commission. The
landowner and/or developer may not reapply for the same modification,
once finally denied, for at least one year after such rejection.
6. A notation regarding the substance of any modification approved in
accordance with this Part and the date of such approval shall be
lettered in ink upon the recording tracing and signed and dated by the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 704 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 704
1:509

Part 8
AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
§ 801. Initiation. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 801]
The provisions of this Chapter may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed or repealed in accordance with the following
procedure. A proposal for an amendment may be initiated in any of the
following ways:
§ 802. Procedures for Consideration. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 802]
A. A request to the Planning Commission by the Board of Supervisors.
B. An official proposal by the Planning Commission.
C. A petition presented to the Planning Commission by at least five
property owners in the Township or a developer who has entered into
an agreement with a landowner to purchase property in the Township.
1. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, amend this Chapter in
accordance with the following provisions. In the case of amendments
other than those prepared by the Township Planning Commission, the
Board of Supervisors shall submit the proposed amendment to the
Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior to the
date fixed for the public hearing on the proposed amendment.
2. The proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Washington County
Planning Commission for review and recommendations at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing on the amendment.
3. The Board of Supervisors shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to
public notice after which it shall vote approval or disapproval of the
proposed amendment within 90 days of the conclusion of the hearing.
4. If a proposed amendment is changed substantively after public hearing,
the Board of Supervisors shall hold an additional public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before voting for or against adoption.
5. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless public notice of the
proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in this Chapter and
shall include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered, a reference to a place within the Township where copies of
the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Board of Supervisors
shall publish the proposed amendment once in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Township not more than 60 days nor less than
seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment
shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary
prepared by the Township Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions
in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
§ 801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 802
1:511
A. A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
B. An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
County law library or other County office designated by the County
Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than that
necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
6. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Board of Supervisors
shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise in one newspaper
of general circulation in the Township a brief summary setting forth all
the provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the
amendments.
7. Subdivision and land development amendments may be incorporated
into official ordinance books by reference with the same force and
effect as if duly recorded therein.
8. Within 30 days after adoption, the Board of Supervisors shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the Washington County Planning
Commission.
9. Appeal from decisions of the Board of Supervisors on amendments shall
be to the County Court of Common Pleas.
10. A proposed amendment, once finally denied, may not again be
considered for adoption in its original form for at least one year after
such denial, unless new circumstances would warrant such
reconsideration.
§ 802 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 802
1:512
Part 9
PROHIBITIONS, PENALTIES, ENFORCEMENT, FEES AND
INJUNCTIVE PROCEEDINGS
§ 901. Unlawful Recording and Sale of Lots. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 901]
§ 902. Preventative Remedies. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 902]
1. No plan of a subdivision or land development proposed in the Township
shall be recorded in any public office unless or until that plan shall bear
the certified approval of the Board of Supervisors.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade or otherwise convey or
offer to sell, trade or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part
of or in conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or
land development unless and until said plan, plat or replat shall have
been first recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
1. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided. The Township may refuse to issue any permit
or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real
property which has been developed or which has resulted from a
subdivision of real property in violation of this Chapter. The authority to
deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
A. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
B. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
C. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
D. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
2. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require
§ 901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 902
1:513
§ 903. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 903]
§ 904. Enforcement. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 904]
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this Chapter shall, upon being found liable therefore in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this Chapter
to have believed that there was no such violation in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the district
justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
2. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Section.
1. The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter and shall have all the powers and duties
conferred upon zoning officers by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
2. The Zoning Officer shall review proposals for subdivision and land
development plans upon request of the Planning Commission or Board
of Supervisors; shall issue or revoke permits; shall enter upon, at his
discretion, subdivision and land development plans in the process of
construction to evaluate compliance with the terms of approved
applications; shall notify the developer, in writing, regarding any aspect
of the development not in compliance and demand remedial action to
guarantee compliance and avoid revocation of the permit; and shall
otherwise act as the Township's agent in the enforcement of these
regulations.
§ 902 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 904
1:514
§ 905. Filing, Application Review and Inspection Fees. [Ord. 234, 5/
27/1997, § 905]
3. No developer, owner or agent or employee of them shall block entrance
of the Zoning Officer to any subdivision, land development or mobile
home park plan in the process of development.
1. Filing Fees.
A. In order to defray a part of the cost incurred by the Township in
processing plans, filing fees shall accompany the filing of each
preliminary and final application. Checks shall be made payable to
the Township.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall establish, from time to time, a
schedule of filing fees by resolution. The schedule of fees shall be
available to the public in the Office of the Township Manager.
C. In the event that the developer submits a revised application, the
revised application shall be accompanied by the filing fee required
for an original application. This fee shall apply only to revisions
initiated by the applicant, but shall not apply to revisions required
to complete an application or revisions requested by the Planning
Commission which are not required to complete an application.
2. Application Review Fees.
A. Application review fees shall include reasonable and necessary
charges by the Township's professional consultants or the
Township Engineer for review and report on the application to the
Township. Such review fees shall be based upon a schedule
established by resolution by the Board of Supervisors. Such review
fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Township Engineer or other consultants
for similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the Township Engineer or other
consultants to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify
the Township Manager that such fees are disputed, in which case
the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application due to the applicant's request over
disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
then the applicant and the Township shall follow the procedure for
resolution of disputes as set forth in subsection (3) of this Section.
3. Inspection Fees.
§ 904 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 905
1:515
A. The Township may prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the
Township for the reasonable and necessary expense incurred for
the inspection of improvements. Such reimbursement shall be
based upon a schedule established by ordinance or resolution.
Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the
ordinary and customary fees charged by the Township Engineer or
consultant for work performed for similar services in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the engineer or consultant to the Township when fees
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed engineer expenses.
C. If within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Township shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
D. The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately. In the
event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Township is located or if at the time there be no President Judge,
then the senior active judge then sitting shall appoint such
engineer who, in that case, shall be neither the Township Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
E. The fees of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Township shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
§ 905 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 905
1:516
otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 905 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 905
1:517

Part 10
CERTIFICATES AND APPROVALS
§ 1001. Owner Adoption (or § 1002). [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 1001]
Know all men by these Presents, That (I or we) (name of individual owner
or owners), of the Township of North Strabane, County of Washington and
State of Pennsylvania, for ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns, do hereby adopt this plan as (my, our) plan of (my, our)
property situated in North Strabane Township and do hereby dedicate
forever for public use for highway and utility purposes, all drives, roads,
lanes, ways, rights-of-way and other public highways shown upon the plan,
and we release, remise and discharge the Township of North Strabane, its
successor or assigns, of and from all liability, courses of action, claims or
damages arising from or pertaining to in any manner said roads and rightsof-
way.
We further agree that said plan is approved by the Township of North
Strabane for "Planning Purposes Only" and that said Township shall not
issue any "building permits" for lots contained herein, nor shall any lots
be deeded until either all of said roads and improvements in accordance
with North Strabane Township Ordinance _____ and all other applicable
ordinances have been completed and accepted by said Township or until
the Township has approved a bond with sufficient surety to guarantee
construction of the same.
In Witness Whereof, We hereunto set our hand and seal this _____ day of
_____, 19_____.
Notary Public
Owner
Owner
§ 1002. Corporation Adoption (or § 1001). [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 1002]
Know all men by these Presents, That __________, a Partnership (or
Corporation) duly registered under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, of the Township of North Strabane, County of Washington and
State of Pennsylvania, for ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns, does hereby adopt this plan as its plan for its property situate
in North Strabane Township and does hereby dedicate forever for public use
for highway and utility purposes, all driveways, roads, lanes, ways, right-ofway
and other public highways shown upon the plan, and we release, remise
and discharge the Township of North Strabane, its successor or assigns, of
and from all liability, courses of action, claims or damages arising from or
pertaining to in any manner said roads and rights-of-way.
§ 1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1002
1:519
We further agree that said plan is approved by the Township of North
Strabane for "Planning Purposes Only" and that said Township shall not
issue any "building permits" for lots contained herein, nor shall any lots
be deeded until either all of said roads and improvements in accordance
with North Strabane Township Ordinance No. _____ and all other applicable
ordinances have been completed and adopted by said Township or until
the Township has approved a bond with sufficient surety to guarantee
construction of the same.
In Witness Whereof, We hereunto set our hand and seal this _____ day of
_____, 19_____.
Notary Public
Owner
Owner
§ 1003. Individual Acknowledgement (or § 1004). [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 1003]
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA) SS:
COUNTY OF WASHINGTON
Before me, the subscriber, a Notary Public in and for said Commonwealth
and County, personally appeared the above named (Name of Owner), and
acknowledged the foregoing release and dedication and plan to be (his, her,
their) act and deed and desired the same to be recorded as such.
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _____ day of _____, 19_____.
My Commission Expires the _____ day of _____, 19_____.
SEAL
Notary Public
§ 1004. Corporation Acknowledgement (or § 1003). [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 1004]
Before me, the subscriber, a Notary Public in and for said Commonwealth
and County personally appeared Name and Title of Officer of the Name
of Corporation, who being duly sworn, deposeth and saith that he was
personally present at the execution of the adoption, release and dedication
and saw the common and corporate seal duly affixed and that the above
release and dedication was duly signed and sealed by and as for the act and
deed of the said Name of Corporation, for the uses and purposes therein
mentioned and that the name of this deponent subscribed to the said release
and dedication as Title of Officer of said corporation, in attestation of the
§ 1002 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 1004
1:520
due execution and delivery of said release and dedication is this deponent's
own and proper and respective handwriting.
Title of Officer
Sworn and subscribed before me this day.
WITNESS MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL this _____ day of _____, 19___.
My Commission Expires the _____ day of _____, 19_____.
SEAL
Notary Public
§ 1005. Title Clause (No Mortgage). [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 1005]
I, (or We) Name of Owner owners of the Name of Plan, do hereby certify
that the title of this property is in the name of _____ as recorded in Deed
Book Volume _____, page _____, Recorder of Deeds Office. I (or We) further
certify that there is no mortgage, lien or encumbrance against this property.
Witness
Owner
§ 1006. Title Clause (Mortgage Clause). [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 1006]
If the property embraced in this plan is encumbered by a mortgage,
judgment of record, or otherwise, the following certificates shall appear.
I, (or We) Name of Owner owners of the Name of Plan, do hereby certify
that the title of this property is in the name of _____ as recorded in Deed
Book Volume _____, page _____, Recorder of Deeds Office.
Witness
Owner
I, (or We) Name of Bank or Mortgage Company mortgagee of the property
embraced in this plan or subdivision, Name of Plan, do hereby consent to
the recording of said plan in the Recorder's Office of Washington County,
Pennsylvania and to the dedications and covenants appearing hereon.
Witness
Mortgagee
§ 1004 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1007
1:521
§ 1007. Surveyor's Certification (Required). [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 1007]
I, __________, a Registered Surveyor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
do hereby certify that the plan as shown hereon is based upon actual field
survey of the land described and that all angles, distances and courses are
correctly shown, that the monuments and markers have been set as shown
on the plat, and that this plan correctly represents the lots, land, streets and
highways as surveyed and plotted by me for the owners or agents.
SEAL Signature of
Surveyor
Registration
Number
§ 1008. Local Authority Stipulation (Required). [Ord. 234, 5/27/
1997, § 1008]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Strabane hereby gives
public notice that in approving this plan for recording purposes only, the
Township assumes no obligations, legal or otherwise, expressed or implied
either to accept said streets as Township streets or roads or grade, pave and
curb the streets in said plan, or to construct sewers therein or to install in
Township streets or roads.
Secretary
SEAL
Chairman, Board of Supervisors
§ 1009. Municipal Approval. [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997, § 1009]
Approved by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of North Strabane
this _____ day of _____, 19_____.
Secretary
SEAL
Chairman, Board of
Supervisors
§ 1010. Local Planning Commission Approval (Required). [Ord. 234,
5/27/1997, § 1010]
Approved by the North Strabane Planning Commission this _____ day of
_____, 19_____.
Secretary
SEAL
Chairman, Planning
Commission
§ 1007 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 1011
1:522
§ 1011. County Planning Commission Review (Required). [Ord. 234,
5/27/1997, § 1011]
Review by the Washington County Planning Commission this _____ day of
_____, 19_____.
SEAL
Chairman
§ 1012. County Conservation District Approval (Required). [Ord.
234, 5/27/1997, § 1012]
Approved by the Washington County Conservation District this _____ day of
_____, 19_____.
Chairman
§ 1013. Proof of Recording (Required). [Ord. 234, 5/27/1997,
§ 1013]
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA) SS:
COUNTY OF WASHINGTON
Recorded in the Recorders Office for the recording of deeds, plans, etc., in
said County in Plan Book Volume _____ page _____.
Given under my hand and seal this _____ day of _____, 19_____.
SEAL
Recorder
§ 1011 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1013
1:523

Part 11
COMMON OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 1101. Purpose. [Ord. 303, 4/26/2005, § 1]
§ 1102. Definitions. [Ord. 303, 4/26/2005, § 2]
ACTIVE RECREATION — Organized recreational or leisure activities or
pursuits which typically require substantial improvements to land,
including, but not limited to, uses such as playgrounds, ball fields or sports
courts, golf courses and swimming pools.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel of land or area of water or combination
of land and water designed and intended for the active, passive, or
combination of active and passive use and enjoyment of residents, where
such area does not include streets, off-street parking areas and areas set
aside for public facilities.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent or such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
FEE-IN-LIEU DEDICATION — A fee paid instead of the disposition of land
dedication for open space or park/recreational land.
FEE PER DWELLING UNIT — The rate defined, as adopted by resolution
and periodically updated by the Township, which represents the general,
dollar value of recreation open space for each dwelling unit within the
Township.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAYS — An area defined and/or delineated as such
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or equivalent
agency, with applicable required setbacks.
PASSIVE RECREATION — Non-organized activities that typically require no
or little improvement to land, including, but not limited to, walking, bike
riding, picnicking, hiking, bird watching, kite flying, etc.
RECREATION FEES — Fees authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968 (as amended) instead of the dedication
of land for active recreational use and the construction of recreational
facilities upon agreement with a developer.
RECREATION FEES — Fees authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968 (as amended) instead of the dedication
1. To conserve, enhance and promote the use and retention of common
space and recreation areas.
2. To develop a network of recreation land, parks, and space and trails.
3. To promote a spirit of community through the development,
conservation and preservation of quality natural resources and parks
and recreational areas.
§ 1101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1102
1:525
of land for active recreational use and the construction of recreational
facilities upon agreement with a developer.
RECREATION FEES FUND — An interest-bearing account established by
the Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968 (as amended) for depositing the recreational fees
collected through the fee-in-lieu process where such fees are used for the
purchase or leasing of park, recreation and/or open space land and/or
the construction or improvement of existing and new park, recreation and
leisure facilities.
RECREATION OPEN SPACE — That area of land, of size, character and with
unimpeded public access, that is suitable for the development of passive
recreation or specific active recreation facilities for leisure time activities,
usually of a formal nature and often performed with others, requiring
equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields, including,
but not limited to, tot lots, walking trails, baseball fields, soccer fields,
football fields, tennis, basketball and other court games, hockey facilities,
multipurpose fields, club house development or community swimming
pools.
WETLANDS — Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered
by shallow water. For purposes of this classification, wetlands must have
one or more of the following three attributes:
WOODLANDS — Trees a minimum of six inches caliper with a density of 10
individual trees per acre.
§ 1103. Recreation Open Space Requirements. [Ord. 303, 4/26/
2005, § 3]
A. At least periodically, the land supports hydrophytes;
B. The substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil; and
The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by
shallow water at some time during the growing season of each year.
C.
1. Overview.
A. If a landowner and/or developer elects to dedicate land for
recreation open space as part of a proposed land development or
subdivision, a portion of the land for recreation open space may be
located within the development's required common open space (as
defined by the Township Zoning Ordinance). The portion of land
dedicated for recreation open space shall not occupy more than
75% of the development's total required open space. No land
designated as a buffer yard (as defined by the Township Zoning
Ordinance) shall be included within land dedicated for recreation
open space.
§ 1102 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 1103
1:526
B. Recreation open space shall be dedicated for recreational uses,
either passive, active, or a combination of active and passive.
C. If a developer/landowner of a proposed residential development
and or subdivision elects not to dedicate any land for recreation
open space, the provisions of § 1104, "Fee-in-lieu Requirements,"
shall apply.
D. If a developer/landowner of a proposed residential development
and or subdivision elects not to dedicate the area of recreation
open space required in its entirety based upon the calculations of
subsection (3), the provisions of § 1105, "Combined Recreation
Open Space Dedicated/Fee-in-Lieu Requirements," shall apply.
2. Ownership and Maintenance.
A. Recreation open space provided as part of the residential land
development/subdivision will either be dedicated to the public for
use by the public, or shall be deeded to a homeowner's association
to remain available for use by the occupants of the residential land
development/subdivision.
B. The developer or homeowner's association shall provide all
relevant bonds/agreements to the Township to ensure that the
recreation open space shall be properly maintained by the
developer or homeowner's association.
C. If the recreation open space is offered for public dedication by the
developer or homeowner's association, the Township reserves the
right to accept the ownership and maintenance responsibility for
the recreation open space if said open space is generally consistent
with the Township's Comprehensive Parks, Recreation and Open
Space Plan, other parks and recreation objectives, or for other
community development reasons.
D. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
recreation open space or any successor organization shall at any
time after establishment of the land development/subdivision fail to
maintain the recreation open space in reasonable order and
conditions in accordance with the development plan, the Township
may serve written notice upon such organization, or upon the
residents of the land development/subdivision, setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the
recreation space in reasonable condition.
E. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be corrected within 30 days or any
extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the taxable
values of the properties within the land development/subdivision
and to prevent the recreation open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon the recreation open space and perform
maintenance as necessary. The maintenance performed by the
§ 1103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1103
1:527
Township shall not constitute a taking of the recreation open space
nor vest in the public any rights to use the same.
F. The pro-rata cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the land
development/subdivision that have a right of enjoyment of the
recreation open space and shall become a lien on the properties.
The Township, at the time of entering upon the recreation open
space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of lien in
the Washington County Office of the Prothonotary upon the
properties affected by the lien within the land development/
subdivision.
3. Unit of Dedication. For subdivision or land developments, a minimum of
2,000 square feet of land per single-family dwelling unit and 1,500
square feet of land per multifamily unit shall be reserved for recreation
open space.
4. Applicability. The land dedication for recreation open space shall be
applicable for any residential land development/subdivision that is at
least five acres in size and contain at least five dwelling units.
5. Accessibility.
A. Land dedicated for recreation open space shall be located to serve
all occupants of the residential development/subdivision or
accessible to each dwelling unit through a dedicated easement(s)
or right-of-way(s).
B. The developer shall provide pedestrian improvements between a
dwelling unit and such easement(s)/right-of-way(s) where direct
access from a dwelling unit to the recreation open space is not
provided. Pedestrian improvements may include bike paths, stone
trails, concrete or asphalt walkways, and shall comply with any
other applicable Township standards for pedestrian facilities.
C. If land for recreation open space is dedicated or intended to be
dedicated to the Township, parking and vehicular access to such
open space shall be provided. The number of parking spaces and
extent of vehicular access shall be determined by the Township and
shall be dependent upon the type of activities proposed for such
open space.
D. If land for recreation open space is dedicated or intended to be
dedicated for private use and, subsequently, not to the Township,
parking and vehicular access shall be determined in accordance
with applicable Township ordinance requirements.
E. Any improvements for parking and/or vehicular access to land for
recreation open space, whether for private or public use, shall be
constructed in accordance with Township construction standards.
§ 1103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 1103
1:528
6. Size/Location.
A. For access and visibility, the recreation open space shall have a
minimum frontage of 100 feet on an existing or proposed street or
shall adjoin an existing park or common open space that is
accessible from a street. If such frontage is located on a private
street, the Township shall reserve the right to decline ownership
and maintenance responsibility for the recreation open space if
offered by the developer.
B. Recreation open space shall be within 150 feet of an existing or
proposed public street or shall be visible from said street if the
recreation open space does not have frontage on said street.
C. Land shall be accessible to sewer, water and other public utilities.
7. Shape.
A. To the greatest extent possible, recreation open space shall be a
single, compact and contiguous area.
B. Where feasible, the majority of the recreation open space's
perimeter shall not be shared with the parcel boundary of the
residential development/subdivision.
C. The shape shall accommodate the general standards for the
intended proposed recreation activities/facilities.
8. Environmental Constraints.
A. At least 50% of the recreation open space shall be located on
generally level land. Generally level land shall be considered as
slopes with a natural gradient less than 10% and for man-made
slopes with a gradient less than 5%.
B. The dedicated recreation open space land shall not contain
wetlands as defined/classified/recognized by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, floodplains delineated on FEMA FIR maps, or
stormwater facilities constructed as a part of the residential
development/subdivision.
C. Developers shall minimize conflicts between proposed landscaping
(including trees, shrubs and groundcover) and active recreation
areas. All land, at a minimum, shall be seeded with grass cover.
Trees, in accordance with species defined in the landscape/buffer
yard standards of the North Strabane Township Zoning Ordinance,
shall be utilized to complement existing resources conserved as per
the Common Open Space requirements defined in the North
Strabane Township Zoning Ordinance.
9. Documentation shall be provided to demonstrate/confirm that the
dedicated land is free from legal encumbrances and liens.
§ 1103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1103
1:529
§ 1104. Fee-in-lieu Requirements. [Ord. 303, 4/26/2005, § 4]
10. Timing of Dedication.
A. Land shall be dedicated for park/recreation use at the time that the
subdivision is recorded with Washington County. If the land
development/subdivision occurs in phases, the Township may, at its
discretion, allow the overall area of land required for park/
recreation development to be dedicated, either in whole or in part,
in a later phase(s) of the land development/subdivision. If the
Township permits such dedication to occur, the landowner and/or
developer shall post financial security to the Township equivalent
to that defined by resolution, as amended, at the time that the first
phase of the subdivision/land development is recorded. The posted
financial security shall be returned to the landowner and/or
developer upon completion of said park/recreation development.
The area of land to be dedicated for park/recreation use per
development phase shall, at a minimum, be equal to the following
equation:
Minimum land dedication per development phase = Unit of
Dedication25 Multiplied by the total number of units in the
proposed land development/subdivision phase.
B. In the event that more than the minimum land dedicated per
development phase is provided in a development's early phase(s),
the developer shall not be required, in a subsequent phase(s), to
provide more than the total minimum land dedicated for the entire
subdivision.
11. Modifications/Waivers. If land to be dedicated totals less than three
acres, the Board of Supervisors may waive or modify the above
requirements if such land is identified for a different purpose as part of
the Township's Comprehensive Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan.
12. Any land dedicated to the public shall be maintained in accordance with
§ 503(11) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
1. In lieu of the dedication of land for recreation open spaces, a developer
shall pay a recreation fee to the Township for the provision of parks and
recreation.
2. The recreation fee requirements may be amended, adopted by
resolution, and published on an annual basis.
A. By January 31 of each year, the Township shall update, as
applicable, the fee per dwelling unit. The updated fee shall be
calculated based upon the annual change in the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) as reported by the Federal government.
25.Defined by § 1103.3.
§ 1103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 1104
1:530
§ 1105. Combined Recreation Open Space Dedicated/Fee-in-Lieu
Requirements. [Ord. 303, 4/26/2005, § 5]
B. Every fifth year, the Township may update the fee per dwelling unit
based upon findings from the analysis of current sale prices of
vacant land within the Township. Sale price data utilized for the
update shall, at a minimum, include that from the current and prior
year.
3. The fee set by the Township (referenced by resolution) shall be
calculated based upon the following formula:
Recreation Fee = fee per dwelling unit multiplied by the total number
of dwelling units proposed in the land development/subdivision.
4. To minimize the incremental subdivision of land for the purpose of
avoiding the dedication of recreation open space or recreation fee, the
Township reserves the right to apply an alternative fee other than
defined by § 1104 3. Situations in which the alternative fee may be
applied include:
A. Undeveloped land upon which fewer than five dwelling units could
be constructed;
B. Developed land that could potentially continue to be subdivided or
further developed at a later date.
5. Any fee collected by the Township shall be maintained, expended, and
refunded in accordance with § 503(11) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
1. If desired, a developer may combine the dedication of recreation open
space with a recreation fee in order to fulfill the requirements of these
provisions.
2. The combination of the dedicated recreation open space and recreation
fee shall be permitted if a developer intends to dedicate at least a
minimum of $25,000 in recreation fees and at least a minimum of one
acre of open space.
3. Calculating the combination of dedicated recreation open space and
recreation fees shall be based upon the following formula:
Total dedication = (a x b) +(c x (d-b)) where:
a = fee per dwelling unit
b = the number of dwelling units elected to be included in the
dedication
c = 2,000 square feet per single-family dwelling unit or 1,500 square
feet per multifamily dwelling unit
d = total number of units in the proposed residential development/
subdivision
§ 1104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1105
1:531
Example #1: Fulfills Combined Requirements
Total
Dedication
= ($800 x 50) + (2,000 square feet x (100 — 50)
= ($40,000) + (2,000 square feet x 50)
= ($40,000) + (100,000 square feet)
= $40,000 + 2.3 acres
Example #2: Fulfills Combined Requirements
Total
Dedication
= ($800 x 200) + (2,000 square feet x (300-200)
= ($160,000) + (2,000 square feet x 100)
= ($160,000) + (200,000 square feet)
= $160,000 + 4,6 acres
Total
Dedication
= ($800 x 10) + (2,000 square feet x (30-10)
= ($8,000) + (2,000 square feet x 20)
= ($8,000)+ (40,000 square feet)
= $8,000 + 0.92 acres
4. All provisions of § 1103, "Recreation Open Space," and § 1104. "Fee-in-
Lieu Requirements," shall pertain to this Section, where applicable.
§ 1105 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 1105
1:532
Chapter 23
SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 24
TAXATION, SPECIAL
§ 1105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1105
1:533

Part 1
PARKING LOT TAX
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Parking Tax Ordinance."
§ 102. Definitions. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 2]
As used in this Part, unless the context indicates clearly a different meaning,
the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:
COMMERCIAL PARKING PLACE or PARKING PLACE — Any place within
North Strabane Township, whether wholly or partially enclosed or open,
at which motor vehicles are parked or stored for any period of time in
return for a consideration, not including any parking area or garage to the
extent that it is provided or leased to occupants of a residence on the same
or other premises for use only in connection with, and as accessory to,
the occupancy of such residence and any parking area or garage operated
exclusively by an owner or lessee of a hotel, tourist court or trailer park, to
the extent that the parking area or garage is provided to guests or tenants
of such hotel, tourist court or trailer park for no additional consideration.
CONSIDERATION — Consideration received upon an express or implied
contract or under a lease or otherwise, whether or not separately stated,
and whether or not paid, provided or allowed by the person on whose behalf
the motor vehicle is parked or stored or by some other person.
GROSS RECEIPTS — The monetary amount of the aggregate consideration
from transactions.
HOTEL, TOURIST COURT, and TRAILER PARK — Are used herein as
defined in the appropriate Township zoning ordinance of North Strabane
Township; as used herein; the term “residence” means any building
designed and used for living or sleeping purposes, other than a hotel, tourist
court of trailer park.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OPERATOR — Any person conducting the operation of a parking place or
receiving consideration for the parking or storage of motor vehicles at such
parking place.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association,
firm, or corporation. Whenever used in any provision prescribing a fine or
a penalty, the word "person," as applied to partnerships, shall mean the
partners thereof; as applied to unincorporated associations, shall mean the
members thereof; and as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers
thereof.
TOWNSHIP — Township of North Strabane.
TRANSACTION — The transaction involved in the parking or storing of a
motor vehicle at a commercial parking place for a consideration.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:535
TREASURER — The Township Secretary to the Board of Supervisors of
North Strabane Township, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
§ 103. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 3]
A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon all transactions
of each operator with respect to each commercial parking place, at the
rate of 10% of the gross receipts from all such transactions received upon
and after the effective date of this Part. No person shall conduct such
transaction without complying with all the provisions of this Part and paying
the tax hereby imposed.
§ 104. Annual License. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 4]
No operator shall conduct the operation for a commercial parking place
without obtaining for each parking place an annual license from the
Township Secretary, Boone Avenue, Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, within the
time specified. Any operator not possessing such license within 30 days
after the effective date of this Part and any person who intends to begin
conducting the operation of a commercial parking place shall obtain such
license before beginning such operation. At each parking place, the
operator shall display the license in a conspicuous location at all times.
Such licenses shall not be transferable between one operator and another
or between one parking place and another. Any operator who ceases to
conduct the operation of a parking place shall notify the Township Secretary
and return the license applicable thereto.
§ 105. Records. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 5]
Each operator shall maintain, separately with respect to each parking place,
complete and accurate records of transactions and of gross receipts of all
transactions. Each operator shall issue to the person paying consideration
written evidence of such transactions or classes of transactions as the
Township Treasurer may prescribe by regulations. Where consideration in
a transaction is not separately stated, the operator shall maintain such
evidence and records as are necessary to segregate the consideration
applicable to the transaction. Each operator shall afford the Treasurer
and his designated employees and agents access to all such records and
evidence at all reasonable times and shall provide verification of the same
as the Treasurer may require.
§ 106. Returns and Payment. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 6]
Any person desiring to conduct or continue to conduct any parking lot
which charges a fee for parking shall file with the Township's Secretary an
application for a permit on forms provided by the Township. Every permit
shall be issued in duplicate. The original, to which the Township Seal shall
be affixed, shall be given to the person applying for the permit, and the
duplicate shall be kept on file by the Township's Secretary in the Township
municipal offices. Every person to whom a permit shall have been issued
§ 102 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 106
1:536
shall, on or before the 15th day of each month, prepare and file a return
with the Township Secretary showing a computation of the tax due for the
preceding calendar month on forms to be supplied by the Township and, at
the same time, shall pay over to the Township Secretary the entire amount
of the tax due.
§ 107. Treasurer's Powers and Duties. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 1]
The Treasurer, on behalf of the Township, shall receive and collect the taxes,
interest, fines and penalties imposed by this Part and shall maintain records
showing the amounts received and the dates such amounts were received.
The Treasurer is hereby authorized to examine the books and records of any
person filing a return in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or,
if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due.
§ 108. Collection. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 8]
The Treasurer shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interest, costs,
fines and penalties due under this Part and unpaid. If for any reason any
tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount
of unpaid tax and an additional penalty of 1% of the amount of unpaid
tax for each month or fraction of a month during which the tax remains
unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever suit is brought for the
recovery of unpaid tax, the operator shall, in addition, be liable for the costs
of collection as well as for interest and penalties. All taxes, interest and
penalties collected or recovered shall be paid into the Township Treasury as
general revenue to be used for general revenue purposes.
§ 109. Enforcement and Remedies. [Ord. 86, 1/1/1976, § 9; as
amended by Ord. 240, 10/28/1997]
1. Enforcement Notice.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this Part has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other
person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner of record
and any other person against whom the Township intends to
take action.
(2) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the property in
violation.
§ 106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:537
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provision of this Part.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Board of Supervisors within a period of 10 days.
(6) That the failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Board of
Supervisors, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions
clearly described.
2. Enforcement Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Part or any
person violating or failing to carry out any of the provisions or
requirements of this Part or of neglecting, failing or refusing to
furnish complete and correct returns or to pay over any tax levied
by this Part at the time required, or of knowingly making any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or of doing or attempting to
do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part
of the tax imposed under this Part shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $600 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues or each section of this Part which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
C. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 109 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 109
1:538
Part 2
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 38, 10/6/1964; as amended by Ord. 142, 12/
6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 341, 9/27/2011]
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
shall have the meanings set forth therein. The following terms shall have
the meanings set forth herein:
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
COMBINED TAX RATE APPLICABLE TO RESIDENTS — The total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax imposed by
the school district and by the municipality in which the individual resides,
is 1%.
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent home
and to which the person has the intention of returning whenever absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce the person
to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a business, domicile
is that place considered to be the center of business affairs and the place
where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation required to be reported to as
determined by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under Section 303
of the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as amended, and rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder. Employee business expenses as reported to or
determined by the Department of Revenue under Article III of the Tax
Reform Code shall constitute allowable deductions in determining earned
income. The term does not include offsets for business losses. The amount
of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be
taxable as earned income.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity, employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage commission or other compensation.
The term includes the commonwealth, a political subdivision and an
instrumentality or public authority of either. For purpose of penalties under
this Part 2, the term includes a corporation officer.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of The Township of North
Strabane, Washington, Pennsylvania.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:539
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., and any amendments thereto.
MUNICIPAL TAX RATE APPLICABLE TO NONRESIDENTS — The total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on the
municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by
the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971, as amended, and rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder. The term does not include income under any of the following
subsections:
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domicile outside the taxing
authority.
PERSON — A natural person.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the Township.
TAX — The tax imposed by this Part 2.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or
reported under this Part 2 or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXING AUTHORITY — The Township of North Strabane, Washington
County, Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this Part 2 and the Local
Tax Enabling Act to file a return of the earned income and net profits or to
pay the earned income and net profits tax.
TCC — The Washington County Tax Collection Committee, which has been
established to govern and oversee the collection of earned income tax
within the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
Income which:
(1) Is not paid for services provided; and
(2) Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
A.
Income which represents:
(1) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held for 12 months or more for
draft, breeding or dairy purposes; or
(2)
(3) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.
B.
§ 201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 202
1:540
§ 202. Imposition of Tax; Rate. [Ord. 38, 10/6/1964; as amended by
Ord. 142, 12/6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 341, 9/
27/2011]
§ 203. Individual Tax Returns and Payments. [Ord. 38, 10/6/1964; as
amended by Ord. 142, 12/6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by
Ord. 341, 9/27/2011]
Every resident receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act and this Part 2.
§ 204. Employer Withholding, Remittance, and Tax Returns. [Ord.
38, 10/6/1964; as amended by Ord. 142, 12/6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/
26/1985; and by Ord. 341, 9/27/2011]
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and this Part 2.
1. General Purpose Resident Tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of residents of the taxing authority.
2. General Purpose Nonresident Tax. The taxing authority also imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of the
taxing authority, from any work, business, profession, or activity, of any
kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
3. Ongoing Tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this Part 2 is repealed or the rate is changed.
4. Local Tax Enabling Act Applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this Part 2.
Any further amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are
required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this Part 2 upon the effective date of such
amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this Part 2 to
the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
5. Applicable Laws, Regulations, Policies, and Procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and with policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by
the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 205
1:541
§ 205. Collection of Tax. [Ord. 38, 10/6/1964; as amended by Ord.
142, 12/6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 341, 9/27/
2011]
The tax will be collected from residents and employers by the tax collector.
§ 206. Interest, Penalties, Costs, and Fines. [Ord. 38, 10/6/1964; as
amended by Ord. 142, 12/6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by
Ord. 341, 9/27/2011]
Residents and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed
by the collector in accordance with authorization by the TCC having
jurisdiction.
§ 207. Purpose; Effect on Prior Provisions. [Ord. 38, 10/6/1964; as
amended by Ord. 142, 12/6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by
Ord. 341, 9/27/2011]
The primary purpose of this Part 2 is to conform the earned income and
net profits tax currently imposed by the taxing authority to the Local Tax
Enabling Act, as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so
within the time frame required by Act 32. Any prior ordinance imposing a
tax on earned income or net profits of individuals is amended and restated
in its entirety to read as stated in this Part 2. Any other prior ordinance
or part of any prior ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this Part 2
is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent that this Part 2 is
the same as any ordinance in force immediately prior to adoption of this
part, the provisions of this part are intended as a continuation of such prior
ordinance and not as a new ordinance. If this part is declared invalid, any
prior ordinance levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect
and shall not be affected by adoption of this part. If any part of this Part
is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior ordinance levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this part.
The provisions of this part shall not affect any act done or liability incurred,
nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this part. Subject to
the foregoing provisions of this section, this part shall amend and restate
on the effective date any ordinance levying a tax on earned income or net
profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.
§ 208. Effective Date. [Ord. 38, 10/6/1964; as amended by Ord. 142,
12/6/1984; by Ord. 147, 11/26/1985; and by Ord. 341, 9/27/2011]
The provisions of this Part 2 shall become effective on January 1, 2012.
§ 205 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 208
1:542
Part 3
(RESERVED)26
§ 301. (Reserved)
26.Editor's Note: Former Part 3, Occupational Privilege Tax, Adopted By Ord. 41, 5/11/1967,
As Amended, Was Superseded By Ord. 306, 12/27/2005. See Now Part 6 Of This Chapter.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:543

Part 4
REALTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 401. Short Title. [Ord. 315, 1/23/2007]
This Part shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance" of North
Strabane Township.
§ 402. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 315, 1/23/2007]
North Strabane Township adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 197127 and hereby imposes a realty transfer tax as
authorized under that article, subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax
imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 403. Administration. [Ord. 315, 1/23/2007]
The tax imposed under § 401 and all applicable interest and penalties shall
be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December 31,
1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as the "Local Tax Enabling
Act;"28 provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last
date prescribed for timely payment, North Strabane Township, pursuant
to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D),
authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax and penalties.
§ 404. Interest. [Ord. 315, 1/23/2007]
Any tax imposed under § 402 that is not paid by the date the tax is due
shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims
under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.),
as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the "Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act29 for tax claims.
§ 405. Repeal; Effect on Prior Taxes. [Ord. 315, 1/23/2007]
1. As of the effective date of this Part, any ordinance inconsistent herewith
shall be and is hereby repealed.
2. The repealed ordinances referred to above shall remain effective for
documents that become subject to tax prior to the effective date of this
Part.
27.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:545
§ 406. When Effective; Applicability. [Ord. 315, 1/23/2007]
The provisions of this Part shall become effective on and be applicable
to any document made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for
recording on or after January 1, 2007.
§ 406 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 406
1:546
Part 5
(RESERVED)30
§ 501. (Reserved)
30.Editor's Note: Former Part 5, Real Estate Tax Exemptions, Adopted By Ord. 214, 4/25/
1994, As Amended, Was Repealed By Ord. 329, 8/26/2008.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 501
1:547

Part 6
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
§ 601. Title. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax."
§ 602. Definitions. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
As used in this Part, unless the context indicates clearly a different meaning,
the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts or any other income.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency or any other body engaged in business in or situated in the
Township, employing one or more employees engaged in any occupation,
other than domestic servants.
OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind or service, domestic or other, for which any
compensation is received.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this Part.
§ 603. Levy of Tax. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007; as amended by Ord. 349,
11/27/2012]
For general purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation within the Township of North Strabane during the calendar
year 2008, from the effective date of this Part, and thereafter, without
reenactment by the Board of Supervisors. Such tax shall be referred to
as the “local services tax (LST).” Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time shall pay tax in the amount of $52 in
accordance with the provisions of this Part.
§ 604. Collection Through Employers. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
1. Every employer not registered under the provisions of Part 2, earned
income tax, of this chapter shall, within 30 days after first becoming an
employer, register with the Township Tax Collector, or with such other
person as shall be designated by resolution of the Board of Supervisors,
the employer's name, address, the names and addresses of Township
employees, and such other information as the Tax Collector shall
require.
2. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time, each employer
shall deduct the tax from compensation payable to the taxpayer and file
a return on a form prescribed by the Township Tax Collector on a prorata
basis according to the number of payroll periods established by the
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 604
1:549
employer for a calendar year. Typical examples of payroll periods
established by employers are weekly, biweekly, twice per month, and/or
monthly.
3. All employers with work sites within the Township are required to
deduct the LST at the site of employment.
4. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any calendar year shall, within 15 days after
discontinuing business or ceasing operation, file the return hereinabove
required and pay the tax to the Tax Collector.
5. The failure of the employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section or who fails to pay
such tax to the Tax Collector shall be liable for such tax in full, without
deduction of the fee hereinafter provided, as though the tax has
originally been levied against such employer.
6. Withholding.
A. Employers are only required to withhold the LST on the payrollperiod
basis for those payroll periods in which the taxpayer is
employed.
B. When two or more employers employ a taxpayer in a payroll period,
an employer is not required to withhold the LST if the taxpayer
provides a pay stub from his/her principal employer accompanied
by an employee statement of principal employment that the pay
stub is from the taxpayer's principal employer and that the
taxpayer will notify the employer of any change in employment.
Employers are relieved of liability for the tax if they fail to withhold
the tax due to incorrect information provided by the taxpayer
regarding the taxpayer's principal employer or if the employer
complies with the provisions establishing the collection of the tax
on a payroll-period basis.
C. Concurrent Employment. If a taxpayer has two or more jobs in
different political subdivisions during a payroll period, the priority
of claim to collect the LST shall be as follows:
(1) Where the taxpayer maintains his or her principal employment
office or is principally employed;
(2) Where the taxpayer resides and works;
(3) Where the taxpayer is employed that is nearest in miles to the
taxpayer's home.
7. Self-Employed Individuals. The tax for self-employed individuals shall
be prorated on a quarterly basis as if their payroll period is a calendar
quarter and shall be paid within 30 days of the end of each calendar
quarter.
§ 604 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 604
1:550
§ 605. Direct Payment by Taxpayers. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
Every taxpayer who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason is
not collected under § 604 of this Part, shall file a return on a form prescribed
by the Tax Collector and shall pay the tax directly to the Collector.
8. Remittance. Employers shall remit withheld taxes to the Tax Collector
within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
9. Up-Front Exemption. In order to receive an up-front exemption,
employees must file an annual up-front exemption form (developed by
the Pennsylvania DCED) with the Tax Collector levying the LST and the
employee's employer. The exemption certificate will verify that the
employee reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
of less than $12,000 from all sources within the Township for the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed. A copy of the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
Township for the year prior or the calendar year for which the employee
is requesting an exemption must be attached to the exemption
certificate. Employers must make up-front exemption forms readily
available to employees at all times and provide new employees with the
forms at the time of hiring.
10. Suspension of Withholding. Upon receipt of an up-front exemption form
and until otherwise instructed by the Township imposing the tax,
employers must stop withholding the LST for the specific calendar year
from employees for whom the exemption applies.
11. Restoration of Withholding.
A. Employers shall restart withholding the LST from an employee who
files an exemption certificate in the following circumstances:
(1) If instructed to do so by the Township;
(2) If notified by the employee that he/she is no longer eligible for
the exemption; or
(3) If the employer pays the employee more than $12,000 for the
calendar year.
B. Employers restart withholding of the LST by withholding a "catchup"
lump-sum tax equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld
from the employee as a result of the exemption and the same
amount per payroll period that is withheld from other employees.
12. Military Exemption. The Township shall exempt from the LST members
of a reserve component of the armed forces called to duty and
honorably discharged veterans who served in any war or armed conflict
who are blind, paraplegic, or a double or quadruple amputee as a result
of military service or who are 100% disabled from a service-connected
disability.
§ 604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 606
1:551
§ 606. Nonresident Taxpayers. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within North Strabane Township, be subject to the tax and the
provisions of this Part.
§ 607. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
The Tax Collector, or such other person as shall be designated by the
Board of Supervisors, on behalf of the Township, shall collect and receive
the taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this Part and shall
maintain good records showing the amounts received and the dates such
amounts were received. The Tax Collector shall prescribe and issue all
forms necessary for the administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration of this
Part, including but not limited to requirements for collection through
employers, requirements for deductions, requirements for evidence and
records, and provisions for the examination and correction of returns. The
Tax Collector and agents designated by him shall be provided all means,
facilities and opportunity for the examinations hereby authorized.
§ 608. Collection. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
The Tax Collector, or other such person shall be designated by the Board
of Supervisors, shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interest, costs,
fines and penalties due under this Part and unpaid. If, for any reason, any
tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount
of unpaid tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of unpaid
tax that remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Whenever suit is
brought for the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection as well as for interest and penalties. The
Tax Collector may accept payment under protest of the tax claimed by the
Township in any case where any person disputes the Township's claim for
the tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter decides that there has
been overpayment to the Tax Collector, the Tax Collector shall refund the
amount of the overpayment to the person who paid under protest.
§ 609. Violations and penalties.
1. Any person or employer who violates any provision of this Part or any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof
before any District Justice or other court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and
costs, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
2. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of the Part shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice or other court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and costs, and in
§ 606 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 609
1:552
§ 610. Applicability; Severability. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the
taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of the United States
and the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If a
final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provision or
any circumstances to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of
this Part, or the application of such provision to other circumstances, shall
remain in full force and effect. The intention of the Board of Supervisors is
that the provisions of this Part shall be severable and that this Part would
have been adopted if any such illegal or unconstitutional provisions had not
been included.
§ 611. When Effective. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
This Part shall become effective immediately upon passage or as otherwise
provided by law.
§ 612. Authority. [Ord. 325, 11/11/2007]
This Part is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act of
1965, No. 511, as amended.31
default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
31.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 609 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 612
1:553
Chapter 25
TREES
Chapter 26
WATER
§ 612 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 612
1:554
Part 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 26-101. Short Title. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
This chapter shall be known cited as the "North Strabane Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 26-102. Purpose. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare
within North Strabane Township, Washington County, by minimizing
the harms and maximizing the benefits to the citizens of North Strabane
Township and surrounding communities through provisions intended
to:
A. To the extent practicable, meet legal water quality requirements
under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa, Code Chapter 93 to
protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated
uses of the waters of the commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems close to their source, by regulating activities that cause
these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems to the fullest extent
practical.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface
and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and
prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a
minimum of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best
management practices (BMPs) that are constructed and
implemented.
J. Promote safe practices aimed at minimizing downstream damage.
K. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
§ 26-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-103
1:555
§ 26-103. Statutory Authority. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Primary Authority: North Strabane Township is empowered to regulate
these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S.,
P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act," and the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 55101 et
seq., as amended.
§ 26-104. Applicability. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-105. Repealer. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of North Strabane
Township inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this chapter is hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 26-106. Severability. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section(s) or
provision(s) of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any of the remaining section(s) or provision(s) of this chapter.
1. In North Strabane Township, all regulated activities and all activities
that may affect stormwater runoff, including land development and
earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this chapter.
2. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
3. "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. "Regulated activities" include, but
are not limited to, the following listed items:
A. Earth disturbance activities.
B. Land development.
C. Subdivision.
D. Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
E. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
F. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
4. See § 26-302 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
§ 26-103 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-107
1:556
§ 26-107. Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements. [Ord.
No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
§ 26-108. Duty of Persons Engaged in Development of Land. [Ord.
No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Any landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of
land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall, unless an
exemption is granted, implement such measures as are required by this
chapter to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such measures
also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate, volume,
direction, and where practicable quality of resulting stormwater runoff in
a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and water
quality.
§ 26-109. Municipal Liability Disclaimer. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-110. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Design standards and criteria for the construction of certain stormwater
management facilities should comply with the specifications of Appendix E,
North Strabane Township Standard Details, included in this chapter.32 The
North Strabane Township Board of Supervisors by resolution may from time
to time change the specifications. In their sole discretion, the Township and
the zoning officer may approve modifications to the design standards.
1. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or with any condition
imposed by a municipal official hereunder, shall relieve any person from
any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon
the Township for damages to persons or property.
2. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by the Township, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
32.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-111
1:557
§ 26-111. When Effective. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
§ 26-112. Waivers. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to § 26-112, Subsections 2 and 3. The
request for a waiver or modification shall originate with the landowner,
shall be in writing, and accompany the stormwater management site
plan submission to the municipality. The request shall provide the facts
on which the request is based, the provision(s) of the ordinance
involved and the proposed modification. The designated plan reviewer
shall review the request to determine if it meets the requirements of
this chapter including § 26-112, Subsections 2 and 3. If acceptable to
the municipality and the regulated stormwater activity involving earth
disturbance is less than one acre, the municipality may grant the waiver
or modification. If acceptable to the municipality and the regulated
stormwater activity involving earth disturbance is greater than or equal
to one acre, the municipality will send the request to the DEP as per
§ 26-112, Subsection 3.
2. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of unique physical circumstances or preexisting site conditions
peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not
be contrary or detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the
intended outcome, and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved.
Hardship must be due to such unique physical circumstances or
preexisting site conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter, and there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of this chapter. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Hardship cannot have been created by the
landowner or developer. Modification shall not substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. Modification may be considered if an alternative standard or
approach will provide equal or better achievement of the purpose of the
chapter.
3. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality unless that action is approved in advance
by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). If a response
from the DEP is not received within 45 days, the waiver or modification
shall be deemed acceptable. Prior DEP approval of the particular
waiver or modification will constitute approval for use of the particular
waiver or modification for similar circumstances or conditions.
§ 26-111 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-112
1:558
Part 2
Definitions
§ 26-201. Terms Defined. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the
land through the combined action of human activity and natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
ACT 167 — The municipality is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality
and quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with
agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation,
and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing
crops, tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting,
harvesting crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new
buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a
result of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position
to another as defined in the grading ordinance, Ch. 13; changing
of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
§ 26-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-201
1:559
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has
filed an application for approval to engage in any regulated
activities at a project site within the Township.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater
impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise
meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly
grouped into one of two broad categories or measures:
"nonstructural" or "structural." "Nonstructural" BMPs are
measures referred to as operational and/or behavior-related
practices that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with
stormwater runoff whereas "structural" BMPs are measures that
consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to capture
and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not
limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from largescale
retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention
basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs
are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing
rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Washington County
Conservation District. The Washington County Conservation
District has the authority under a delegation agreement executed
with the Department of Environmental Protection to administer
and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a
stream and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment
or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or
another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for
highway, railroad or other purposes which does or may impound
water or another fluid or semifluid or is conformance with Pa. Code
Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway Management.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of
occurrence (e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24
§ 26-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-201
1:560
hours), used in the design and evaluation of stormwater
management systems. Also see "return period."
DESIGNEE — The agent of this Township and/or agent of the
governing body involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by contract or
memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to
manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant
with permission of such landowner, or any responsible person, who
undertakes a subdivision, land development in accordance with the
rules and regulations set forth in the North Strabane Township
Ordinances, or that undertakes any regulated activity of these
Ordinances.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which
a regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property
line of the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located
such that all overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed
toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to convey stormwater runoff and shall include
streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers,
detention basins, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a
grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management, drainage, or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench,
ditch, pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which
surface water flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other
human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including,
but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations,
embankments, land development, agricultural plowing or tilling,
timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, mineral
extraction, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.
§ 26-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-201
1:561
EROSION — The process of breaking down and carrying away of
exposed ground surfaces by action of wind, water and temperature
change.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A
plan which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, Section 93.4b(b) (relating to
anti-degradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site
prior to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the
site is undeveloped land and not forested, the land use shall be
considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is
documented to generate lower Curve Numbers or Rational "C"
Coefficient.
FEES — Shall be as established under separate ordinance by the
Township.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — The remaining portions of the 100-year
floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department
of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance
Administration Flood Hazard Boundary, mapped as being a special
flood hazard area. Included are lands adjoining a river or stream
that have been or may be inundated by a 100-year flood. Also
included are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in
Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement
Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions
of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no
FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary,
that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet landward from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These
§ 26-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-201
1:562
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design
and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and
reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the
design high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, detention
basin, or diversion ridge. The space is required as a safety margin
in a tank, pond or basin.
GRADE —
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED — (Hydrologic Engineering
Center Hydrologic Modeling System) A computer-based hydrologic
modeling technique adapted to the watershed(s) in Washington
County for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been calibrated by
adjusting key model input parameters.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish,
and wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pa.
Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, Section 93.4b(a).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils
vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as
surface intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A,
B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which
is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural
Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) of the US Department of
Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of most of
the soils in the United States and their group classification. The
soils in the area of interest may be identified from a soil survey
report from the local NRCS office or the County Conservation
District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious
surfaces (or areas) include, but are not limited to: roofs, additional
indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar
structures, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas proposed to initially be gravel or
crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
(1)
To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
(2)
§ 26-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-201
1:563
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to
retain stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where
it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or
percolated downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct
runoff into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage
trench, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at
the diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure
through which water may flow.
INVASIVE SPECIES — DCNR defines invasive plants as those
species that are not native to the state, grow aggressively, and
spread and displace native vegetation. (See
http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/public/documents/
document/dcnr_010314.pdf for a list of invasive species.)
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Any of the following
activities:
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An approach to land
development that uses various land planning and design practices
and technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural
resource systems and reduce infrastructure costs. LID still allows
land to be developed, but in a cost-effective manner that helps
mitigate potential environmental impacts.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other
runoff conveyance facility used as a reach in the Washington
County Act 167 watershed hydrologic model(s).
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential
buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a
single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of
the number of occupants or tenure.
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether
initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of or for the
purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Developments authorized to be excluded from the regulation of
land development by § 106 of Chapter 22.
(3)
§ 26-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-201
1:564
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate
(e.g., cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel
shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may
include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The federal government's system for issuance of
permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in
Pennsylvania.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have historically grown
in Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, US Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather
Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver
Spring, Maryland (2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at
Internet address http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be
limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams,
ditches, canals, and pipes not under pressure.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates
during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from
a specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association
or corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other
(1) Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where
the Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
(2)
§ 26-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-201
1:565
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of North
Strabane Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete
conveyance, including, but not limited to: any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged,
as defined in state regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical
meteorological and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably
possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the probable
maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the basis of data
obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Township are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which
has previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a
manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity
involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 92, Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of pre-development peak rate
of runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the postdevelopment
peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect
downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which
post-development flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
pre-development flows as required to meet the plan requirements
and the goals of Act 167.
§ 26-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-201
1:566
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is
stored and not released during the storm event. Stored water may
be released from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of
runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface
waters of this commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which
a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to recur on the average once every 25 years; or stated in
another way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring
in any one given year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands, that serves as a protective filter
to help protect streams/wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land
uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that
is used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified
design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance
activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road (such
as milling and overlays) are not considered earth disturbance
activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release
of stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by
incorporating controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land
surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is
captured (retained) and not released into surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface
water as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other
material transported by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth
occurring from the failure to properly design, construct, implement
or maintain control measures and control facilities in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 26-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-201
1:567
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic
matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth
filled with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface
water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system
of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels,
or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying
stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a
thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff
computation developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil
type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number
(CN).
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges that are not accommodated by the outfall structure,
STANDARD DETAILS — Shall be established and maintained by the
Township Engineer.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water
quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean
Streams Law.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm
"event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of
years. See also "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that
convey intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but
excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any structure,
natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or
construction, conveys runoff. Typical stormwater conveyance
facilities include, but are not limited to, open channels, storm
sewers, pipes and culverts.
§ 26-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-201
1:568
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants
than are found in typical stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure,
natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or
construction, stores or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention and retention basins, infiltration facilities, vegetated
swales, raingardens and bioretention areas.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Washington County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff in
Washington County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864, (Act 167) and known as the "Storm Water Management Act."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) —
The plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating
how stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in
accordance with this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure
in excess of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which
encloses a regulated waters of the commonwealth.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means, into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the
court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership,
or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt.
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a
watershed for which stormwater management criteria has been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface
waterrunoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to
a point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined
total of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if
any.
TOWNSHIP — North Strabane Township, Washington County,
Pennsylvania.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
§ 26-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-201
1:569
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made drainageway, which
has a definite channel and flows in a definite direction, whether
continuously or intermittently, including streams, rivers, creeks,
channels, conduits, canals, drains, gullies, ravines and the like and
which is certified by a registered surveyor or engineer as being a
natural watercourse.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or
channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED — Area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
(The term includes but is not limited to wetland areas listed in
the State Water Plan, the United States Forest Service Wetlands
Inventory of Pennsylvania and a wetland area designated by a river
basin commission. This definition is used by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Army
Corps of Engineers.)
§ 26-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-201
1:570
Part 3
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 26-301. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 26-302:
A. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as
described under §§ 26-304 and 26-305 of this chapter.
D. The SWM site plan approved and signed by the Township shall be
on-site throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
2. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Act 167 and the regulations
promulgated thereunder (including, but not limited to, Chapter Title 25
of the Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control).
Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual), No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated.
3. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Act 167 and the regulations promulgated thereunder, conform to the
state water quality requirements, meet all requirements under the
Storm Water Management Act and any more stringent requirements as
determined by the Township.
4. The Township may, after consultation with PADEP and the Conservation
District, approve measures for meeting the state water quality
requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet
the minimum requirements of and do not conflict with state law,
including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
5. Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be
created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
altered without written notification of the affected property owner(s).
Notification shall include a description of the proposed development
and the stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased,
relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at a
§ 26-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-301
1:571
minimum include any property having a shared boundary with the
subject property of the SWM site plan; however, if in the judgment of
the designated plan reviewer additional properties are being affected,
additional notifications may be required. Proof of notification (signed
postal receipt, for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
submission to the municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject
to the requirements of this chapter.
6. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
A. Protect health, safety, and property.
B. Meet the requirements of this chapter by implementing measures
to:
(1) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(2) Encourage the creation, maintenance and extension of riparian
buffers and the protection existing forested buffers.
(3) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(4) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(5) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(6) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(7) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(8) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(9) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(10) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
7. Impervious Areas:
A. The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
B. For developments taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
§ 26-301 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-301
1:572
C. For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 26-303 and the peak
rate controls of § 26-304 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
8. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
A. Applicant must obtain an easement for proposed concentrated flow
across adjacent properties to a drainage way or public right-of-way.
B. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
9. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
10. Stormwater drainage systems shall not be permitted to have open
discharge points within 25 feet of a public right-of-way. The discharge
must be piped and connected to an existing public storm sewer system
or conveyed to a stable discharge location such as a stream, and all
required permits must be obtained and provided to the Township.
11. Stormwater drainage systems that discharge within 25 feet of adjacent
downstream property lines may be subject to modification as required
by the Township, should it be determined that there is substantial risk
of damage to the downstream property.
12. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage areas with a
minimum width of 20 feet and including the 100-year water surface
shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses.
Excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
drainage area shall be prohibited. Also, maintenance, including mowing
of vegetation within the drainage area, may be required, except as
approved by the appropriate governing authority.
13. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainage ways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
§ 26-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-301
1:573
Open channel location, lining, and discharge orientation may be subject
to modification as required by the Township.
14. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands) shall
be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
15. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety.
16. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-way shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
17. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
18. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter. No portion of an infiltration BMP constructed slope shall be
within 30 feet of adjacent downstream properties or public rights-ofway.
The Township may require that the outfall pipe be connected to an
existing storm sewer system or conveyed through a property to a stable
discharge location to prevent runoff damage to the downstream
property. Additional provisions to ensure safety of downstream features
may be required by the Township.
19. No portion of a stormwater management detention/retention BMP
constructed slope shall be within 15 feet of adjacent downstream
properties or public rights-of-way. The Township may require that the
outfall pipe be connected to an existing storm sewer system or
conveyed through a property to a stable discharge location to prevent
runoff damage to the downstream property. Additional provisions to
ensure safety of downstream features may be required by the
Township.
§ 26-301 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-301
1:574
§ 26-302. Exemptions/Modifications. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
20. All roof drains shall be connected to a storm sewer system to prevent
overland flow. All roof drains must have watertight connections to
prevent exfiltration.
21. Applicants are encouraged to use low-impact development practices to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the state water quality requirements.
22. Applicants are encouraged to utilize underground stormwater
management facilities where possible, instead of surface water
impoundments.
23. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream Township, the developer shall notify the downstream
Township and provide a copy of the SWM plan, if requested, for review
and comment.
1. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
A. Protect health, safety, and property.
B. Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and exceptional
value (EV) watersheds.
2. The applicant must demonstrate that the following BMPs are being
utilized to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for
the exemptions:
A. Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
B. Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
C. Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
D. Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
E. Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
F. Direct runoff to pervious areas.
3. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development/
additional impervious area will not adversely impact the following:
A. Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
B. Velocities and erosion.
C. Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
§ 26-301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-302
1:575
D. Existing known problem areas.
E. Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
F. Downstream property owners.
4. An applicant proposing regulated activities may be eligible for
exemption from rate control, volume control, or stormwater
management site plan requirements in this chapter according to the
following table:
Table 302.1 - Exemptions and Submission Requirements
New impervious area1, 2
(square footage)
Applicant must provide
0 < 2,500 No submission is required
2,500 < 5,000 Documentation of new impervious
surfaces3
5,000 and greater Rate controls, volume controls
and SWM site plan
NOTES:
1 New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
2 Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and
gravel in proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
3 The small project stormwater management application included in
Appendix E33 shall be used to document new impervious surfaces.
5. Single-family residential activities are exempt from these requirements
provided the construction:
A. Comply with §§ 26-301, Subsection 7, and 26-302, Subsections 1, 2,
and 3; and
B. Driveways:
(1) Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel
strip or other spreading device.
(2) No more than 1,000 square feet of paved surface may
discharge to any one point.
(3) The length of flow on the pervious must exceed the length of
the paved surface flow.
C. The Township can require more information or require mitigation
of certain impacts through installation of stormwater management
BMPs if there is a threat to property, health, or safety.
33.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-302
1:576
§ 26-303. Waivers. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
6. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 26-302, Subsections 1, 2, and 3, may be exempted
from various requirements of this chapter if documentation can be
provided that a downstream man-made water body (i.e., reservoir, lake,
or man-made wetlands) has been designed or modified to address the
potential stormwater flooding impacts of the proposed development.
7. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. The Township may accept alternative stormwater management
controls under this section provided that:
A. The Township, in consultation with the PADEP (or delegated
authority), determines that meeting the volume control
requirements (see § 26-304) is not possible or places an undue
hardship on the applicant.
B. The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP
(or delegated authority), for NPDES requirements pertaining to
post-construction stormwater management requirements.
C. The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of
this chapter, including but not limited to §§ 26-301, Subsection 4,
and 26-302, Subsections 1 through 3.
8. Agricultural activities are exempt from the rate control and SWM site
plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the activities
are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
9. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
and volume control requirement and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt and provisions shall be
provided to ensure the safety of downstream properties and waterways.
10. The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Township believes may pose
a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
1. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare.
2. All waiver requests must meet the provisions of § 26-303, Subsections 7
and 8.
§ 26-302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-303
1:577
A. Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such measures as
necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and
exceptional value (EV) watersheds.
B. Municipalities will then consider waivers in accordance with
§ 26-301, Subsection 4.
3. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body of
the Township that any mandatory provision of this chapter is
unreasonable or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship
as it applies to the proposed project, or that an alternate design may
result in a superior result within the context of §§ 26-102 and 26-103 of
this chapter, the governing body of the Township may grant a waiver or
relief so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is
secured, provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of this chapter.
4. The applicant shall submit all requests for waivers in writing and shall
include such requests as a part of the plan review and approval process.
The applicant shall state in full the facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of
the Ordinance that are involved, and the minimum waiver or relief that
is necessary. The applicant shall state how the requested waiver and
how the applicant's proposal shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent or purpose and general principles of this
chapter.
5. The Township shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests.
6. All waiver requests must be accompanied by a fee set by resolution by
North Strabane Township; the fee being designed to cover the
administrative costs of reviewing the waiver request. The Township
shall charge a fee for each waiver request, which shall be used to offset
the administrative costs of reviewing the waiver request. The applicant
shall also agree to reimburse the Township for reasonable and
necessary fees that may be incurred by the Township Engineer and
Solicitor in any review of a waiver request.
7. In granting waivers, the Township shall impose reasonable conditions
that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements that are to be modified.
8. The Township may grant applications for waivers when the following
findings are made, as relevant:
A. That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent of this chapter.
§ 26-303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-303
1:578
§ 26-304. Volume Controls. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
B. That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
C. That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based on cost
considerations.
D. That existing down gradient stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated.
E. That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or
roadways will not occur.
F. That potential icing conditions will not occur.
G. That increase of peak flow or volume from the site will not occur.
H. That erosive conditions due to increased peak flows or volume will
not occur.
I. That adverse impact to water quality will not result.
J. That increased 100-year floodplain levels will not result.
K. That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will
not result from the waiver.
L. That careful consideration has been given to the use of infiltration
measures where practicable and pre-development groundwater
recharge protected.
M. That peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
N. That long-term operation and maintenance activities are
established.
O. That the receiving streams and/or water bodies will not be
adversely impacted in flood-carrying capacity, aquatic habitat,
channel stability and erosion and sedimentation.
1. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B of this chapter34 shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.
2. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method as defined below. For
regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require
hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either method; therefore, the applicant
may select either method, the intrinsic limitations on applicability of the
analytical procedures associated with each methodology, and other
factors.
34.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-304
1:579
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the pre-development total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(2) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
(a) Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for pre-development hydrologic
calculations.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered
meadow (good condition) for pre-development hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration test
shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual.
Notification of the Township shall be provided to allow
witnessing of the testing.
C. In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltrationbased
best management practices to partially fulfill the
requirements in either § 26-304, Subsection 2A, or B, the applicant
shall be required to obtain an NPDES permit from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environment Protection.
3. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
§ 26-304 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-305
1:580
§ 26-305. Rate Controls. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-306. Sensitive Areas and Stormwater Hotspots. [Ord. No. 383,
8/27/2019]
1. Lands contained within Washington County that have not had release
rates established under an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan:
A. Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates for the one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty-, and 100-year storms.
2. Lands contained within Washington County that have had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
A. The post-development peak discharge rates shall be in accordance
with the approved release rate map for the individual watershed,
except as indicated in § 26-305, Subsection 2B, Release rates
include 50%, 70% and 100% for the ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and
100-year storms.
B. A release rate of 50% is required for drainage to all HQ/EV
waterways in North Strabane Township.
1. Sensitive areas and water quality sensitive developments as defined
below which require special consideration with regard to stormwater
management.
A. "Sensitive areas" are defined as those areas that, if developed, have
the potential to endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the
delineated one-year zone of contribution and direct upslope areas
tributary to the water supply wells. North Strabane Township may
update the sensitive area boundaries based on new research or
studies as required.
B. "Stormwater hotspots" are defined as a land development project
that has a high potential to endanger local water quality, and could
potentially threaten ground water reservoirs. The Township will
determine what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case
basis. The PADEP wellhead protection contaminant source list shall
be used as a guide in these determinations. Industrial
manufacturing site and hazardous material storage areas must
provide NPDES SIC codes.
2. Performance Standards.
A. The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage
areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of
these boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the
limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive
§ 26-305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-306
1:581
area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall
be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project
site is adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive
area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the
sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management
plan to document the site's location relative to the sensitive area.
B. Stormwater hotspots may be required to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan and file notice of intent as
required under the provision of the EPA Industrial Stormwater
NPDES permit requirements.
C. Stormwater hotspots must use an acceptable pre-treatment BMP
prior to volume control and/or rate control BMPs. Acceptable pretreatment
BMPs for these developments include those based on
filtering, settling, or chemical reaction processes such as
coagulation.
§ 26-306 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-306
1:582
Part 4
E&S Standards
§ 26-401. Erosion and Sedimentation Requirements During Earth
Disturbance Activities. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 92 and 102 as required and applicable as follows:
A. The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
B. Development of written plans.
C. Submission of plans for approval.
D. Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
E. Maintaining plans and permits on site.
2. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Washington County
Conservation District must be provided to the Township.
3. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Washington County Conservation
District, shall be available at the project site at all times if required
under Chapter 102.
4. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 102 and 105. The erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Washington
County Conservation District for approval and shall address the
following, as applicable:
A. Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails, and storage and staging areas.
B. Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
C. Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
D. Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
E. A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding, and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
5. No portion of a sediment trap or sediment basin constructed slope shall
be within 15 feet of adjacent downstream properties or public rights-of-
§ 26-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-401
1:583
way. The Township may require that the outfall pipe be connected to
an existing storm sewer system or conveyed through a property to a
stable discharge location to prevent runoff damage to the downstream
property. Additional provisions to ensure safety of downstream features
may be required by the Township.
6. Use of temporary interceptor channels is discouraged.
§ 26-401 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-401
1:584
Part 5
Protected Watershed Standards
§ 26-501. Protected Watershed Requirements. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/
2019]
For any regulated activity within a protected watershed (high-quality or
exceptional value), the applicant shall meet requirements as contained in
25 Pa. Code, Chapters 93 as required and applicable.
§ 26-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-501
1:585

Part 6
Riparian Buffer Standards
§ 26-601. Riparian Buffer. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
North Strabane Township strongly encourages developers and other
persons engaged in regulated activities to provide riparian buffers for the
protection of watersheds and to promote the health, safety and public
welfare.
§ 26-602. Required Buffers. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-603. Strongly Recommended Riparian Buffers. [Ord. No. 383,
8/27/2019]
1. For any regulated activity, the minimum riparian buffer shall be as
follows with the buffer being measured perpendicularly from the top of
the stream bank landward:
A. For all watersheds other than high-quality or exceptional value
watersheds or impaired watersheds, a minimum of 50 feet; or
B. As determined by a stream corridor study approved by PADEP and
the Township.
1. For any regulated activity, the minimum riparian buffer should be as
follows with the buffer being measured perpendicularly from the top of
the stream bank landward.
A. High-quality or exceptional value watersheds: a minimum of 150
feet;
B. For impaired watersheds: a minimum of 150 feet.
2. Developers are encouraged to have a riparian buffer located on both
sides of all perennial and intermittent streams. The perennial and
intermittent streams and the proposed riparian buffer boundaries, if
any, should be shown on all applications for building permits,
subdivision, or land development. Existing uses within the buffer are
permitted to continue but it is encouraged that they not be expanded.
3. The buffer should be undisturbed forest consisting of appropriate
native species.
4. Where wetlands are located partially or entirely within a buffer, the
buffer should be extended to encompass the wetland and shall be
widened by a distance sufficient to provide a twenty-five-foot forested
buffer measured perpendicularly from the wetland boundary.
5. The following uses shall be permitted in the buffer:
A. Footpaths, trails and bike paths provided that:
§ 26-601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-603
1:587
(1) Width is limited to five feet;
(2) Width may be increased provided a corresponding increase in
the buffer is provided;
(3) Construction shall have minimal impact to the buffer.
B. Stream crossings, provided the crossing is designed and
constructed in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the
buffer. The riparian buffer should be restored to its original
condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon completion of
construction.
C. Utility lines, provided that the crossing is designed and constructed
in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the inner buffer and
provided that there is no practical alternative to locating the utility
line within the buffer. The riparian buffer should be restored to its
original condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon
completion of construction.
D. Maintenance and restoration of the riparian buffer.
E. Projects conducted with the objective of improvement,
stabilization, restoration, or enhancement of the stream bank,
stream channel, floodplain, watershed hydrology, riparian buffers,
or aquatic habitat and maintenance activities associated with such
projects. These projects include, but are not limited to, agricultural
and stormwater management best management practices. Such
projects must receive appropriate permits and approvals from
PADEP prior to starting the project.
F. Minor private recreational uses for the property owner. Such uses
include benches, fire rings, and similar uses. Such uses do not
include structures such as cabins, sheds, pavilions, garages,
dwellings or similar structures.
6. Disturbance of the riparian buffer should be limited to the area
necessary to perform an allowable use.
7. Where possible and practical, disturbances should be phased with each
phase restored prior to beginning the next phase.
8. Allowable activities should not cause stormwater flow to concentrate.
9. Any vegetation removed for an allowable activity should be replaced
immediately upon completion of the activity. Where mature trees are
removed, such trees should be replaced with the largest practical tree
of acceptable native species.
10. Erosion and sediment pollution control shall be installed and
maintained during construction. Evidence of an approved erosion and
sediment control plan, NPDES permit or other PADEP permit, where
required, shall be submitted prior to issuance of local permits.
§ 26-603 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-603
1:588
11. Riparian buffers should be maintained in a manner consistent with
sound forest management practices. In the absence of a site specific
management plan, the following maintenance guidelines apply:
A. Buffers should be inspected periodically for evidence of excessive
sediment deposition, erosion or concentrated flow channels.
Prompt action should be taken to correct these problems and
prevent future occurrence.
B. Trees presenting an unusual hazard of creating downstream
obstructions should be removed. Such material should be removed
from the floodplain or the riparian buffer (whichever is widest); or
cut into sections small enough so as to prevent the possibility of
creating obstructions downstream. Wherever possible, large stable
debris should be conserved.
C. Vegetation should be inspected periodically to ensure diverse
vegetative cover and vigorous plant growth consistent with
buffering objectives.
(1) Remove invasive plant species that may threaten the integrity
of the buffer.
(2) Periodic cutting of trees may be necessary to promote vigorous
growth and encourage regeneration.
D. Excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and other
chemicals should be avoided. These products should be used only
when absolutely necessary to maintain buffer vegetation.
§ 26-603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-603
1:589

Part 7
Design Criteria
§ 26-701. Design Criteria for Stormwater Management and
Drainage Facilities. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. General Design Guidelines:
A. Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless (1) the watersheds are subwatersheds of a common
watershed which join together within the perimeter of the
property; (2) the effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate
discharge onto adjacent lands; or (3) easements from the affected
landowner(s) are provided.
B. Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
pre-development flow type condition. See § 26-301 of this chapter
for BMP location restrictions.
C. Innovative stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are
encouraged. They shall be located, designed, and constructed in
accordance with the latest technical guidance published by PADEP,
provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering plans and
performance capabilities and supporting site-specific soils, geology,
runoff and groundwater and infiltration rate data to verify
proposed designs. Additional guidance from other sources may be
accepted at the discretion of the Township (a pre-application
meeting is suggested).
D. All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
E. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
Township shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented
adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as
identified in the plan.
F. The design and construction of multiple use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Consultation with the Township and prior approval are
required before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with
stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.
§ 26-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-701
1:591
(1) Multiple-use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.
(2) Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas
are clearly separated and secure.
G. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety.
2. Stormwater Management Facility Design Considerations: All
stormwater management facilities shall meet the following design
requirements:
A. All areas of a subdivision, land development plan or mobile home
park to be developed with streets, residential lots or sites,
recreation areas or other uses shall be graded to assure positive
drainage.
B. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided
to ensure the controlled flow of natural watercourses and to
guarantee the drainage of all low points along the curb or gutter
lines, as well as at intervals related to slope, of all streets in or
adjacent to the plan. Where driveways cross gutter, line or passage
via a pipe below the driveway entrance of the type and size
required by the North Strabane Township.
C. In designing the storm drainage system, the developer shall use as
his guide the publication "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,"
Technical Release No. 55, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, June 1986, and as amended.
D. The predevelopment condition of the parcel to be developed, as
determined by the Township, shall be considered the state of the
land surface on the date that the developer entered into an
agreement to purchase the property. If the property has been
partially or completely developed at the time of purchase, the
Township shall require the new owner, if he proposes to redevelop
or further develop the property, to take remedial action for
compliance with the requirements of this subsection. This shall
include situations where removal of existing impervious areas and
replacing them with new impervious areas is proposed, where no or
inadequate existing stormwater management is present. If
remedial action is required, regardless of the condition of the
surface, the design runoff shall not exceed curve number 75
applied to class C "good meadow" soils (see Tables 2-1 and 2-2 of
T.R. 55). Stormwater runoff originating upstream of the property
that is bypassed through or around the site may be removed from
the hydrographical analysis for on-site stormwater management
§ 26-701 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-701
1:592
facilities. Conveyance structures designed to bypass flow must be
designed for the 100-year twenty-four-hour peak flow event. If a
property is to be laid out in lots, no reduction in lot size shall be
permitted to accommodate storm drainage detention structures.
Adequate space shall be reserved for all proposed structures and
access roads.
E. The stormwater drainage plan of a subdivision, land development
plan or mobile home park shall be designed to assure that, after
development, stormwater does not leave the property at a greater
velocity or volume per second than before development
commenced.
(1) The difference between the pre-development and postdevelopment
condition for all storms up to the 100-year storm
shall be stored on the property for gradual release at predevelopment
rate.
(2) Outlet works shall be designed so as to store water and control
runoff for all storms of frequency up to and including the onehundred-
year storm.
(3) Vertical riser pipes with trash racks and anti-vortex devices
shall be provided in detention basins, unless an alternate
design is approved by the Township.
(4) Detention basins shall be designed to drain completely in a
period between 24 and 72 hours.
(5) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a Municipal or state
roadway or right-of-way without approval from the Township or
PennDOT.
F. Detention areas, where required to impede runoff, shall be
designed to meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) Except where a permanent pond is approved by the Township
Commissioners, detention areas shall be designed to drain
completely. All stormwater management BMPs shall be
equipped with a drain line no less than four inches in diameter
and a valve that is normally closed, preferably on the outside of
the facility where it is easily accessed, so that the facility may
be completely dewatered for maintenance and emergencies.
(2) The height of the impoundment dam shall be not more than 10
feet measured between the top of the dam and the toe of the
slope on the downstream side of the dam. The level of water
within the impoundment shall not exceed 10 feet measured
between the lowest point in the impoundment area behind the
dam and the top of the emergency spillway.
§ 26-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-701
1:593
(3) The area to be occupied by the dam shall be cleared of all
topsoil and organic materials prior to construction. The dam
shall be built up in layers not to exceed six inches in depth with
equipment providing 95% compaction at optimum moisture
conditions. The top of the dam shall be constructed 10% higher
than its designed height to allow for settlement.
(4) The core trench stabilizing the dam shall extend the full length
under the dam and full height each side of the dam and shall be
designed after a soil investigation at the dam site carried to at
least 10 feet below the level of the toe of the dam or to
bedrock. The core trench shall be not less than three feet in
depth, not less than three feet in width at its bottom, and its
sides shall slope not less than one-foot vertical rise to each one
foot of horizontal run (one to one).
(5) The settled elevation of the top of the dam at its lowest point
shall be not less than one foot above the maximum water level
to be impounded behind the dam and not less than two feet
above the elevation of the emergency spillway.
(6) The surfaces of the dam shall be planted in a seed mixture as
specified by PaDEP requirements.
(7) The horizontal drain pipe passing through the dam shall be
reinforced concrete pipe. Anti-seepage collars shall be placed
not less than 28 feet apart along the length of the pipe. Each
collar shall be fabricated of not less than one-fourth-inch steel
plate, shall extend not less than two feet in all directions at
right angles from the outer face of the pipe, shall be welded in
place all around and shall be completely enclosed within the
dam fill.
(8) The top of the riser pipe to drain the pond shall be not less than
three feet in height above the invert elevation of the horizontal
pipe, shall be not less than four inches in diameter and shall be
fitted with an anti-vortex device and a trash rack.
(9) The emergency spillway shall be capable of passing the flow
created by the 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm event with
riser inoperable, demonstrating one foot of freeboard or
greater.
(10) Stone low-flow channels with underdrains shall be installed in
all aboveground earthen detention facilities, and channel
slopes within the basin shall be 2% minimum.
(11) Notwithstanding the above requirements, dams as classified
under Pennsylvania Code 25 Chapter 105, Pennsylvania Dam
Safety, shall meet all requirements of said act.
§ 26-701 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-701
1:594
G. The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table.
The invert of stormwater facilities may be lowered if adequate
subsurface drainage is provided. Flows from underdrains shall not
be counted in volume or rate control calculations.
H. The outfall pipe passing through the embankment shall be
reinforced concrete pipe. Antiseepage collars shall be placed not
less than 28 feet apart along the length of the pipe and shall be
constructed in accordance with construction detail.
I. Exterior slopes of the basin embankment shall not exceed 3:1, and
may be further reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
J. Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed 3:1.
K. Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of
2% extending radially out from the principal outlet structure. A
concrete-lined low-flow channel shall be provided in accordance
with the construction detail. Facilities designed as water quality/
infiltration BMPs may have a bottom slope of zero.
L. Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(1) Minimal maintenance, saturation-tolerant vegetation must be
provided in basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
M. The fence shall be nonprivacy to allow for sight into the basin. A
fence may be required for each aboveground stormwater
management facility as determined at the time of dedication of the
facility to the homeowner's association or other responsible party
as named and required by the Township. All required fencing shall
be a minimum four feet high and require access points for
maintenance, as required by the Township.
N. An access road shall be provided to stormwater management
facilities that are not directly adjacent to a public right-of-way, in
accordance with the construction detail. Two points of access to the
facility must be provided, with a gated access point in the fence
location. Adequate turning locations adjacent to the stormwater
management facility shall be provided for maintenance vehicles.
Easement dedicate to the township will be shown on subdivision or
site plans.
O. Written design reports and calculations shall be submitted for
review and approval by the Township. Routing calculations using
modified PULS methodology shall be included to assure outflow
rates are in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 26-701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-701
1:595
§ 26-702. Calculation Methodology. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Calculations for storm pipe sizing shall also be included using
the rational method and Manning's formula for a twenty-five-year
storm using PennDOT intensity duration frequency curves from the
Engineering Design Manual (latest edition).
P. The owner or developer shall enter into a legal agreement
approved by the Township Solicitor which shall hold the Township
harmless from any and all liability relating to storm drainage
collection and its discharge during construction of the system and
thereafter. The owner or developer shall secure, where necessary,
off-site easements for storm drainage.
Q. The costs of review and inspection by the Township of the
stormwater management system as proposed by the developer
shall be borne by the developer, whether or not the plan is
ultimately approved. The Township shall review such changes as
the developer may make in his plan for compliance with the
Township's recommendations and shall advise the Board of
Supervisors whether or not the revised plan is in compliance.
Inspection reports prepared by the contractor and/or geotechnical
engineer shall be provided to the Township.
R. Catch basins shall meet the Township standards and shall have
inverts poured to allow self-cleaning. Catch basins shall be located
no further apart then 300 feet, measured between catch basins on
the same side of the street.
S. Graded areas shall be stabilized with erosion-resisting plantings
placed immediately after the completion of grading. Graded slopes
produced by placing fill earth over the preexisting surface shall be
keyed in accordance with sound geotechnical practices.
T. All persons, partnerships or corporations intending to excavate, fill
or grade land in the Township shall be required to apply for a
grading permit under the terms of the SALDO,35 as amended, and
shall have a valid grading permit in their possession prior to the
start of any grading work. Work shall be undertaken in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and applicable
regulations of Washington County Conservation District.
1. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual, as amended herein.
2. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Methodology.
Other methods shall be selected by the design professional based on
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 26-701 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-702
1:596
the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site and approved by the Township.
3. Rainfall Values:
A. Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
B. NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type
II, twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in
conjunction with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or be
consistent with the following table:
Return Interval
(year)
Twenty-Four-Hour Rainfall
Total
(inches)
1 1.99
2 2.38
10 3.35
25 3.96
50 4.46
100 4.99
4. Runoff Volume:
A. Rational Method. Not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
B. NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method shall be used to
estimate the change in volume due to regulated activities.
Combining Curve Numbers for land areas proposed for
development with Curve Numbers for areas unaffected by the
proposed development into a single weighted curve number is not
acceptable.
5. Peak Flow Rates:
A. Rational Method. This method may be used for design of
conveyance facilities only. Caution should be used by the design
professional if the watershed has more than one main drainage
channel, if the watershed is divided so that hydrologic properties
are significantly different in one versus the other, if the time of
concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff volume
is an important factor. The combination of Rational Method
hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
§ 26-702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-702
1:597
B. NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method is recommended for
design of stormwater management facilities and where stormwater
runoff volume must be taken into consideration.
C. For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
6. Runoff Coefficients:
A. Rational Method. Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).36
B. NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. Use Table C-2 (Appendix C).37 Curve
Numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in hydrologic
models as they are a design tool with statistical variability. For
large sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to the nearest
whole number.
C. For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious areas conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
D. For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow (good condition).
7. Design Storm:
A. All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year
hydrographs through the facility using the storage indication
method or modified plus method. The design storm hydrograph
shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full
hydrograph.
B. The stormwater drainage system (minor calculations) shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development 100-year storm
event to stable discharge locations, demonstrating that the pipe
capacity exceeds the total flow through the pipe, and that the
hydraulic grade line does not surcharge connecting structures.
C. Permanent channels shall be designed to convey the 100-year
storm event to stable discharge locations, demonstrating a
minimum of six inches of freeboard and that channel lining material
sheer stress does not exceed the maximum allowable sheer stress.
D. All structures (culvert or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a municipal road shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum one-foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of the roadway, using FHWA HY-8 or
HEC-RAS methodology, as applicable.
36.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
37.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-702
1:598
8. Time of Concentration:
A. The time of concentration is to represent the average condition that
best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. The following
time of concentration (Tc) computational methodologies shall be
used unless another method is preapproved by the Township:
(1) Pre-development: NRCS's Lag Equation:
Time of Concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/.6)* 60](minutes)
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours)
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet)
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent)
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by: S =
[(1,000/CN) - 10]
CN = NRCS Curve Number for watershed
(2) Post-development: NRCS Segmental Method. The length of
sheet flow shall be limited to 100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.
B. Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(1) The post-development Tc shall never be greater that the predevelopment
Tc for any watershed or subwatershed. This
includes when the designer has specifically used swales to
reduce flow velocities. In the event that the designer believes
that the post-development Tc is greater, it will still be set by
default equal to the pre-development Tc for modeling
purposes.
(2) The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
(3) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute Tc for any
post-development watershed or subwatershed without
providing any computations.
(4) The designer must provide computations for all predevelopment
Tc paths. A five-minute Tc cannot be assumed for
pre-development.
§ 26-702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-702
1:599
(5) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
pre-development conditions for purpose of Tc calculation.
9. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. The Manning's equation should not
be used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from PennDOT's
Drainage Manual, Publication 584.
10. The Township has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site
history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and recommendation of the
Township.
§ 26-702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-702
1:600
Part 8
SWM Site Plan And Report Requirements
§ 26-801. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in § 26-302, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit,
or the commencement of any land disturbance activity, may not proceed
until the applicant has received written approval of a SWM site plan from
the Township.
§ 26-802. SWM Site Plan and Report Contents. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/
2019]
1. The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be
rejected.
2. Appropriate sections from the Municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,38 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plan.
A. SWM site plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Plans shall be of one size and in a form that meets the
requirements for recording in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Washington County.
(a) Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals no more than 50 feet;
(b) Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more, plans shall be drawn
at a scale of one inch equals no more than 100 feet;
(c) Lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans
are reduced to 1/2 size.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of
the property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, email address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 26-801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-802
1:601
(6) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000
feet and illustrates the project relative to highways,
municipalities or other identifiable landmarks.
(7) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
(8) Existing and final contours at intervals:
(a) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot;
(b) Slopes between 5% and 15%: no greater than two feet;
(c) Steep slopes (greater than 15%): five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(9) A stream and wetland delineation report prepared by a
qualified professional must be provided. Perimeters of existing
waterbodies within the project area including stream banks,
lakes, ponds, springs, field delineated wetlands or other bodies
of water, sinkholes, flood hazard boundaries (FEMA delineated
floodplains and floodways), areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site, and overland drainage paths. In addition, any
areas necessary to determine downstream impacts, where
required for proposed stormwater management facilities, must
be shown.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
water lines on and within 50 feet of property lines including
inlets, manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction
boxes, and other utility system components.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the Hydraulic
Soil Group classification including rock outcroppings.
(13) Geotechnical report indicating subsurface conditions that may
affect stream pollution (such as the presence of deep mines),
slope stability analysis for all proposed embankments
associated with stormwater BMPs, boring logs in the location
of proposed stormwater BMPs, compaction requirements, and
recommendations for construction of basins or subsurface
BMPs (such as keyway size, embankment slope, maximum
depth of excavation, etc.). In addition to the slope stability
analysis provided prior to construction, an additional slope
stability analysis must be performed on all constructed
embankments and provided to the Township.
§ 26-802 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-802
1:602
(14) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas,
and buildings), including plans and profiles of roads and paved
areas and floor elevations of buildings.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs where required
by the Township.
(17) The location and clear identification of the nature of
permanent stormwater BMPs.
(18) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown on a separate from the SWM site plan (typically an E&S
plan).
(19) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement along with a
twenty-foot ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
Easements for stormwater BMPs shall conform with § 26-901
of this chapter. Subsurface facilities shall have riser structures
and cleanout ports that are accessible and unobstructed by
parked vehicles or any item which may prohibit maintenance
and inspection.
(20) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(21) Construction sequence.
(22) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operations, and maintenance responsibilities.
(23) Notes and Statements:
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that
the stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered
or removed without prior approval by the Township.
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is
part of the SWM site plan.
(c) At the discretion of the Township, a note indicating that
record drawings will be provided for all stormwater
facilities prior to occupancy, or the release of the surety
bond.
(d) The following signature block for the registered
professional engineer preparing the stormwater
management plan:
"I, ___ (NAME) _____, hereby certify that the Stormwater
Management Plan meets all design standards and criteria
§ 26-802 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-802
1:603
of the North Strabane Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
(e) The following signature block for the Township Engineer
reviewing the stormwater management plan:
"I, ___ (NAME) _____ have reviewed this Stormwater
Management Plan in accordance with the Design
Standards and Criteria of the North Strabane Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
B. SWM site report shall include (but not limited to):
(1) General data including:
(a) Project name.
(b) Project location: address of the property site.
(c) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant/
owner of the property.
(d) Name, address, telephone number, email address, and
engineering seal of the individual preparing the SWM site
report.
(e) Date of submission and revisions.
(2) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project
and provides the following information, where applicable:
(a) Narrative:
1) Statement of the regulated activity describing what is
being proposed. Overall stormwater management
concept with description of permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction
specifications and materials to be used for stormwater
management facilities.
2) Expected project schedule.
3) Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to release rate districts.
4) Detailed description of the existing site conditions
including a site evaluation completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas
such as brownfields. This may be included in the
geotechnical report.
5) Total site area, pre and post, which must be equal or
have an explanation as to why it is not.
§ 26-802 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-802
1:604
6) Total site impervious area.
7) Total off-site areas.
8) Number and description of stormwater management
facilities.
9) Type of development.
10) Pre-development land use.
11) Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
12) Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
13) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural
computations for all stormwater management
facilities.
14) A written maintenance plan for all stormwater
features including detention facilities and other
stormwater management elements.
15) Identification of ownership and maintenance
responsibility for all permanent stormwater
management facilities.
16) Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary Tables.
1) Pre-development Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG)
assumptions, curve numbers (CN), computation of
average slope, hydraulic length, computed time of
concentration.
2) Existing conditions runoff volume and peak rate of
runoff.
3) Post-development runoff volume and peak rate of
runoff.
4) Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
5) Land use for each subarea.
6) Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN).
7) Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
8) Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to and
out of ponds.
§ 26-802 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-802
1:605
9) Pond maximum return period design data including
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation,
and emergency spillway elevation, and provided
freeboard for emergency spillway analysis.
10) Water quality depth and volume requirements.
(c) Calculations.
1) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations, calculations, assumptions, and criteria
for the design of all stormwater BMPs.
2) Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation,
embankment side slopes, top width of embankment,
emergency spillway elevation, perforated riser
dimensions, pipe barrel dimensions and dimensions
and spacing of antiseep collars.
3) Design computations for the control structures (pipe
barrel and riser, etc.).
4) Design computations for emergency spillway analysis
(100-year, twenty-four-hour storm with riser
inoperable).
5) A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume vs.
elevation) and all supporting computations.
6) Routing computations.
(d) Drawings.
1) Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets
depicting the time of concentration path for both
existing conditions and post-developed condition.
2) All stormwater management facilities must be located
on a plan and described in detail including easements
and buffers boundaries.
(3) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information shall
be rejected for review by the Township and will be returned to
the applicant.
(4) Description of, justification, and actual field results for
infiltration testing with respect to the type of test and test
location for the design of infiltration BMPs. Infiltration testing
must be provided herewith and may not be performed at a later
date, if infiltration BMPs are proposed. Infiltration testing must
be performed in-situ at the proposed bottom elevation of
stormwater BMPs.
§ 26-802 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-802
1:606
§ 26-803. SWM Site Plan and Report Submission. [Ord. No. 383, 8/
27/2019]
(5) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing municipal stormwater collection
system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(6) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover including the type and amount of impervious
area to be added.
(7) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operation, and maintenance responsibilities as well as
schedules and costs for inspection and maintenance activities
for each permanent stormwater or drainage BMP, including
provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the
SWM site plan, as requested by the Township:
(1) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement
(Appendix A).39
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and
off-site work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter
from the Washington County Conservation District.
(4) An NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(6) Geologic assessment.
(7) On-site inspection reports from contractor and/or geotechnical
engineer, including boring logs, compaction test results, and
on-site recommendations for construction of detention basins.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of
a PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when
proposed facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-ofway,
or when drainage is directed toward a PennDOT right-ofway.
1. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
2. Two copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted and be
distributed as follows:
39.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-802 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-803
1:607
§ 26-804. SWM Site Plan and Report Review. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/
2019]
§ 26-805. Modification of Plans. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or re-design of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township, shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this chapter. Proof of resubmission to the Conservation District is required,
and to DEP or PennDOT if their approval is required.
A. One copy to the Township accompanied by the requisite executed
review fee reimbursement agreement, as specified in this chapter.
B. One copy to the Township Engineer.
3. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Township or
other government agencies.
1. The Township shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. The Township shall review the SWM
site plan and report for consistency with the purposes, requirements,
and intent of this chapter.
2. The Township shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this Part, when a SWM site plan and
report is found to be deficient, the Township shall disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Township may accept submission of modifications.
3. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall follow the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.
4. The Municipal Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Township. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
§ 26-803 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-806
1:608
§ 26-806. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plan and Report.
[Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
A disapproved SWM site plan and report shall be resubmitted with the
revisions addressing the Township's concerns documented, in writing, to
the Township in accordance with this chapter. The applicable municipal
review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan
and report.
§ 26-807. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity. [Ord. No.
383, 8/27/2019]
The Township's approval of a SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The Township may
specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any
specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date
the Township signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been
approved within this time, then the Township shall consider the SWM site
plan disapproved and shall revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 26-808. Record Drawings, Completion Certificate and Final
Inspection. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. The applicant shall be required to provide record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to the Township as a prerequisite for
the release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.
2. The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by
a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs
have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan and
report.
A. Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control
facilities.
B. Submission shall include a comparison of the constructed stagestorage
(volume vs. elevation) of all aboveground and belowground
stormwater storage facilities to the approved design.
C. Elevations of stormwater BMP top of embankment and emergency
spillway shall be taken as the lowest elevation at which water will
begin to overflow. It shall not be acceptable to take an average of
surveyed data points for the purpose of reporting as-built
elevations.
§ 26-806 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-808
1:609
D. Basin bottom elevation shall be reported as the lowest elevation in
the basin. If the basin is proposed to be filled with aggregate or
media, the basin bottom shall be reported as the surface elevation
of this media, so long as the thickness of the media is indicated on
the drawing.
E. All proposed design criteria for stormwater BMPs must be
measured and reported, such as width of embankment, top of riser,
orifice or weir size and elevations, and underdrain size and
locations.
3. After receipt of the record drawing and certification of completion by
the Township, the Township shall conduct a final inspection.
4. As-Built Drawings.
A. Upon completion of the construction within a land development or
construction of improvements in a subdivision, the applicant shall
furnish the Township with an electronic file in PDF format of the
plan.
B. Such "as-built" drawings shall include the following items where
applicable:
(1) Scale, North arrow and date;
(2) Tract boundary and lot lines;
(3) Road access, public and private internal roads and walks;
(4) Plan view and vertical profiles of new public streets;
(5) Stormwater management to include:
(a) Location of detention facilities including measurements as
required to verify as-built volume.
(b) Location of outflow structures including measurements of
controls.
(c) Location and size of emergency spillways.
(d) Location of all best management practices (BMPs)
including but not limited to sumps, vegetative swales, bioswales,
ditches and sediment forebays.
(6) Locations of drainage structures and pipes, including type and
profiles;
(7) Utility easements, including sanitary sewer;
(8) Parking area and number of spaces;
(9) Location of all buildings;
§ 26-808 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-808
1:610
(10) Statement to the effect that all utilities are located within the
proper rights-of-way for roads to be considered for acceptance
by the Township;
(11) Landscaping;
(12) Lighting; and
(13) Location of trash facilities.
§ 26-808 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-808
1:611

Part 9
Easements
§ 26-901. Easements. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
2. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainage-way, channel or
stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such
watercourse, drainage-way, channel or stream with a width adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the 100-year
floodplain.
3. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities (except where the single-family residential
exemption applies), including, but not limited to, detention facilities
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
4. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
5. Easement dimensions shall be as follows:
A. A minimum of 20 feet wide for all public storm sewers and outfall
pipes;
B. A minimum of 15 feet wide for all private roof drain collectors;
C. A minimum of 10 feet from the edge of all constructed slopes and
access roads associated with stormwater BMPs.
6. Easements shall provide ingress to, and egress from, a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
shall be added to the plan granting the municipality or their designees
access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way able for
vehicle ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities.
7. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
8. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would
adversely affect the function of the easement, or conflict with any
conditions associated with such easement, except for plantings directly
associated with and required for the function of stormwater BMPs.
9. All easements shall be shown on the subdivision plan, as applicable.
Applicable subdivision plans shall be recorded prior to any land
development occurring.
§ 26-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-901
1:613
10. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content
of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township and Solicitor.
§ 26-901 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-901
1:614
Part 10
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 26-1001. Maintenance Responsibilities for Developer- or Owner-
Retained Facilities. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-1002. Maintenance Agreement for Developer- or Owner-
Retained Stormwater Facilities. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities of the stormwater
facilities. The operation and maintenance description shall outline
required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
ensure proper operation of the stormwater control facilities.
2. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principals:
A. If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned with no homeowners' association, and in which
streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to be dedicated
to the Township, stormwater BMPs shall also be dedicated to and
maintained by the Township upon formal review of the as-built
condition of the BMPs and formal acceptance by the Township.
B. If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership
(e.g., a commercial development) or if sewers and other public
improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the
ownership and maintenance of stormwater control facilities/BMPs
shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management
entity.
C. The Township shall take enforcement actions against an applicant
for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
3. The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan and report. The Township shall request the dedication of such
facilities as part of the approval of the SWM site plan. The Township
reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating
responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management controls.
4. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan, or to allow the property to
remain in a condition, which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless the Township grants an exception in writing.
1. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix
§ 26-1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1002
1:615
A),40 or similar agreement, covering all stormwater control facilities
that are to be privately owned. The operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement shall be recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part
hereto.
2. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township and the Solicitor.
3. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, the Township may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
40.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-1002 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-1002
1:616
Part 11
Inspections
§ 26-1101. Schedule of Inspections. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-1102. Right-of-Entry. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to
PADEP compliance programs, the Township or their municipal assignee
may inspect all phases of the installation of temporary or permanent
stormwater management facilities.
2. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the Township
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the Township
shall revoke any existing permits or approvals until a revised SWM site
plan is submitted and approved as specified in this chapter.
3. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by a professional engineer
registered in Pennsylvania according to the inspection schedule
described on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
A. Inspection reports for all constructed stormwater BMPs shall be
provided to the Township at least once annually, for the life of the
stormwater BMP.
B. If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the Township, or their designee, may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(1) Prior to conducting such inspections, the Township shall
inform the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The
owner shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections
and submit the required inspection reports to the Township.
1. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter, at reasonable times, upon
any property within the Township, to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
2. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
3. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the Township such
devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
§ 26-1101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1102
1:617
4. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Township access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 26-1102 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-1102
1:618
Part 12
Enforcement And Penalties
§ 26-1201. Notification. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-1202. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-1203. Public Nuisance. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-1204. Suspension and Revocation. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the Township
shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall
set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of these violation(s).
2. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
enforcement as set forth in this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is
proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
1. The approved SWM site plan shall be on file at the project site
throughout the duration of the construction activity. The Township or
their designee may make periodic inspections during construction.
2. Adherence to Approved SWM Site Plan.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
1. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
2. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
1. Any approval or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or
revoked for:
A. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
§ 26-1201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1204
1:619
§ 26-1205. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Where a violation of this chapter has occurred and remains uncured after
notice from the Township or its designee, the Township may institute a legal
action against the violator to restrain, prevent, abate, or enjoin the violation
of this chapter or any stormwater management plan together with expenses
and costs of suit, including attorney fees.
§ 26-1206. Appeals. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Washington County, Pennsylvania, within 30 days of that
action.
B. A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, regulation or mandate from county, state, or
federal entities relating to the regulated activity, inclusive of prior
projects that have not terminated existing permits or that are
under consent order or other legal action.
C. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act, during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
2. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the Township
when:
A. The Township or their designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
B. The Township is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
3. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this
chapter if compliance has occurred within one year of the original
application filing date.
§ 26-1204 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-1206
1:620
Part 13
Prohibitions
§ 26-1301. Prohibited Discharges and Connections. [Ord. No. 383,
8/27/2019]
1. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks), or conveyance whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the Township's separate storm sewer system or waters of the
commonwealth is prohibited.
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the Township's separate storm sewer system, which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved
by the Township is prohibited.
3. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the Township's
separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the
commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) as provided in § 26-1301, Subsection 4 below, and (2) discharges
allowed under a state or federal permit.
4. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
A. Discharges from firefighting activities.
B. Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
C. Irrigation drainage.
D. Air conditioning condensate.
E. Springs.
F. Water from crawl space pumps.
G. Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed).
H. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
I. Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
J. Lawn watering.
K. Swimming pool discharges.
L. Uncontaminated groundwater.
§ 26-1301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1301
1:621
§ 26-1302. Roof Drains. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
Roof drains and sump pumps shall be constructed in accordance with
§ 26-301, Subsection 19, of this chapter, unless otherwise approved by the
Township.
§ 26-1303. Alteration of BMPs. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
M. Water from individual residential car washing.
N. Routine external building washdown.
5. In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 26-1301, Subsection 4, significantly
contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified
by PADEP, the Township will notify the responsible person(s) to cease
the discharge.
6. Upon notice provided by the Township or PADEP under § 26-1301,
Subsection 5, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined
by the Township or PADEP, to cease the discharge, consistent with the
degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
7. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
1. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the
Township.
2. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the Township.
§ 26-1301 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-1303
1:622
Part 14
Fees And Expenses
§ 26-1401. General. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
The fee required by this chapter is the Municipal Review Fee. The Municipal
Review Fee shall be established by the Township from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors to defray review costs incurred by
the Township and the Township Engineer. The applicant shall pay all fees.
§ 26-1402. Expenses Covered by Fees. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
§ 26-1403. Recording of Approved SWM Site Plan and Related
Agreements. [Ord. No. 383, 8/27/2019]
1. The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and report by the Township.
C. Pre-construction meetings.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and
drainage improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection and review of record drawing and as-built plan
upon completion of the stormwater management facilities/BMPs
and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
1. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Washington County, within 90 days of approval of the SWM site plan
by the Township:
A. The SWM site plan.
B. Operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix A).41
C. Easements under § 26-901.
D. Riparian buffers under § 26-602.
2. The Township shall suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this Section.
41.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 26-1401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1403
1:623
3. It is advised to coordinate the recording of the above listed information
with PADEP NPDES notice of termination requirements.
§ 26-1403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 26-1403
1:624
Chapter 27
ZONING
§ 26-1403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 26-1403
1:625

Part 1
BASIC PROVISIONS
§ 27-100. Title. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The official title of this chapter is "North Strabane Township Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 27-101. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 27-102. Authority. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority granted to the Township
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988 (53 P.S.
§10101 et seq., as may be amended from time to time).
§ 27-103. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-104. Community Development Objectives. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
1. In the event of conflicts between the provision of this chapter and any
other ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.
2. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion
of the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
3. In interpreting the language of this chapter to determine the extent of
the restriction upon the use of property, the language shall be
interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the
language written and enacted by the Board of Supervisors, in favor of
the property owner and against any implied extension of the restriction.
1. Community development objectives are set forth in the North Strabane
Township 2016 Comprehensive Plan Update. In addition to the specific
objectives stated in the Comprehensive Plan Update, the general
community development objectives on which this chapter is based are:
A. To promote the interest of public health, safety and the general
welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire and to provide adequate open spaces for
light and clean air.
C. To conserve and stabilize property values.
§ 27-100 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-104
1:627
§ 27-105. Compliance. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
altered, converted or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be used or be
designed to be used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates required
by this chapter.
§ 27-106. Severability. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
If any of the provisions of this chapter or the application of any provision to
particular circumstances is held to be invalid, the remainder of the chapter
or the application of such provision to other circumstances shall not be
affected.
D. To preserve woodlands, open space, and recreational, agricultural
and environmentally sensitive lands from conflict with urban
development.
E. To facilitate the economic provision of adequate transportation,
water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
F. To prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion
in travel and transportation, and loss of health, life or property
from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
G. To promote stormwater management and soil and water
conservation.
H. To set forth population density controls.
I. To promote coordinated and practical community development.
J. To promote the utilization of renewable energy sources.
§ 27-104 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-106
1:628
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 27-200. General Interpretations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
All words used in this chapter shall carry their customary dictionary
definitions as provided in the most recent edition of Webster's Collegiate
Dictionary, except where specifically defined herein. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not permissive; the word "may" is permissive. The words "used" or
"occupied," as applied to any land or structures, shall be construed to
include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
The word "person" shall include the individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association or any other entity. Words in the masculine gender
shall include the feminine gender. The words "includes" and "including"
shall not limit the defined term to the specific examples but are intended to
extend the term's meaning to other instances of like kind and character.
§ 27-201. Particular Meanings. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The following words and phrases shall have the particular meanings
specified for the purpose of interpreting this chapter:
ACCESS — A means of providing vehicular or pedestrian ingress and egress
to and from a property.
ACCESS ROAD — The roadway used for ingress and egress from a Township
or state road providing private access to an oil and gas development and/or
related operations.
ACCESSORY DWELLING — A dwelling unit accessory to the principal
residence of the landowner for the housing of relatives or close friends who
are in need of economic or health benefits provided by persons who are
concerned about their well-being, while allowing them to live independently
in an apartment converted within an existing single-family dwelling or
detached garage or in a mobile home located on the same lot with an
existing single-family dwelling.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, located on the same lot with
the principal structure, that is subordinate and incidental to the principal
structure of the property and which may occupy a separate structure and/or
area on or in the ground, including but not limited to storage sheds or other
storage structures, off-street parking, signs, off-street loading, gazebos,
children's playhouses, greenhouses for personal use, garages, swimming
pools, detached decks, fences and similar structures.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land, located on the same lot as the principal
use, that is subordinate and incidental to the principal use of that lot.
ACTIVE RECREATION, HIGH-IMPACT — See "recreation, active, highimpact."
§ 27-200 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:629
ACTIVE RECREATION, LOW-IMPACT — See "recreation, active, lowimpact."
ADULT ARCADE — Any place where the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time and where the images displayed are sexually
explicit or depict nudity or sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE — An establishment having a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade, including but not
limited to videocassettes, movies, books, magazines and other periodicals,
which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual conduct, as defined
herein, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.
ADULT BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult motel, adult
mini motion-picture theater, adult motion-picture theater, adult news rack,
adult nightclub, body-painting studio, bathhouse, escort service, massage
parlor, or any other business establishment offering adult entertainment, as
defined herein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Movies, videos, still or motion pictures,
photographs, slides, films or other visual representations, books, magazines
or other printed material or live dramatic, musical or dance performances
that are sexually explicit or depict nudity or sexual conduct, as defined
herein.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building, with
a capacity for accommodating fewer than 50 persons, used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel or motel presenting adult motion pictures by
means of closed-circuit television, the material being presented having as
a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual
conduct, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building, with a
capacity for accommodating 50 or more persons, used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual conduct, as defined
herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NEWS RACK — Any coin-operated machine or device that dispenses
printed material substantially devoted to the depiction of nudity or sexual
conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT NIGHTCLUB — Any nightclub, as defined herein, that offers adult
entertainment, as defined herein.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:630
AGE-RESTRICTED PLANNED COMMUNITY — A residential development
in which residency is qualified by age and other related characteristics
specific to the development in accordance the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C.A.
§ 3601 et seq.) and which complies with the criteria of the Township's Code
of Ordinances.
AGRICULTURAL SALES — The sale of products raised, grown or produced
on a farm, provided that the sales are conducted on the farm property
where the products are raised, grown or produced and where products
sold that are not raised, grown or produced on the farm shall be a minor
percentage of the total sales.
AGRICULTURE — Any principal or accessory use of land or structures
for farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, kennels, horticulture,
floriculture, arboriculture, or animal or poultry husbandry. Accessory uses
permitted in conjunction with agriculture may include barns, stables, corn
cribs, silos and other uses or structures that are clearly related to an
agricultural operation.
AIRPORT — A place where fixed-wing aircraft land and take off on
designated and/or improved runways, including hangars, facilities for
refueling and repair and which may include accommodations for
passengers, licensed as such by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
AIRSTRIP — An unimproved area of land designated for fixed-wing aircraft
to land and take off, licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
AISLE — A paved area, of a minimum width specified by this chapter, that
provides direct access to one or two rows of parking spaces and connects
those parking spaces with the driveways that provide circulation through a
parking area.
ALTERATION — See "structural alteration."
AMENDMENT — See "zoning amendment."
ANIMAL GROOMING — A retail business that offers services for the
bathing, trimming and conditioning of domestic pets and that may offer the
sale of pet-care products as an accessory use.
APPLICANT — An individual, corporation, entity that fills out the
application.
ARCHITECT — A registered professional architect licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ARTERIAL STREET — A public street that serves large volumes of highspeed
and long-distance traffic streets classified as arterial in the Township
include Interstate 79, U.S. Route 19, PA Route 136, PA Route 519 and PA
Route 980.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A retail establishment that provides
for one or more of the following activities:
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:631
BAKERY — A retail establishment that sells baked goods, including the
baking of goods when prepared for retail sales on the premises only and not
for distribution to another retail outlet.
BAR or TAVERN — A business, licensed by the commonwealth, that sells
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as the principal use
and that may offer food for consumption on the premises as an accessory
use.
BASEMENT — That portion of the foundation of a building between the
floor of the foundation and the floor of the first story of the building, having
a portion of its height below grade but at least 1/2 of its height above the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
BATHHOUSE — An establishment that provides baths of all kinds, including
methods of hydrotherapy involving nudity or sexual conduct, but not
including hydrotherapy treatment practiced by or under the supervision of
a medical practitioner, such as a medical doctor, physician, chiropractor or
similar professional licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A dwelling, that is the principal residence of the
operator, where no more than four sleeping rooms are offered to transient
overnight guests for compensation and where the only meal served and
included with the overnight accommodations is breakfast.
BEER DISTRIBUTOR — A commercial business licensed by the
commonwealth to sell beer in quantity entirely for off-premises
consumption.
BETTING PARLOR — A business establishment where bets are taken on
activities for which gambling on the outcome is legal, including facilities on
the site of a racetrack as well as off-track facilities.
The servicing of motor vehicles and operations incidental thereto and
limited to the retail sale of petroleum products, and that may include
one or more of the following activities: retail sales and installation
of automotive accessories; automobile washing by hand; undercoating
and rustproofing; waxing and polishing of automobiles; tire changing
and repairing (excluding recapping); battery service, changing and
replacement, excluding repair and rebuilding; radiator cleaning and
flushing, excluding steam cleaning and repair; installation of
accessories; and state inspection;
A.
The following operations, if conducted within a completely enclosed
building, as defined by this chapter: lubrication of motor vehicles;
replacement of exhaust systems; brake servicing, limited to servicing
and replacement of brake cylinders, lines and brake shoes; wheel
balancing; the testing, adjustment and replacement or servicing of
carburetors, filters, generators, points, rotors, spark plugs, voltage
regulators, water and fuel pumps, water hoses and wiring; and/or
B.
The operation of a convenience food store, provided that retail sale of
petroleum products is a part of the operation.
C.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:632
BILLBOARD — Any off-premises sign with a changeable or permanent
advertising face that advertises an establishment, person, activity, product
or service that is unrelated to or not available on the premises on which the
sign is located.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
North Strabane, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
BOARDING STABLE — The keeping of horses and ponies owned by persons
other than the owner of the stable, or the rental of horses owned by the
owner of the stable for a fee or other form of compensation. (See also
"riding academy.")
BODY-PAINTING STUDIO — Any establishment that provides the service of
applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent,
to or on the human body in a state of nudity, as defined herein.
BUFFER AREA — A landscaped area, of a certain depth specified by this
chapter, that shall be planted and maintained in trees, grass, ground cover,
shrubs, bushes or other natural landscaping material and shall consist of a
mix of types and sizes of plant material that, within three years of planting,
meets the standard of providing a compact year-round visual screen at least
six feet in height or an existing natural barrier, such as vegetation and/or
topography, that duplicates the effect of the required buffer area, provided
that the natural barrier is maintained with vegetation or landscaping at all
times.
BUILDING — A roofed structure, whether or not enclosed by walls, to
be used for shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, goods, materials,
animals, things or an area of land. (See also "completely enclosed
building.")
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average of
the elevations of the finished grade at the four corners of the building to
the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs,
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING LINE, FRONT — A line parallel to or concentric with the front lot
line, the minimum measurement of which is the front yard depth required
by this chapter.
BUILDING SPACING — The minimum distance between two buildings on
the same lot, measured from the outermost wall or projection, excluding
bay windows, chimneys, flues, columns, ornamental features, cornices and
gutters that project beyond the wall of the building no more than two feet.
BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — Any office of recognized
professions, other than medical, such as lawyers, architects, engineers,
real estate brokers, insurance agents and others who, through training,
are qualified to perform services of a professional nature and other offices
used primarily for accounting, corresponding, research, editing or other
administrative functions, but not including banks or other financial
institutions.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:633
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments engaged in providing services
to business offices on a fee or contract basis, including but not limited
to advertising and public relations; management and consulting services;
employment services; building security and maintenance services,
equipment servicing, rental/leasing and sales; computer and data
processing services; mailing, photocopying, quick printing and fax services;
sale of office supplies; and similar business services, but not including the
rental, sale or repair of vehicles or heavy equipment.
CAR WASH — A facility, whether automatic, semiautomatic or manual, for
washing and polishing vehicles.
CARPORT — A structure to house or protect motor vehicles that is open to
the weather for at least 40% of the total area of its sides.
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, carry-out."
CARTWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way that is surfaced for
vehicular use, excluding curbs and shoulders.
CASINO — A business establishment where the principal use is legal
gambling activities and that may also include a restaurant or nightclub as
an accessory use.
CATERING SERVICES INCLUDING RENTAL HALL — A business
establishment that provides meals and/or refreshments for public or private
events that are consumed on the premises.
CELLAR — That portion of the foundation of a building between the floor of
the foundation and the floor of the first story of the building, having 1/2 or
more of its height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CEMETERY — Property used for interring of dead persons or domestic
pets, including mausoleums, columbariums, crematoriums, and mortuaries
operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such property.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the Zoning Officer
indicating that the premises for which a building permit and/or a zoning
certificate has been issued is ready for occupancy and is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and the Township Building Code, if applicable.
CERTIFIED MODULAR LARGE VOLUME TANKS (MLVTs) — For the
purposes of this chapter, MLVTs include any aboveground, fully enclosed
tank field assembled from multiple uniform factory-prepared components
which provides primary containment for 100,000 barrels or more of fluids.
By this definition, MLVTs are typically field assembled on an oil and gas
location for temporary use or are dismantled for movement to a different
location following their use. This shall include modular large volume tanks
(MLVTs) that meet American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards or
standards deemed to be acceptable by the Township. For use in association
with oil and gas development and related operations.
CERTIFIED WATER STORAGE FACILITIES — An aboveground assembly of
fluid storage containers that are each certified by a nationally recognized
testing laboratory or organization such as the ASA, American Petroleum
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:634
Institute, ASTM International, the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, or the American Water Works Association and used to hold fresh
water and/or re-use water for use in oil and gas development and related
operations.
CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN — A sign that is designed so that characters,
letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged, either manually or
electronically, to change the message on the sign without altering the face
or surface of the sign. An electronic sign panel when used as part of a
billboard is not a changeable-copy sign.
CLEANING AND DYEING PLANT — A facility used for cleaning or dyeing
of fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort. The cleaning of
such articles shall be by immersions only, in volatile solvents including, but
not by way of limitation, solvents of the petroleum-based type, and/or the
chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes incidental hereto.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area of unobstructed vision at the
intersection of two streets or of a driveway and a street, defined by line
of sight a given distance from the intersection of the center lines of two
streets or the center lines of the driveway and the street. (See illustration
in Appendix A.42)
CLINIC, MEDICAL — Any establishment, including mobile diagnostic units,
where persons receive medical, dental, chiropractic and surgical diagnosis,
treatment and counseling under the care of a group of licensed medical
doctors and dentists and their supporting staff, where said patients are not
provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises.
CLINIC, PSYCHOLOGICAL — Any establishment where persons receive
medical and psychological diagnosis, treatment (including methadone or
similar type of treatment) and counseling under the care of a group of
licensed medical practitioners and their supporting staff, where such
patients are not provided with room or board or kept overnight on the
premises.
CLINIC, VETERINARY — See "veterinary clinic."
CLUB, PRIVATE — See "private club."
COAL MINE ADJUNCT FACILITIES — A support facility, not a coal mining
facility, required for and used only in connection with an underground coal
mine that is to:
COAL MINE FACILITIES, UNDERGROUND — Structures and installations
necessary to the operation of an underground coal mine, which shall include
A. Supply air or power to the underground coal mine.
Ventilate air or gas from the underground coal mine, which shall
include fans and fan buildings.
B.
C. Remove water from the underground coal mine.
42.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:635
slopes shafts or portals for the primary purpose of gaining access from the
surface to an underground coal mine by persons or equipment to mine and
removal coal, coal preparation and cleaning plants and related equipment,
ponds, and treatment facilities, coal refuse disposal areas, silos for storage
of coal, coal tipples, access roads, aboveground repair and personnel areas
and structure and transport facilities.
COAL MINE, UNDERGROUND — All underground areas within a
continuous barrier of undisturbed coal from which such coal is extracted.
COGNITIVE SUPPORT SERVICES — Diagnosis, assessment and/or
treatment of certain cognitive (thinking) and behavior difficulties such as
those that can result from brain injury and/or dementia. Behavioral therapy
can take many forms, but usually involves counseling or therapy for an
individual with brain injury and his/her family.
COLLECTOR STREET — A public street that, in addition to giving access
to abutting lots, intercepts local streets and provides a route for carrying
considerable volumes of local traffic to community facilities and arterial
roads. For the purposes of this chapter, streets are deemed collector streets
because of their current function; other streets are anticipated they will
be collector streets as identified as part of the Township's comprehensive
transportation planning and build-out analyses conducted as part of the
North Strabane Comprehensive Plan based upon their need to be improved
as development occurs and incrementally brought to said status.
Current Collector Streets Anticipated Collector Streets
Boone Avenue, Brehm Road,
Chartiers Street, Conklin Road,
Galley Road, Johnson Road, Latimer
Avenue, Linden Road, Linden Creek
Road, Linwood Road, Lindley Road,
McClelland Road, McDowell Lane,
Thomas Road, Thomas/Eighty-Four
Road, Waterdam Road, Weavertown
Road, West McMurray Road
Christy Road
North/South Connector (South
Beltway)
Brown Lee
COMMERCIAL — A business, enterprise, activity or other undertaking
engaged in for a profit.
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — A retail business that sells flowers, plants,
shrubs, trees and other natural flora and products that aid their growth
and care and that may include a greenhouse and/or the growing of plant
material outside on the lot.
COMMERCIAL RIDING ACADEMY — See "riding academy, commercial."
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — See "school, commercial."
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle licensed by the Department
of Transportation, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds; or any other vehicle, either motorized,
self-propelled or designed to be towed by another vehicle, for use in
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:636
commercial or industrial enterprises, such as air compressors, welding
units and the like; or any and all earthmoving equipment, such as
bulldozers, hi-lifts, backhoes, ditching equipment and the like.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A lot or portion thereof or body of water, or a
combination thereof, within a development site for the use and enjoyment
of the residents of a development, including stormwater management
facilities, but not including streets, off-street parking areas and other areas
set aside for facilities for the general public.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any structure designed for transmitting
or receiving wireless communications of video, voice, data and similar
transmissions, including but not limited to omnidirectional or whip
antennas, directional or panel antennas and satellite or microwave dish
antennas that may be mounted on an existing building, an existing public
utility storage or transmission structure or an existing communications
tower, excluding transmission and receiving devices licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) exclusively for private use by citizens.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — A manned or unmanned
structure that contains the equipment necessary to maintain and operate
communications antennas and that covers an area on the ground in excess
of 200 square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT CABINET — An unmanned structure
that contains the equipment necessary to maintain and operate
communications antennas and that covers an area on the ground of no more
than 200 square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure, whether freestanding or
attached to a building, designed to support multiple communications
antennas, including monopole, self-supporting and guyed towers and one
or more of the following mounts for antennas: rotatable platform, fixed
platform, multipoint or sidearm mounts and pipe mounts for microwave dish
antennas.
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING — A building designed and
constructed so that all exterior walls shall be solid from the ground to the
roofline, containing no openings except for windows and doors that are
designed so that they may be closed and any other small openings required
for the ventilation system.
COMPRESSOR — A device that raises the pressure of natural gas and/or
byproducts. Compressors are any devices that create a pressure differential
to move or compress vapor or a gas. Any such device used alone or in series
to adequately move a vapor or a gas is considered a compressor.
COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and constructed to compress
natural gas that originates from a single well site or a collection of well sites
and to remove water or water vapor from the natural gas, which operates
as a midstream facility for delivery of gas to a transmission pipeline,
distribution pipeline, processing plant or underground storage field,
including one or more natural gas, electric compressors, associated
buildings, pipes (other than regulated or unregulated local distribution
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:637
system, gathering system or transportation lines served by the compressor
station), valves, tanks and other equipment.
COMPRESSOR STATION FACILITY FOOTPRINT — The site and/or fenced
compound which will be developed and constructed for use as a compressor
station containing buildings, compressors and related equipment necessary
for the operations as a compressor station for the transportation and
treatment of gas that will be traveling through a pipeline network. This site
shall not be used for the storage of pipeline, equipment, or construction
trailers during normal operations.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use authorized by this chapter that may be
granted only by the Board of Supervisors following review by the Planning
Commission and a public hearing, subject to express standards and criteria
contained in this chapter.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION — A residential development in which the
dwelling units are clustered on the portion of the site most suitable for
development and the remaining property is preserved as undivided common
open space.
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER, TEMPORARY — A structure designed, used or
constructed to provide temporary offices for construction supervision on the
site of an approved subdivision or land development during the time that a
valid building permit or grading permit is in effect.
CONTRACTING BUSINESS — The administrative offices of a business that
provides landscaping, construction, remodeling, home improvement, land
development and related services on a contractual basis and that may
include the storage of materials, equipment and vehicles, provided that all
materials, equipment and vehicles are stored within a completely enclosed
building.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — An establishment that may or may not include
administrative offices for a business that provides construction, remodeling,
home improvement, land development and related services on a contractual
basis, but that involves the outdoor storage of all or part of the materials,
equipment or vehicles used in the business.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store, primarily servicing customers
residing within a two-mile radius, with a gross floor area of 4,000 square
feet or less, offering a limited selection of grocery, household and personal
items for quick purchase and that may include the dispensing of gasoline.
CONVENTIONAL WELL — A conventional gas well, also known as a
traditional well, is a well that produces oil or gas from a conventional
formation. Conventional formations are variable in age, occurring both
above and below the Elk Sandstone. While a limited number of such gas
wells are capable of producing sufficient quantities of gas without
stimulation by hydraulic fracturing, most conventional wells require this
stimulation technique due to the reservoir characteristics in Pennsylvania.
Stimulation of conventional wells, however, generally does not require the
volume of fluids typically required for unconventional wells.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:638
CORNER LOT — A lot at the intersection of and fronting on two or more
street rights-of-way.
COUNTRY CLUB — See "golf or country club."
COUNTY — Washington County, Pennsylvania.
COVERAGES — See "lot coverage."
CUTOFF ANGLE — The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of
light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from
the light source, above which no light is emitted. (See Appendix B43)
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, licensed by the commonwealth, located
within a building that is not used as a dwelling unit, for the care, on a
regular basis, during part of a twenty-four-hour day, of children under the
age of 16 or handicapped or elderly persons.
DAY-CARE HOME — See "family day-care home."
DBH — Diameter at breast height (DBH) is the standard method of
expressing the diameter of a trunk or bole of a standing tree.
DECK or PATIO — Any uncovered outdoor living area, without a roof,
constructed on or above the surface of the ground.
DEEP INJECTION WELL (CLASS II WELL) — Wells used to inject fluids
associated with the production of oil and natural gas or fluids and
compounds used for enhanced hydrocarbon recovery. These wells normally
inject below the deepest underground source of drinking water (USDW)
except in cases where the USDW contains producible quantities of oil or
gas and are defined as Class II wells by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA).
DELICATESSEN — A retail establishment, other than a restaurant, that
sells ready-to-eat food products such as cooked meats, sandwiches and
prepared salads, primarily for consumption off the premises, but which
may provide a few table or a counter for on premises consumption as an
accessory use and that may include off-premises catering.
DENSITY, DWELLING UNIT — See "dwelling unit density."
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP),
the commonwealth agency responsible for overseeing and administering
environmental laws and regulations within Pennsylvania.
DEVELOPER — An individual landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant
with the landowner's written permission who causes development to occur
upon a lot and who is responsible for compliance of such development
with the terms of this chapter and the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.44
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to an improved or unimproved
land or water area, including but not limited to construction of buildings or
43.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:639
structures or additions thereto, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A graphic and written presentation of a proposed
development, including a plat of subdivision and all provisions relating to
use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of development, streets, parking facilities, common open space and
public facilities.
DIRECT VEHICULAR ACCESS — A curb cut on or a private driveway
leading directly to a public street right-of-way. In the case of the
requirement for direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street,
the point of access shall be onto the arterial or collector street without
traversing any other public street right-of-way.
DISABLING GLARE — Lighting, as determined by the Township Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Township Police Department, that impairs
visibility and creates a potentially hazardous situation for either pedestrians
or motorists.
DISTRICT — See "zoning district."
DOMESTIC PETS — Animals, fish or birds customarily found in a dwelling
and kept for company or pleasure, including dogs and cats, provided that
there is not a sufficient number to constitute a kennel, as defined herein,
hamsters, rabbits, gerbils, parakeets, canaries and similar small animals or
birds; however, the term "domestic pets" excludes exotic animals, as defined
by Ordinance No. 286,45 as now or hereafter amended, and any horses,
pigs (except for Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs) or other fowl or livestock
customarily found on a farm.
DRILLING — Any digging or boring activity of a new well or reworking of an
existing well to explore, develop or produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbons
or to inject gas, water or any other fluids or substances into the earth.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — Any principal use or accessory use that
involves a window, service lane, bay or other facility where customers are
provided services either inside or outside their vehicles and where cars
may or may not wait in line to access these services, including but not
limited to drive-in or drive-through windows at fast-food restaurants, banks
or other businesses, exterior automated teller machines (ATMs), quick oil
change facilities, car washes and similar automotive services and other such
facilities.
DRIVEWAY — A private vehicular way providing access between a street
and a parking area or garage located on a lot.
DRUG STORE — A business establishment engaged in the retail sale of
prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics, and related
supplies.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Part 4.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:640
DRY-CLEANING PICK-UP STORE — A business establishment in which
articles of clothing and the like are dropped off, sorted, and picked up but
are typically laundered and/or cleaned at a separate establishment.
DWELLING — Any building designed or used as permanent living quarters
for one or more families, but not including hotels, motels or
boardinghouses.
DWELLING TYPES — The following dwelling types are included in this
chapter and shall be placed on permanent foundation:
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached residential building that
is the only principal structure on the lot, designed exclusively for
occupancy by one family, as defined herein, and containing one dwelling
unit.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A multifamily residential building that is
the only principal structure on the lot, unless authorized by this chapter
to be subdivided along the common wall for fee-simple ownership of
each dwelling unit, designed exclusively for occupancy by two families
living independently of each other and containing two dwelling units,
each with a separate entrance directly to the outside, including double
houses, duplexes and carriage homes.
B.
TRIPLEX — A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy
by three families living independently of each other, containing three
dwelling units, each having independent access directly to the outside
and having no other units above or below, which units are attached
at right angles to one another with the entrance to each unit facing a
different direction, including patio homes.
C.
QUADRUPLEX — A residential building designed exclusively for
occupancy by four families living independently of each other,
containing four dwelling units, each having independent access directly
to the outside and having no other units above or below, which units are
attached at right angles to one another with the entrance to each unit
facing a different direction, including patio homes.
D.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A residential building designed
exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing three or more separate
dwelling units, including triplexes, quadruplexes, townhouses and
garden apartments.
E.
NON-FAMILY FACILITY, TYPE 1 — A living arrangement that may
or may not be restricted by identified age(s) of residents who are
primarily non-family members, whereas said arrangement, as licensed
in accordance with by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department
of Health, provides dwelling units for residents of varying abilities
of mobility and/or disability and provides on-site supervision and
assistance available to said residents on an occasional, as-needed basis
and that may include certain design features and/or therapy-centered
F.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:641
programming associated with resident needs that are not customary in
the construction of conventional dwelling units, such as but not limited
to emergency call systems, common dining facilities, common laundry
facilities, minimal housekeeping services, cognitive support services
and/or memory care, common leisure and recreational facilities,
transportation services and similar supporting services for residents.
NON-FAMILY FACILITY, TYPE 2 — A living arrangement that may
or may not be restricted by identified age(s) of residents who are
primarily non-family members, whereas said arrangement, as licensed
in accordance with by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department
of Health, provides dwelling units for residents of independent mobility
and not in need of supervision but provides on-site supervision and
assistance available to said residents on an occasional, as-needed basis
and that may include certain design features and/or therapy-centered
programming associated with resident needs that are not customary in
the construction of conventional dwelling units, such as but not limited
to emergency call systems, common dining facilities, common laundry
facilities, minimal housekeeping services, cognitive support services
and/or memory care, common leisure and recreational facilities,
transportation services and similar supporting services for residents.
G.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily residential building no more
than four stories in height, containing three or more dwelling units that
share a common entrance to the outside, usually through a common
corridor, and which dwelling units may have other dwelling units either
beside, above or below them.
H.
GROUP-CARE FACILITY — Any supervised long-term group living
arrangement licensed by the commonwealth for any of the following:
Persons who do not meet the definition of "mentally or physically
handicapped" provided in the Fair Housing Amendments Act or the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
(1)
Persons who do meet the definition of "mentally or physically
handicapped" provided in the Fair Housing Amendments Act or the
Americans with Disabilities Act living in an institutional setting and
not maintaining a common household.
(2)
Persons who, whether handicapped or not, are criminal offenders,
juvenile offenders or delinquents or who have been found by any
governmental tribunal, court or agency to be a danger to society
or who are under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system,
a governmental bureau of corrections or a similar agency or
institution.
(3)
I.
PERSONAL-CARE BOARDING HOME — Unless otherwise defined in
Pennsylvania Code Chapter 2600, Personal Care Homes, as amended, a
premises in which food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision
are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours, for four or more adults
who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require the services
J.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:642
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms that are used as living quarters
for one family and that have permanent facilities for sleeping, cooking and
eating, as well as sanitary facilities.
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY — The number of dwelling units authorized by
this chapter per acre of land.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and for use by the public, a utility, a corporation or any other person, the
use of which shall not be inconsistent with the rights of the grantee and in
which no permanent structure shall be erected.
EDGE OF WELL PAD — This shall mean the edge of the disturbed area
associated with the operations.
EDUCATIONAL STUDIO — An establishment that provides training to
individuals or groups in specialized recreational activities or avocations,
including but not limited to dance, gymnastics, martial arts, photographs,
music, arts and crafts and similar pursuits.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date on which this chapter is duly adopted by the
Township or as specified in the ordinance so adopted.
ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Any area which has more than a
25% slope, is part of a floodplain, wetland, riparian buffer as defined by the
in or of a licensed long-term care facility, but who do require assistance
or supervision in activities of daily living or instrumental activities of
daily living. The term includes a premises that has held or presently
holds itself out as a personal care home and provides food and shelter
to four or more adults who need personal care services, but who are not
receiving the services.
TOWNHOUSE — A multifamily residential building other than a triplex
or quadruplex that contains at least three but no more than eight
dwelling units, each of which is separated from the adjoining unit
or units by a continuous, unpierced vertical wall extending from the
basement to the roof, each unit having independent access directly to
the outside and having no other units above or below.
K.
TRANSITIONAL DWELLING — A dwelling unit occupied on a shortterm
basis by persons assigned by a court of law, or who are selfreferred,
or referred by a public, semipublic or nonprofit agency, and
managed by a public, semipublic or nonprofit agency responsible for
the occupants' care, safety, conduct, counseling and supervision for
a specified period of time, including alcoholic recovery, shelters for
battered persons and their children, maternity homes, community
reentry services following incarceration, prison assignment, house
arrest or other court-ordered treatment, and other such short-term
supervised assignments.
L.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:643
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and/or possesses
landslide-prone soils.
EQUIPMENT STORAGE YARD — An area of land devoted to the storage,
whether temporary or permanent, of construction equipment, farm
equipment or other heavy equipment or vehicles in excess of 26,000 pounds
GVW.
ERECTED — Includes "built," "constructed," "reconstructed," "moved upon"
or any physical operations on the land required for the building. Excavation,
fill, drainage and the like shall be considered part of the erection.
ESCORT SERVICE — A business that provides a service, by appointment
or upon request, where individuals leave one premises and go to another
premises for a specified period of time for the purpose of engaging in nudity
or sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The provision of distribution and collection
systems by public utilities, regulated by the Public Utilities Commission
(PUC) or any agency, franchisee or authority of North Strabane Township of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, telephone, steam, or water lines,
sewers, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, cable TV (not including
towers) and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary to
furnish adequate services within North Strabane Township to the general
public.
ESTABLISH AN ADULT BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
EXPLORATION — Temporary geologic or geophysical activities such as
drilling in context with the zoning definition in this chapter, including
seismic surveys related to the search for natural gas or other subsurface
hydrocarbons.
EXTRACTION — The act or process of separating, obtaining or removing
a substance, such as a mineral, including but not limited to coal, sulfur,
petroleum, oil and/or gas, and including oil and gas development.
FAMILY — An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption or foster child care, including domestic servants or gratuitous
guests thereof; or a group of not more than three unrelated persons living
together without supervision in a dwelling unit, or not more than 12 persons
living together in a group living arrangement with supervision, provided
that the group living arrangement meets all of the following criteria:
A. The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
business, to any adult business.
B.
The addition or change of any adult business to any other existing adult
business or to a non-adult business.
C.
D. The relocation of any adult business.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:644
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A facility, licensed or approved by the
commonwealth, as required by the laws of the commonwealth, located
within a dwelling in which the operator resides, for the care on a regular
basis, during part of a twenty-four-hour day, of not more than six children
under 16 years of age, including care provided to children who are relatives
of the provider, where such use shall be secondary to the use of the dwelling
for living purposes and shall meet all applicable requirements for a home
occupation.
FARM — A site of 10 acres or more used for the pursuit of agriculture, as
defined herein.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, fast-food."
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured or natural material, or combination of
materials, erected for the enclosure of land and/or dividing one area of
land from another. This definition shall not include agricultural fences
erected for the purpose of enclosing livestock in areas properly used for
agricultural purposes, nor shall it include retaining walls that are designed
and approved in accordance with the Township Grading Ordinance.46
It provides nonroutine support services, including supervision, personal
care, social or counseling services, and transportation, to persons who
need such assistance in order to use and enjoy a dwelling or to avoid
being placed within an institution, because of physical disability, old
age, mental retardation, or other handicap or disability, as defined by
the Fair Housing Amendments Act or the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
A.
It provides for the joint occupancy of a dwelling unit where the
residents maintain a common household and practice, on a permanent
or long-term basis, a joint economic, social and cultural life.
B.
C. It does not involve the housing of persons on a transient basis.
It does not involve the housing or treatment of persons accepted for
residence in the group living arrangement on the basis of their status
as criminal offenders, juvenile offenders or delinquents, or who would
otherwise qualify for residence by virtue of having been found by any
governmental tribunal, court or agency to be a danger to society or are
on release or under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system, a
government bureau of corrections or similar institution.
D.
Family shall not include persons living together in a group-care facility,
personal-care boarding home or transitional dwelling, as defined
herein, or any other supervised group living arrangement for persons
not protected by the Fair Housing Act or for any persons who constitute
a direct threat to others or their physical property.
E.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:645
FENCE/WALL/BARRIER, CLOSED — A partition that provides zero- to fivepercent
transparency and lacks significant void spaces in the vertical
surface.
FENCE/WALL/BARRIER, OPEN — A partition that provides greater than
five-percent transparency through the void of space.
FENCE/WALL/BARRIER, ORNAMENTAL — An enclosure used to beautify
or to enrich or improve the appearance of a property and/or a structure.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A bank, savings and loan association or
similar institution that lends money or is engaged in a finance-related
business.
FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — Facilities, owned and
operated by a public agency or nonprofit corporation, used for the storage
of fire trucks, firefighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency
medical equipment and for the training of firefighters, paramedics and
other medical rescue personnel, and that may or may not include offices,
meeting rooms, exercise rooms, sleeping quarters for the employees and
volunteers, kitchen facilities and a social hall.
FLEX SPACE — Any building designed to accommodate a combination of
office and warehousing or office and manufacturing or assembly.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of all the horizontal floor areas of a
building, measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total floor area of a building designed for tenant
occupancy, or areas accessible to the customers, clients or general public,
but excluding storage areas, equipment rooms, food preparation areas in a
restaurant and common areas such as halls, corridors, stairwells, elevator
shafts, rest rooms, interior vehicular parking and loading areas and similar
common areas, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line
of joint partitions and exteriors of outside walls.
FLOWBACK — The process of flowing a completed/fractured well for the
purposes of recovering water and residual sand from the gas stream prior
to sending gas down a sales line.
FOOD AND RELATED PRODUCTS PACKAGING, STORAGE AND
DISTRIBUTION — A facility in which preprocessed food products are
delivered to the site and are packaged and stored until eventually being
distributed to stores, cafeterias, etc.
FOOD STORE — A retail establishment that has a gross floor area of no
more than 10,000 square feet and that offers for sale specialty or gourmet
food items or meats or groceries that are packaged and are not available for
consumption on the premises.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands, when practiced
in accordance with accepted silviculture principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes that do not involve any land development.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:646
FRESH WATER — Any water obtained from a water purveyor or portion of
the generally recognized hydrologic cycle which occupies the pore spaces
and fractures of saturated subsurface materials. Fresh water does not
include exploration and production fluids such as produced water, flowback
fluids, or re-use water.
FRONT BUILDING LINE — See "building line, front."
FRONT LOT LINE — See "lot line, front."
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the embalming of the deceased for
burial, but not including cremation, and for the display of the deceased and
ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GAMING FACILITY — A room or rooms used for legal gambling activities.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or a portion of the principal
building, not accessible to the general public and designed or used for
shelter or storage of private vehicles and personal property of the
occupants of the principal building, and that may include the shelter or
storage of no more than one private vehicle owned and used by others.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, other than a private garage, containing
two or more parking spaces, accessible to the general public, used for the
storage or parking of motor vehicles, or where such vehicles are kept for
remuneration, hire or sale, but not including the repair of vehicles or the
storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles.
GARAGE, VEHICLE REPAIR — See "vehicle repair garage."
GARDEN APARTMENT — See Subsection H under "dwelling types."
GLARE — Brightness in the field of view that is sufficiently greater than
that to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance or loss in visual
performance and visibility, so as to jeopardize health, safety or welfare.
GOLF COURSE — A recreational facility that has a course, with a minimum
of nine regulation-size holes, for playing golf as its principal use and that
may have a clubhouse, locker rooms, restaurant, swimming pool, pro shop,
facilities for racquet sports, maintenance facilities and similar facilities as
accessory uses.
GOLF OR COUNTRY CLUB — A recreational facility, operated by a public
or private entity, that has as its principal use a golf course, as defined
herein, and that may include one or more of the following accessory uses: a
clubhouse and/or restaurant, locker rooms, pro shops, swimming pool and
facilities for racquet sports.
GROCERY STORE — A retail establishment in excess of 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area that primarily sells meat, food and household products
but that may also include as accessory uses a pharmacy, a florist, a travel
agency, a video rental (excluding an adult video store), a coffee shop, a
delicatessen, banking and copy/fax services.
GROSS ACREAGE — The total acreage of land applicable to a lot(s).
GROSS FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, gross."
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:647
GROUP-CARE FACILITY — See Subsection I under "dwelling types."
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material designated as a hazardous
material under the terms and provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act of 1980 and/or any regulations promulgated thereunder
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
designated as "hazardous materials."
HEALTH CLUB — A commercial recreational enterprise or private club that
has as a principal use a gymnasium, swimming pool or other sports facility
and that may offer massages, whirlpool baths, steam rooms, saunas and/or
medical facilities as accessory uses to the principal use.
HEAVY MANUFACTURING — The mechanical or chemical transformation
of raw materials or substances into new products or other raw materials
or any manufacturing process not included in the definition of "light
manufacturing" or "high-technology industries."
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See "building height."
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade around the sign to the highest point on the
sign and its supporting structure, including the foundation of the sign, if it
is elevated above the ground level.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE — For structures other than buildings or signs,
the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished
grade around the structure to the highest point on the structure.
HIGH-TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRIES — The assembly of component parts or
the production of finished products, excluding any process that involves
toxic or highly volatile substances, including computer components and
accessories; electrical parts, accessories and equipment; laboratory
apparatus; robotics; optical instruments; precision instruments; surgical,
medical and dental instruments and supplies; timers and timepieces; search
detection and navigational equipment; musical instruments; and
photographic equipment and accessories.
HOME GARDENING — Raising flowers, ornamental plants, fruits and
vegetables for personal use and enhancement of a residential lot.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character, other
than a no-impact home-based business, conducted entirely within a dwelling
by the residents thereof, which use is clearly secondary to the use of the
dwelling for living purposes and does not, in any way, change the character
of the dwelling.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS, NO-IMPACT — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use that is clearly
secondary to the use of a dwelling for residential purposes and that involves
no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, and
no pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess
of those normally associated with residential use.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:648
HOSPICE CARE — Care designed to give supportive care to people in the
final phase of a terminal illness and focus on comfort and quality of life,
rather than cure. This definition is per the World Health Organization.
HOSPITAL — A business or institution, licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, having an organized medical staff and
providing equipment and services primarily for inpatient care to persons
who require definitive diagnosis or treatment, or both, for mental or
physical injury, illness, pregnancy, or other disability. A hospital may also
involve medical research and training for health care professionals.
HOTEL — See "motel or hotel."
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING — The process of injecting water, customized
fluids, sand, steam, gas or other agents into a gas well under pressure to
improve gas recovery.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Surfaces with a coefficient of runoff greater
than 0.85, including all buildings, roofed areas, parking areas, driveways,
streets, sidewalks and areas paved in concrete and asphalt and any other
areas determined by the Township Engineer to be impervious within the
meaning of this definition.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE — The percentage of the total lot area
covered by impervious surfaces, as defined herein.
IMPOUNDMENT — A facility or part of a facility which is a natural
topographic depression, manmade excavation, or diked area formed
primarily of earthen materials although it may be lined with synthetic
materials, and which is designed to hold an accumulation of liquid wastes or
wastes containing free liquids. The term includes holding, storage, settling
and aeration pits, ponds and lagoons. The term does not include injection
wells.
IMPROVEMENT — See "development."
INDOOR ENTERTAINMENT — A commercial establishment located within
a completely enclosed building, as defined by this chapter, where customers
or patrons engage in non-athletic leisure activities as spectators or
participants, including but not limited to theaters (live and motion-picture),
bowling alleys, pool halls, virtual reality and simulation gaming parlors,
video arcades, dance halls and similar facilities, but excluding any adult
business, as defined herein.
JUNKYARD — Any premises devoted wholly or in part to the storage, buying
or selling, salvaging, recycling or otherwise handling or dealing in scrap
metals, building materials, scrapped or used appliances or other household
goods, fixtures, vehicles and vehicle parts, machinery and machinery parts
or other forms of discarded materials.
JUVENILE INCARCERATION FACILITY — A facility, operated under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for up to 120 juveniles that
provides for the twenty-four-hour incarceration and confinement of
juveniles adjudicated to be delinquent by the Pennsylvania Juvenile Court
system or juveniles requiring incarceration and confinement by virtue of
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:649
having been determined to be prosecuted as adults while committing crimes
as a juvenile, and limited to juveniles to be incarcerated or confined for
serious criminal offenses and not including juveniles eligible to reside in
a juvenile personal-care home/child residential facility or other such less
restrictive residential setting.
JUVENILE PERSONAL-CARE HOME/CHILD RESIDENTIAL FACILITY —
A premises or part thereof for housing of up to 50 juveniles, operated
in a twenty-four-hour living setting, in which care is provided for one or
more children who are not relatives of the facility operator, as governed
by the Pennsylvania Code, Title 55, Public Welfare, Chapter 3800, Child
Residential and Day Treatment Facilities.
KENNEL — A structure and/or premises where four dogs and/or cats that
are six months or older are kept, bred, trained and/or boarded at any one
time, whether for profit or not.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan, prepared in accordance with the
application requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,47 for approval of a land development, as defined
herein.
LANDFILL — Any site licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PA DEP) for the disposal of solid waste, other
than hazardous waste, as defined and regulated by federal statute.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively;
(1)
A single nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure;
(2)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(3)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
C.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:650
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A registered professional landscape architect
licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPING CONTRACTOR — A retail business that includes the
growing and/or selling of flowers, plants, trees, shrubs and other natural
flora and the products that aid their growth and care and that may include
one or more of the following activities as accessory uses only: storage
of decorative landscaping materials, such as landscaping ties, decorative
rocks, marble chips, sandstone or limestone chips; storage of mulch,
reddog, sand or gravel to be used in landscaping; and/or shredding,
screening or storage of topsoil.
LANDSCAPING PLAN — A plan, prepared by a registered architect or a
registered landscape architect, identifying each tree and shrub by size,
type and scientific name, indicating balled and burlapped or bare root, and
location. The plan shall include a planting diagram and such other diagrams
or reports necessary to show the method of planting, staking and mulching,
grass seeding specifications and mixtures and existing trees over 10 inches
in diameter at breast height.
LANDSLIDE SUSCEPTIBILITY — Areas of moderate to high susceptibility to
landsliding produced by the influence of natural and/or man-made activity.
LAUNDROMAT — A retail business equipped with a number of individual
clothes washing machines and clothes dryers and that may include
individual dry-cleaning machines for use by the general public, excluding
laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in a multifamily residential
building.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The assembly, processing or fabrication of
certain materials and products where no process involved will produce
noise, vibration, water pollution, fire hazard or noxious emissions that will
disturb or endanger neighboring properties. Light manufacturing includes
but is not limited to the production of the following goods: home appliances,
electrical instruments, office machines, precision instruments, electronic
devices, timepieces, jewelry, optical goods, musical instruments, novelties,
wood products, printed material, lithographic plates, type composition,
machine tools, dies and gauges, ceramics, apparel, lightweight nonferrous
metal castings, film processing, light sheet metal products, plastic goods,
pharmaceutical goods, food products, not including animal slaughtering,
curing or rendering of fats, and similar activities.
LOADING SPACE — An area within a principal building or on the same lot
with the principal building designed in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and used for the standing, loading or unloading of tractortrailer
trucks and other vehicles.
LOCAL STREET — Any street in the Township not defined by this chapter
as an arterial street or a collector street.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:651
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines, excluding the area within
any street right-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the lot area covered by all principal and
accessory structures, expressed as a percentage.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of the lot that adjoins the street right-ofway
or through which access is provided to a public street.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — That lot line that is contiguous with the street center
line or the street right-of-way line. In the case of a lot that has no frontage
on a street, the front lot line shall be the lot line through which vehicular
access is provided, regardless of which way the dwelling faces.
LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line that is generally opposite the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line that is not a front lot line nor a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot that, individually or as part of a subdivision, has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Washington County.
LOT WIDTH — The straight-line distance between the point of intersection
of the front building line with the side lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — See "corner lot."
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts on two parallel streets or that fronts on
two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width
or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is 320 or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning
and electrical systems contained therein. A manufactured home which is
erected on a permanent foundation, as defined herein, and which is
connected to all available utilities shall be considered a single-family
dwelling for the purposes of this chapter. A manufactured home without a
permanent foundation, as defined herein, shall be considered a mobile home
as defined by this chapter and shall only be permitted to be located in a
mobile home park as authorized by this chapter.
MANUFACTURING — The mechanical or chemical transformation of raw
materials or substances into new products or other raw materials, including
the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products and the
blending of materials into finished or semifinished products.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:652
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY — See "heavy manufacturing."
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — See "light manufacturing."
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment that provides services of massage
or body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of
the body, and all forms of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical
practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical therapist licensed by the
commonwealth, not including any athletic club, health club, school,
gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage
or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or
accessory service to the principal service.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties to a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement that the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MEDICAL CLINIC — See "clinic, medical."
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as set forth in
Act 16 of 2016.48
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — Use of the premises by a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, holding a permit issued by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Health to dispense medical marijuana.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR — The use of the premises
by a person, including a natural person, corporation, partnership,
association, trust or other entity, or any combination thereof, holding a
permit from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Health to
grow and/or process medical marijuana, with all growing and processing
activity to be conducted indoors.
MEDICAL OFFICES — One or more administrative offices of individual
doctors, dentists, chiropractors or other medical practitioners and their
supporting staffs, where human patients receive diagnosis, treatment and
counseling.
MEMORY CARE — A distinct form of long-term skilled nursing that
specifically caters to patients with Alzheimer's disease, dementia and other
types of memory problems. Also called special care units (SCUs), memory
care units usually provide twenty-four-hour supervised care within a
separate wing or floor of a residential facility.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — Any extraction of any mineral for sale or other
commercial purpose that involves removal of the surface of the earth or
exposure of the mineral or subsurface of the earth to wind, rain, sun or
other elements of nature. The term "mineral" includes, but is not limited to,
anthracite and bituminous coal, lignite, including mining activities carried
out beneath the surface of the earth by means of shafts, tunnels, other
48.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:653
underground mine openings, limestone and dolomite, sand, gravel, rock,
stone, earth, slag, ore, vermiculite, clay and other mineral resources.
MINI-WAREHOUSE or SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of
buildings in a controlled-access and fenced compound that contains various
sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls and/or
lockers leased to the general public for a specified period of time for the
dead storage of personal property. Stalls and/or lockers may be accessed
from exterior and/or interior access.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, that arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land that have
been so designated and improved that they contain two or more mobile
home lots for the placement of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME SALES, SERVICE AND STORAGE — An establishment
engaged in the retail sales of mobile homes, including the servicing and onsite
storage of mobile homes offered for sale.
MODEL HOME — The temporary use of a dwelling unit in an approved plan
that is under construction for the purpose of marketing dwelling units to be
constructed.
MOTEL or HOTEL — An establishment that offers transient overnight
lodging accommodations, including extended stays, to the general public
and that also may provide additional supporting services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, recreation facilities and living quarters for a
resident manager or proprietor.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See Subsection E under "dwelling types."
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
NATURAL GAS LIQUIDS (NGL) — Components of natural gas that are liquid
at the surface of in-field facilities or in processing plants. Natural gas liquids
can be classified according to their vapor pressures as low (condensate),
intermediate (natural gasoline) and high (liquefied petroleum gas) vapor
pressure. Natural gas liquids include ethane, propane, butane, pentane,
hexane and heptanes. The term is commonly abbreviated as NGL.
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility designed and constructed
to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane and other constituents
or similar substances from natural gas, to allow such natural gas to be of
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:654
such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission or distribution
to commercial markets, but not including facilities or equipment that are/
is designed and constructed primarily to remove water, water vapor, oil or
naturally occurring liquids from natural gas.
NET ACREAGE — The land area for development calculated by 1) deducting
the required open space allocation for the lot's gross acreage and 2)
deducting other identified environmentally sensitive resources otherwise
pursuant to the chapter's requirements that cannot be calculated as part of
the applicable open space calculation.
NET DENSITY — Net acreage divided by number of dwelling units.
NET FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, net."
NIGHTCLUB — A restaurant, or portion thereof, or any other establishment
serving food and/or drink, whether or not the consumption of alcoholic
beverages is permitted or allowed on the premises, that offers, on a monthly
or more-frequent basis, live entertainment on a stage or bandstand and/
or dancing to music, either live or recorded, and that has a maximum
permitted occupancy authorized by the Township Building Code of 50 or
more persons.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — See "home-based business, noimpact."
NON-FAMILY FACILITY, TYPE 1 — See Subsection F under "dwelling types."
NON-FAMILY FACILITY, TYPE 2 — See Subsection G under "dwelling
types."
NONCOMMERCIAL RIDING ACADEMY — See "riding academy,
noncommercial."
NONCOMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) —
A facility to convert wind movement into electricity, with a rated capacity
of not more than 50 kilowatts, and that is incidental and subordinate
to another use on the same parcel. A facility shall be considered
noncommercial only if it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use;
except that when a parcel on which a noncommercial WECS is installed also
receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical
power generated by the WECS and not presently needed for on-site use may
be used by the utility company in exchange for a reduction in the cost of
electrical power supplied by that company to the parcel for on-site use, as
long as no net revenue is produced by such electrical power.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but that fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but that fails
to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:655
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure that
does not comply with the applicable area and bulk provisions of this chapter
or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or an amendment
thereto or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Nonconforming signs are included in this
definition.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure, that
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use way lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or an amendment thereto
or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by
reason of annexation.
NUDITY — The exposure of human bare buttocks, anus, male or female
genitals or female breast or the appearance thereof.
NUISANCE — Any activity or condition that unreasonably annoys and
disturbs a person, rendering the ordinary use of his/her property physically
uncomfortable, and/or anything that essentially interferes with enjoyment
of life and property or that may constitute a threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township.
NUISANCE GLARE — Lighting, as determined by the Township Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Township Police Department, that creates an
annoyance or aggravation but does not create a potentially hazardous
situation. See "disabling glare."
NURSING HOME — A business or an institution, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the care of human patients requiring
skilled or intermediate nursing care as defined in Chapter 201, Section
201.3, of the Pennsylvania Code, Applicability, Definitions, Ownership, and
General Operation of Long-Term Care Nursing Facilities, but not including
facilities for major surgery or care and treatment of drug or alcohol
addiction.
OCCUPANCY, CERTIFICATE OF — See "certificate of occupancy."
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — Any building, structure, appurtenances to
buildings and structures, land, water or air vehicle, or similar place adapted
for overnight accommodation of persons, or occupied by persons for the
purpose of carrying on business or other activity therein. Proof that said
structure is not actually being occupied or used for such purpose is required
in order for the structure to not be considered occupied.
OFF-SITE VEHICLE INVENTORY STORAGE — The storage of vehicles on a
lot separate from the vehicles sales lot intended for the sale or use by the
vehicle sales owner.
OFFICES, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL — See "business or professional
offices."
OFFICES, MEDICAL — See "medical offices."
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:656
OFFICIAL DATE OF FILING — The date of the Planning Commission
meeting at which an application is first considered after the filing of an
application that is determined to be complete and properly filed.
OIL AND GAS — Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane
gas, propane, butane and/or any other liquid hydrocarbons, constituents or
similar substances that are produced by drilling an oil or gas well.
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT — The well site preparation, well site
construction, drilling, hydraulic fracturing and/or site restoration
associated with an oil and/or gas well of any depth; water and other fluid
storage, impoundment located on the same parcel as a well site; and the
installment and use of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters
and other equipment and structures, whether permanent or temporary. This
also includes the site preparation, construction, installment, maintenance
and repair of other equipment and activities associated with the exploration
for and production of oil and gas. This does not include oil and gas pipelines,
compressor stations and natural gas processing plants or facilities
performing the equivalent functions that operate as midstream facilities
that are only authorized consistent with this chapter as a conditional use.
OIL AND GAS PIPELINES — All parts of those physical facilities regulated
by federal, state or local agencies such as PHMSA, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission through which oil and/or natural gas moves in
transportation, including pipe, valves, and other appurtenances attached
to pipes, compressor units, metering stations, regulator stations, delivery
stations, holders, launcher/receiver stations and fabricated assemblies.
OIL AND GAS WELLS — A bore hole, drilled under a permit issued by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), for the
purpose of producing, extracting or injecting any gas, petroleum or other
liquid related to oil or gas production or storage, including brine disposal,
but excluding bore holes drilled to produce potable water to be used as
such.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See "common open space."
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership, company, corporation, and its
subcontractors and agents who has an interest in real estate for the purpose
of exploring or drilling for, producing, developing or transporting oil or gas.
OVERLAY ZONE — A zoning district that encompasses property in one or
more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements
above that required in the underlying zoning district.
OWNER — See "landowner."
PACKAGING AND DELIVERY SERVICES — A facility in which products are
wrapped, enveloped, boxed and or bundled and then transported to other
business establishments for sale.
PARKING AREA — A portion of a lot designated for the parking of motor
vehicles in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:657
PARKING SPACE — A portion of a garage or parking area designated for the
parking of one motor vehicle in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
PERIMETER SETBACK — The distance specified by this chapter from the
entire boundary of a site proposed for a development, as required by this
chapter.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION — A permanent foundation must be
constructed in accordance with the prescriptive provisions of the adopted
building code or, when required, designed by a licensed professional
engineer. It shall have attachment points to anchor and stabilize the home
to transfer all code required loads to the underlying soil or rock. In either
case, it shall be designed for the following:
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
Vertical Stability:
(1) Footings properly sized to prevent overloading of the soil.
Minimum depth of footings below undisturbed ground surface shall
be 12 inches or as required by the local code, whichever is greater.
(2)
Shallow foundation footings shall be constructed of cast-in-place
concrete.
(3)
(4) Masonry walls and piers shall be mortared.
A.
Lateral Stability:
Anchorage capacity to prevent uplift, sliding, and overturning or
other movement of the structure.
(1)
(2) Shall not utilize tension-only steel straps.
(3) Shall not utilize screw-in soil anchors.
B.
Be constructed of durable materials, i.e., concrete, mortared masonry,
or treated wood (including precast foundation systems).
C.
A permanent foundation does not include any alternative systems or
components labeled only for use under one or more of the following
standards:
(1) 24 CFR 3280, Manufactured Home and Safety Standards (MHCSS).
(2) 24 CFR 3286, Manufactured Home Installation Program (MIS).
(3) NFPA 225 Model Manufactured Home Installation Standard.
(4) ANSI A225.1 NFPA 501A Manufactured Home Installations.
(5) International Residential Code, Appendix E.
D.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:658
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any enterprise providing services pertaining to
the person, their apparel, or personal effects commonly carried on or about
the person, including but not limited to shoe repair, tailoring, clothes
cleaning, watch repairing, barbershops, beauty parlors and related
activities, but not including any adult business, as defined herein.
PERSONAL-CARE BOARDING HOME — See Subsection J under "dwelling
types."
PET SERVICES — A business establishment that sells pet food and other pet
care products to the general public and that may offer animal grooming and
limited veterinary services as accessory uses; or a business establishment
that offers care during part of a twenty-four-hour day of domestic pets as
a principal use and that may sell food or other pet care products as an
accessory use; provided that the uses shall not include an animal hospital
or kennel, as otherwise regulated by this chapter.
PHARMACY — A business establishment where drugs and medicines are
prepared and dispensed.
PHMSA — Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration of the
U.S. Department of Transportation that regulates the design and installation
of pipelines.
PILOT MANUFACTURING — An establishment or part thereof used to
test concepts and ideas, determine physical layouts, material flows and
processes, types of equipment required, costs and other information
necessary prior to undertaking full-scale production.
PIPELINE — All parts of those physical facilities through which gas,
hazardous liquids, fresh water, salt water, or chemicals move in
transportation, including but not limited to, pipe, valves and other
appurtenance attached to pipe, whether or not laid in public or private
easement or public or private right-of-way within the Township, including,
but not limited to, gathering lines, production lines, and transmission lines.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY, NON-WORSHIP — An indoor or outdoor space
without fixed seating used for public gatherings for recreational,
educational, cultural, political, social or entertainment purposes.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY, WORSHIP — A building or buildings, other than
a dwelling, used primarily as a place of worship on a regular basis by a
religious denomination that may also include, as accessory uses, rooms
for religious education, social and recreational activities and administrative
offices, rectories, parsonages, convents, preschool programs and elderly or
child day-care centers.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL PARK — A development comprised of authorized
industrial uses on a site that is under single ownership and control at the
time of an application for development and that is planned and developed
as a single unit wherein several buildings or lots utilize a common means of
access and may share other common facilities, such as parking and signs.
PLANNED OFFICE PARK — A site under single ownership and control
that is developed as a unit for two or more buildings containing medical
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:659
offices or clinics or professional or business offices in a campus environment
utilizing common means of access, parking and loading facilities and
uniform signage and that may include other shared features.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled
by a single landowner and developed as a single entity for a number of
dwellings, the plan for which does not necessarily correspond in lot size,
bulk, type of dwelling unit or use, density or intensity, lot coverage or
required open space to any one district in this chapter.
PLANNED RESEARCH OR TECHNOLOGY PARK — A site under single
ownership and control that is developed as a unit for two or more buildings
containing high technology industries and/or research-and-development
establishments in a campus environment, utilizing common means of
access, parking and loading facilities and uniform signage, and may include
other shared features.
PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER — A site under single ownership and
control that is developed as a unit for two or more retail businesses in one
or more buildings and designed with shared parking, loading and access
facilities and uniform signage.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of North Strabane
Township, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
PORCH — A roofed or uncovered structure without enclosing walls that is
attached to or part of the principal building and that has direct access to
and from the principal building.
PRESCHOOL FACILITY — An establishment that offers private educational
services to children who are under the minimum age for education in public
schools.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — The building or structure in
which the principal use is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use to which the property
is or may be devoted and to which all other uses on the premises are
accessory.
PRINTING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in commercial
or job printing, including offset printing, engraving, photolithographing,
and publishing and binding books, newspapers, pamphlets and other
printed materials.
PRIVATE — Owned, operated or controlled by an individual, group of
individuals, association or corporation, not for profit, and restricted to
members and their guests.
PRIVATE CLUB — Any establishment, other than a sportsmen's club or adult
business, as defined herein, operated by a private organization for social,
recreational, educational, fraternal or sororal purposes, which is open only
to members and their guests and not to the general public.
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "garage, private."
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:660
PRIVATE SCHOOL — See "school, public or private."
PRIVATE STABLE — The keeping or raising of horses and/or ponies as
an accessory use to a single-family dwelling, for the personal use and
enjoyment of the residents of the lot, not involving any profit-making
activity.
PRIVATE STREET — A street, including the entire private right-of-way, that
is privately owned and maintained and that is intended for private, rather
than public, use.
PRIVATE-USE HELIPAD — A helicopter landing pad, licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, and
regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, that is owned by a private
entity and restricted to use by helicopters owned by such entity.
PROCESSING PLANT — A facility designed and constructed to remove
materials such as ethane, propane, butane, and other constituents or similar
substances from natural gas to allow such natural gas to be of such quality
as is required or appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial
markets but not including facilities or equipment that is designed and
constructed primarily to remove water, water vapor, oil, or naturally
occurring liquids from the natural gas, including dew point control facilities.
When used in this chapter, the term shall include any similar facilities
performing the equivalent or similar functions.
PROFESSONAL OFFICES — See "business or professional offices."
PROTECTED STRUCTURE — Any (public/private) hospital, school,
cemetery, religious institution or other public building located within 1,000
feet of an oil and gas development site.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, federal,
state, county or local.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building owned or operated by a government
agency, federal, state, county or local, used to provide services to the public,
including administrative offices, public works buildings and storage yards,
libraries, museums, fire companies, senior centers, recreation buildings,
government service centers and similar facilities.
PUBLIC GARAGE — See "garage, public."
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."49
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL — See "school, public or private."
49.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:661
PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE — A parking area that is located in a parking
structure or parking garage, that is the principal use on the lot, and that
may be operated by either a public agency or private entity, whether for
profit or not, and that is available for use by the general public, usually for
a fee.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A parking area on the surface of the ground that
is the principal use on the lot, that may be operated by either a public
agency or private entity, whether for profit or not, and that is available for
use by the general public, usually for a fee.
PUBLIC STREET — See "street, public."
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any administrative
building, maintenance building, garage or other structure intended for
human occupancy or storage of movable equipment or any part of the
essential public utility installation, as defined herein, other than the general
transmission distribution system provided by public utilities, regulated by
the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) or any agency, franchisee or authority
of North Strabane Township, that is reasonably necessary to furnish
adequate services to the general public both within North Strabane
Township and outside the Township, including but not limited to longdistance
transmission facilities such as electrical power lines or highpressure
natural gas or petroleum lines, switching facilities, substations,
treatment plants, reservoirs, water towers, transmission towers and similar
facilities.
QUADRUPLEX — See Subsection D under "dwelling types."
RACETRACK — A course on which races are run, where the competitors
include animals (usually horses), vehicles or people, or a combination
thereof, and, in the case where gambling on the outcome is legal, that may
include a betting parlor as an accessory use. A racetrack may also include
a restaurant, grandstands or other spectator viewing areas and facilities for
preparing for competition as accessory uses.
RE-ENTRY DRILLING — The act of re-entering an approved oil and gas
development to re-frack, stimulate, etc., drilled wells and/or to drill
additional wells within the number of wells the site has been approved for.
(Example: John Doe Site approved for eight wells and only four wells have
been drilled. If operator comes back to drill an additional four, this shall be
considered re-entry drilling.)
RE-ENTRY RELATED OPERATIONS — The conduct of any related
operations at a Township-approved site that were not included in a previous
approval (permitted or conditional).
RE-USE/RESIDUAL WATER (WASTE WATER) — Water which has been
previously used for industrial, municipal, domestic or other purposes
including those associated with fracking, drilling flowback, and other
drilling related activities, and cannot be returned to a surface water or
groundwater source.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:662
RECREATION, ACTIVE, HIGH-IMPACT — Indoor or outdoor leisure-time
pursuits that draw in excess of 200 spectators and/or participants at any
one time and any indoor or outdoor leisure-time pursuits that draw fewer
than 200 spectators or participants that have operational characteristics
that have a significant impact on surrounding properties, including but
not limited to motocross or dirt bike trails, paintball facilities, arenas,
amusement parks, water parks, ski resorts, campgrounds, fairs, truck and
tractor pulls, off-road vehicle courses and trails, amphitheaters and similar
uses that have significant environmental, noise, traffic or lighting impacts.
(This definition excludes betting parlors, casinos, gaming facilities,
racetracks and boarding stables; golf courses, golf or country clubs; health
clubs; indoor entertainment; private stables; riding academies; shooting
ranges; and sportsmen's clubs, which are separately defined and regulated
by this chapter.)
RECREATION, ACTIVE, LOW-IMPACT — Indoor or outdoor leisure-time
pursuits involving activities that customarily raise the heart rate of
participants above the resting level, including participation by individuals,
groups of individuals or teams and any spectators, usually requiring the use
of special equipment and/or a prescribed site, field or facility, including but
not limited to soccer fields, football, baseball and softball fields, basketball
courts, tennis courts, handball or racquetball courts, swimming pools,
community centers and similar facilities of a size and operational character
that they have a low impact on surrounding properties. (This definition
excludes boarding stables; golf courses, golf or country clubs; health clubs;
indoor entertainment; private stables; riding academies; shooting ranges;
and sportsmen's clubs, which are separately defined and regulated by this
chapter.)
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Outdoor leisure-time pursuits involving activities
that do not raise the heart rate significantly above the resting level but
rather provide refreshment through furnishing a visual and/or psychological
release from the pressure of everyday life for individuals or small groups
of individuals, including but not limited to bridle trails, trails with exercise
stations, Nordic ski trails, hiking, biking, walking, fishing, picnicking,
children's playgrounds, table games, observation areas, bird watching,
botanical gardens, historical or archaeological sites, scenic areas, nature
preserves and similar facilities for relaxing in a natural environment.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A single-axle or multiple-axle structure
mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile, either
with its own motive power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by
an automotive vehicle, for the purpose of travel, camping, vacation and
recreational use, including but not limited to travel trailers, mobile homes,
motor homes, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, pick-up campers, horse
trailers, snowmobiles, jet skis, wave runners, motorcycles and all-terrain
vehicles.
RELATED OPERATIONS — The activities and operations that are ancillary
to oil and gas drilling, such as processing plants, compressor stations,
certified water storage, temporary work and bunk trailers, storage depots,
traffic control sites and truck staging areas.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:663
REPAIR SHOP — A service establishment providing maintenance and
repairs of personal and household items that can be carried in by hand,
including personal effects (such as jewelry, watches, bicycles), small
household appliances, office equipment, small gasoline engines and similar
items, but not including repair of large appliances, motorized vehicles or
heavy equipment.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Any establishment, including
laboratories, that carries on investigation in the natural, physical or social
sciences or engineering and development as an extension of such
investigation, with the objective of creating end products and that may
include supporting storage and transportation facilities, but not including
the mass production of such products.
RESIDENCE IN COMBINATION WITH BUSINESS — A dwelling unit
located in the same building with an office and/or retail business.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Residual waste is nonhazardous industrial waste. It
includes waste material (solid, liquid or gas), impaired fluids and flowback
produced by industrial, mining and agricultural operations. It excludes
certain coal mining wastes and wastes from normal farming activities.
RESTAURANT — An establishment that offers food and beverages for sale
and consumption either on or on and off the premises as the principal use
and may serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as an
accessory use.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A restaurant where refreshments, beverages,
meals or frozen desserts or the like are served for consumption primarily
outside of the premises and where no more than 12 permanent seats are
provided.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant principally devoted to the retail
sale of prepared or premeasured food items, where such food items are
ordered by the customer at a window, counter or vehicle rather than from a
table, and that is designed to facilitate quick service and take-out orders.
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN — An establishment where orders are placed
with waitpersons by customers seated at tables and food and beverages are
served at the table by waitpersons and where the usual length of stay is
one hour or more. A sit-down restaurant may or may not serve alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises as an accessory use and may or
may not offer take-out service as an accessory use but shall not include a
pickup window or drive-through window.
RETAIL BUSINESS — Any establishment, not otherwise specifically defined
in this Part, that sells, on the premises, commodities and/or services directly
to consumers, but not including the manufacturing or processing of any
products.
RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment that includes a boarding stable, as
defined herein, and where instruction in riding, jumping and showing is
offered for a fee and where horses may be hired for riding.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:664
RIDING ACADEMY, COMMERCIAL — A riding academy where instruction
is provided to owners who do not board their horses on the premises and/or
where invitational shows and/or competitions are held.
RIDING ACADEMY, NONCOMMERCIAL — A riding academy where
instruction is provided using only horses that are kept or boarded on the
premises and where horses that are hired for riding are limited to the
horses that are kept or boarded on the premises.
SALES OFFICE — A temporary use for the purpose of marketing the
dwelling units in a residential development or the leasable space or other
occupancy in a nonresidential development.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A privately operated, for-profit establishment
providing technical or skilled training, vocational or trade educational
courses and programs.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE — An accredited institution of learning that
offers elementary and secondary level instruction or which offers associate,
bachelor or higher degrees in the several branches of learning required by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SEAT — The area required for one individual to sit on, as regulated by the
Township Building Code.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY, INTERIOR — A building or group of buildings
with controlled access to various sizes of individual, compartmentalized and
controlled-access stalls and/or lockers accessible only from the interior of
each building where as stalls and/or lockers are leased to the general public
for a specified period of time for the dead storage of personal property.
SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOBILE — See "automobile service station."
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently
offensive representations, descriptions or acts of masturbation, excretory
functions, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or physical contact
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if
such person be female, breast.
SHOOTING RANGE — An outdoor facility that may or may not include a
clubhouse but which includes facilities for one or more of the following
activities: archers, target shooting, skeet or trap shooting, marksmanship
and similar activities.
SIGN — Any structure or device used to attract attention by word or graphic
display. (See Part 16 for regulations governing signs.).
SIGN TYPES AND CLASSES — See definitions for various types and classes
of signs in Part 16.
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF — See Part 16 for definition.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — See Subsection A under "dwelling types."
SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, sit-down."
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:665
SITE — A tract of land or one or more contiguous lots proposed for
development.
SITE AREA — The total area within the boundary lines of a site proposed for
development, expressed in acres or square feet.
SLOPE — The degree of rise or descent of the land surface, calculated
by dividing the number of feet of vertical rise/descent in elevation by the
number of feet of horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage.
SOLAR PV and/or THERMAL SYSTEM — Related terms:
ARRAY — Any number of electrically connected photovoltaic (PV) modules
providing a single electrical output.
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system that
is constructed as an integral part of a principal or accessory building
or structure and where the building-integrated system features maintain
a uniform profile or surface of vertical walls, window openings, and
roofing. Such a system is used in lieu of a separate mechanical device,
replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of
the building or structure that appends or interrupts the uniform surfaces
of walls, window openings and roofing. A building-integrated system
may occur within vertical facades, replacing view glass, spandrel glass
or other facade material; into semitransparent skylight systems; into
roofing systems, replacing traditional roofing materials; or other building
or structure envelope systems.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system attached
to any part or type of roof on a building or structure that has an
occupancy permit on file with the Township and that is either the principal
structure or an accessory structure on a recorded lot/property. This
system also includes any solar-based architectural elements.
CELL — The smallest basic solar electric device which generates
electricity when exposed to light.
DRIP LINE — The outermost edge of a roof including eaves, overhangs
and gutters.
GROUND-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system mounted on
a structure, pole or series of poles constructed specifically to support the
photovoltaic system and not attached to any other structure.
HVAC — Equipment used to heat, cool or ventilate a structure.
INTERCONNECTION — The technical and practical link between the
solar generator and the grid providing electricity to the greater
community.
KILOWATT (kW) — A unit of electrical power equal to 1,000 watts,
which constitutes the basic unit of electrical demand. A watt is a metric
measurement of power (not energy) and is the rate (not the duration) at
which electricity is used. 1,000 kW is equal to 1 megawatt (MW).
MODULE — A module is the smallest protected assembly of
interconnected PV cells.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:666
NET METERING AGREEMENT — An agreement with a local electric
utility that allows customers to receive a credit for surplus electricity
generated by certain renewable energy systems.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) — A semiconductor based device that converts light
directly into electricity.
SOLAR-BASED ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENT — Structural/architectural
element that provides protection from weather that includes awnings,
canopies, porches or sunshades and that is constructed with the primary
covering consisting of solar PV modules, and may or may not include
additional solar PV related equipment.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) AND/OR THERMAL RELATED EQUIPMENT
— Items including a solar photovoltaic and/or thermal cell, panel or array,
lines, mounting brackets, framing and foundations used for or intended to
be used for collection of solar energy.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) AND/OR THERMAL SYSTEM — A solar
collection system consisting of one or more building-and/or groundmounted
systems, solar photovoltaic and/or thermal cells, panels or
arrays and solar related equipment that rely upon solar radiation as
an energy source for collection, inversion, storage and distribution of
solar energy for electricity generation. A solar PV system is a generation
system with a nameplate capacity of not greater than 50 kilowatts if
installed at a residential service or not larger than 3,000 kilowatts at
other customer service locations and do not produce excess on-site
energy greater than currently permitted by Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission guidelines.
TRACKING SYSTEM — A number of photovoltaic modules mounted such
that they track the movement of the sun across the sky to maximize
energy production, either with a single-axis or dual- axis mechanism.
UNREGULATED YARD AREA — Area not within a building and not in a
defined setback or yard area.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — See "use by special exception."
SPECIALIZED ANIMAL RAISING — The raising of livestock and poultry
as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling for the personal use and
enjoyment of the residents on property that does not meet the minimum lot
area requirements. for agriculture, provided that the raising of the animals
is not the principal economic activity of the residents. Specialized animal
raising shall not include any exotic animals, as defined in Ordinance No.
286,50 as hereafter amended. Kennels, private stables, boarding stables
or commercial or noncommercial riding academics, as herein defined and
otherwise regulated, are excluded from this definition.
SPORTS COURT — A surfaced outdoor area accessory to a dwelling or
dwellings, used for playing sports, including but not limited to tennis,
handball, basketball and similar sports.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Part 4.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:667
SPORTSMEN'S CLUB — A legally chartered organization for the pursuit of
hunting, fishing, marksmanship and related activities, that may or may not
include a clubhouse, and that has a roster of membership and a regular
calendar of activities limited to members and their guests.
STABLE, BOARDING — See "boarding stable."
STABLE, PRIVATE — See "private stable."
STOOP — A covered or uncovered porch located at a front, side or rear door
to a dwelling unit.
STORAGE DEPOT — A permanent off-street facility designed as a point for
collection and/or storage of materials, supplies, equipment, and/or other
solid by-products from oil and gas development.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it, excluding
cellars.
STREET — A public or private recorded right-of-way that affords primary
means of vehicular access to abutting property, but not including alleys.
STREET LINE — The legal right-of-way line that forms the dividing line
between the street and the lot.
STREET, PUBLIC — A public right-of-way dedicated and open for public
use that has been adopted by the Township, county, commonwealth or
governmental body.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — A change or rearrangement of the structural
parts or in the means of ingress and egress, or an enlargement or
diminution of the structure, whether by extending on the side or increasing
the height or depth, or the moving from one location or position to another.
STRUCTURAL MATERIAL — The material whose primary function is to
provide structural stability and/or framing of any fence/wall barrier and/or
to support an exposed set of vertical surfaces that can be seen from public
and/or private lots and/or rights-of-way.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
STRUCTURE, HEIGHT OF — See "height of structure."
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions of land, including
any changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:668
SUPPLY YARD — A commercial establishment engaged in storing and
selling building supplies, industrial supplies or feed and grain primarily to
businesses, rather than the general public.
SURFACE AREA OF SIGN — See "sign, surface area of."
SURFACE MINING — Any extraction of any mineral for sale or other
commercial purpose that involves removal of the surface of the earth or
exposure of the mineral or subsurface of the earth to wind, rain, sun or
other elements of nature. The term "mineral" includes but is not limited
to anthracite and bituminous coal, lignite, limestone and dolomite, sand,
gravel, rock, stone, earth, slag, ore, vermiculite, clay and other mineral
resources, excluding mining activities carried out beneath the surface of the
earth by means of shafts, tunnels, or other underground mine openings.
SURVEYOR — A professional surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water or receptacle for water, having a
depth at any point greater than two feet and a surface area greater than
100 square feet, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing
and constructed, installed or maintained outside any building, including
aboveground and in-ground swimming pools.
TAVERN — See "bar or tavern."
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILER — See "construction trailer,
temporary."
TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE — Any use or structure that is intended
to be used either on a seasonal basis, during the time of construction and
completion of an approved development or for any other period of time that
is six months or less.
TEMPORARY WATER PIPELINE — A temporary pipeline in place for a
period not to exceed 12 months, typically located above ground and used to
transport water to and from various oil and gas development, drilling and
related operations.
THROUGH LOT — See "lot, through."
TOWNHOUSE — See Subsection K under "dwelling types."
TOWNSHIP — The Township of North Strabane, Washington County,
Pennsylvania.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SITES — An area used as a stopping place or assembly
point designed to accommodate trucks during their course of travel to an
oil and gas development and intended to be used for four months or fewer
during a twelve-month period. This definition does not include the transfer
of loads to, from or between trucks.
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — An analysis prepared, signed and sealed by a
qualified traffic engineer analyzing the expected trip generation expected to
result from a proposed development based on the ratios and methodology
contained in the current edition of the manuals of the Institute of
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:669
Transportation Engineers (ITE), including current and projected capacities
and levels of service of all streets and intersections within 1,000 feet of
the site proposed for development or the next nearest intersection and
recommendations for improvements to streets and/or traffic-control devices
within the site or immediately adjacent to the boundaries of the site.
TRANSITIONAL DWELLING — See Subsection L under "dwelling types."
TRANSPARENCY — The degree to which an object is able to be seen
through. Something with high transparency would be a glass window, which
allows one to see through it. Something with low transparency would be a
concrete wall, which does not allow one to see through it.
TRIPLEX — See Subsection C under "dwelling types."
TRUCK AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT RENTAL, SALES AND SERVICS — An
establishment engaged in the rental, sale and/or service of vehicles in
excess of 26,000 pounds GVW and/or any other heavy equipment, including
but not limited to construction or farm equipment, whether or not the
equipment is classified as a motor vehicle.
TRUCK STAGING AREA — An off-street facility used for the transfer of loads
to, from or between trucks for oil and gas development or a traffic control
site.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A facility to accommodate the fueling, routine
maintenance and storage of trucks and other motorized equipment and
trailers and that may provide warehousing and transfer facilities as
accessory uses.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — See Subsection B under "dwelling types."
UNCONVENTIONAL WELL — An unconventional gas well is a well that
is drilled into an unconventional formation, which is defined as a geologic
shale formation below the base of the Elk Sandstone or its geologic
equivalent where natural gas generally cannot be produced except by
horizontal or vertical well bores stimulated by hydraulic fracturing (for
example: Marcellus, Utica, Mandata, Huron, Rhinestreet, and Upper
Devonian).
USE — The purpose, business or activity for which any land or structure is
utilized.
USE BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use authorized by this chapter that may
be granted only by the Zoning Hearing Board following a public hearing,
subject to express standards and criteria contained in this chapter.
VARIANCE — A departure from the specific regulations of this chapter
that may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
criteria established by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act
247, as amended) for a particular piece of property that, because of special
circumstances applicable to it, cannot be developed in compliance with the
literal terms of this chapter without undue physical hardship.
VEHICLE ACCESSORIES SALES AND INSTALLATION — An establishment
engaged in the retall sales and installation of accessories for trucks,
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:670
automobiles and motorcycles, including but not limited to such items as
tires, hubcaps, mirrors, seat covers, floor mats, tonneau covers, truck caps,
windshield wipers, trim packages, running boards and the like, but not
including any mechanical parts.
VEHICLE RENTAL, SALES AND SERVICE — The rental, sales and service
of automobiles, motorcycles and trucks under 26,000 pounds GVW, but not
including any heavy equipment or any other vehicle or equipment that is not
classified as a "motor vehicle" under the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building, or part thereof, used for the
servicing and repair of motor vehicles, including engine overhaul, body
work and recapping/retreading of tires, and where all storage of parts and
dismantled vehicles and all repair work are conducted entirely inside a
completely enclosed building, as defined by this chapter.
VETERINARY CLINIC — An establishment for the medical or surgical
treatment of animals, including the boarding of hospitalized animals,
excluding outdoor kennels.
VIDEO STORE, EXCLUDING ADULT VIDEO STORE — A business
establishment which specializes in the sale and/or rental of videos and
digital video discs, or applicable technology, and secondary products such
as digital video player and cleaners, snacks, posters, and the like. The sale
of any adult films, as in those which are X-rated, shall be prohibited at the
establishment.
VOID SPACE — An open area of air, clear of solid, opaque materials that
would obscures one's view beyond; often the area is between one picket,
rail, post, and/or another on a fence, wall, and/or barrier
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION — A building used for the storage
and handling of freight or merchandise, but not including the maintenance
or fueling of commercial vehicles. Warehousing that is incidental to retail
sales and that does not constitute in excess of 30% of the total floor area of
the retail establishment shall be excluded from this definition.
WATER PURVEYOR — The owner or operator of a public water system as
defined in Section 3 of the Act of May 1, 1984 (P.L. 206, No. 43), known as
the Pennsylvania Safe Drinking Water Act, or any person subject to the act
of June 24, 1939 (P.L. 842, No. 365), 2 referred to as the Water Rights Law.51
WELL PRODUCTION PAD — The area of the limits of the surface of the
perimeter used for drilling operations as shown on the site plan.
WELL SITE — The area of surface operations surrounding the surface
location of a well or wells. The site can include facilities, structures,
materials, water containment devices and equipment whether permanent
or temporary, necessary for or incidental to the preparation, construction,
drilling, production or operation of an oil or gas well. Such area shall not
include an access road to the well site.
51.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 721.2 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 631 et seq., respectively.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:671
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — An establishment engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers, institutional, commercial or professional business
customers or other wholesalers, rather than to the general public, or acting
as a broker for such merchandise sales.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — A facility consisting of
a tower, wind turbine generator with blades, guy wires or other support
structures and anchors, access roads and associated control and conversion
equipment to convert wind movement into electricity.
WIND TURBINE — A term used for a wind energy conversion system
(WECS) that produces electricity, typically having one, two or three blades.
WINDSCREEN — An opaque, transparent, or somewhat transparent mesh
fabric material affixed onto a fence, wall, or barrier to reduce wind flow,
create a visual barrier, or serve an informational or aesthetic function.
WOODLANDS — Areas, groves or stands of mature or largely mature trees
that are greater than six inches caliper (diameter) at a height of 14 inches
above the ground, that cover a land area greater than 0.25 of an acre; or
any grove of more than 10 individual trees that are mature having a caliper.
(diameter) greater than 12 inches at a height of 14 inches above the ground.
YARD — A required open space located on a lot that is unobstructed by
any portion of a principal structure, other than certain projections expressly
permitted by this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending between side lot lines across the full
lot width from the street right-of-way line to a line parallel to the front lot
line known as the "front building line," the minimum horizontal distance
required by this chapter.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the
required side yard lines parallel to the rear lot line, the minimum horizontal
distance required by this chapter.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the required front building line to the
rear lot line parallel to the side lot line, the minimum horizontal distance
required by this chapter.
ZONING AMENDMENT — A change to the text of this chapter or to the
Zoning District Map, proposed for adoption by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to the procedures specified in this chapter.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A document issued by the Zoning Officer
indicating that approval of a conditional use has been granted by the
Board of Supervisors, or approval of a use by special exception has been
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, or approval has been granted by the
Zoning Officer for a permitted use by right, pursuant to the procedures of
this chapter, indicating compliance with all applicable requirements of this
chapter, which approval is prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit
and/or certificate of occupancy.
ZONING DISTRICT — An area accurately defined as to boundaries and
location on the Zoning District Map and within which area only certain
§ 27-201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-201
1:672
types of land uses are permitted and within which other types of land uses
are excluded, as set forth in this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP — The official map delineating the zoning districts
of North Strabane Township, Washington County, Pennsylvania, together
with all amendments subsequently adopted, which is incorporated in and
made a part of this chapter by reference thereto.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Township
of North Strabane, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — That person appointed by the North Strabane
Township Board of Supervisors and charged with the responsibility of
administering and enforcing this chapter.
§ 27-201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-201
1:673

Part 3
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 27-300. Zoning District Map. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-301. Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The Township is divided into the districts set forth by this chapter and as
shown by the district boundaries on the Official Zoning District Map. The
zoning districts are:
A-1 Agricultural District
A-2 Agricultural District
R-1-V Village Residential District
R-2 Suburban Residential District
R-3 High-Density Residential District
C-1 Highway Commercial District
C-2 Regional Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
1. The Township is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the
Official Zoning District Map, that, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.
2. The Official Zoning District Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, attested by the Township
Secretary and certified by the Township Engineer, and shall bear the
seal of the Township under the following words: "This is to certify that
this is the Official Zoning District Map referred to in Article III of
Ordinance Number 314, as amended, of North Strabane Township,
Washington County, Pennsylvania," together with the date of adoption
of this chapter.
3. All amendments affecting district boundaries shall be noted on the
Official Zoning District Map by the Township Engineer, including the
date of adoption, and shall be attested to by the Township Secretary.
4. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning District
Map or matter shown thereof except in conformity with the procedure
set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by
any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter and
punishable as provided in Part 19 of this chapter.
5. The Official Zoning District Map, ich shall be located in the Township
Municipal building, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning
status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the
Township.
§ 27-300 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-302
1:675
§ 27-302. District Boundaries. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-303. General District Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundaries indicated as appearing to follow the center
lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such
center lines.
B. District boundaries indicated as appearing to follow platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. District boundaries indicated as appearing to follow municipal
boundaries shall be construed as following municipal boundaries.
D. District boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.
E. District boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow centerlines and, in the event of change in the
location of streams, rivers and other bodies of water, shall be
construed as moving with the actual body of water and following
the centerline.
F. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning District
Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
1. The following regulations shall apply in all zoning districts:
A. In the A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, any use not
specifically listed as an authorized use in the zoning district shall
not be permitted in that zoning district.
B. In the C-1, C-2 and I-1 Districts, any use not specifically listed in the
authorized uses for the zoning district shall not be permitted in that
zoning district, unless such use is authorized as a conditional use in
accordance with the applicable express standards and criteria for
"comparable uses not specifically listed" in § 27-1303, Subsection
16, of this chapter.
C. In all zoning districts where single-family dwellings or two-family
dwellings are an authorized use or are a legally nonconforming use,
the single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall be the only
principal structure on the lot, except in an approved planned
residential development, where single-family dwellings or twofamily
dwellings may be authorized on the same lot with other
single-family dwellings or two-family dwellings.
D. In the zoning districts where such uses are authorized by this
chapter, two or more multifamily or nonresidential buildings may
§ 27-302 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-303
1:676
occupy the same lot, provided that each building can independently
meet the applicable area and bulk regulations and parking
requirements to accommodate the possibility of subdivision of the
property in the future to separate the buildings.
E. In the C-1, C-2 and I-1 Districts, two or more authorized uses may
occupy the same building, provided that all applicable area and
bulk regulations and parking requirements for each of the uses can
be met on the lot.
F. In all zoning districts, all accessory structures shall be located on
the same lot with the principal structure to which they are
accessory. Any accessory structure shall not be built unless or until
the principal structure it serves exists on the lot.
G. Any development with more than 50 dwelling units shall have its
primary point of access on a current or anticipated collector street.
§ 27-303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-303
1:677

Part 4
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 27-400. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to preserve productive agricultural land
resources and to provide for low-density single-family residential
development that will be compatible with agricultural pursuits and will
preserve natural features in areas where public sewers are not anticipated
in the near future and to provide for accessory uses and compatible public
and semipublic uses as conditional uses or uses by special exception.
§ 27-401. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the A-1 Agricultural District, only the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Agriculture, subject to § 27-1408.
(b) Animal grooming, subject to § 27-1408.
(c) Boarding stable, subject to § 27-1408.
(d) Commercial greenhouse, subject to § 27-1408.
(e) Essential services.
(f) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(g) Passive recreation.
(h) Public buildings.
(i) Riding academy, noncommercial, subject to § 27-1408.
(j) Single-family dwelling.
(k) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(l) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(m) Re-entry drilling, subject to § 27-1414.
(n) Traffic control sites, subject to § 27-1415.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Agricultural sales, subject to § 27-1408.
(b) Keeping of domestic pets.
§ 27-400 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-401
1:679
(c) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 27-1411.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
(e) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(f) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to
§ 27-1403.
(g) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts,
subject to § 27-1403.
(h) Private stable, subject to § 27-1408.
(i) Specialized animal raising.
(j) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 27-1407.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Active recreation, low-impact.
(b) Active recreation, high-impact.
(c) Airports or airstrips.
(d) Coal mine adjunct facilities.
(e) Coal mine facilities, underground.
(f) Comparable uses not specifically listed.
(g) Golf course or golf or country club.
(h) Kennel.
(i) Mobile home park.
(j) Oil and gas development.
(k) Riding academy, commercial.
(l) Sportsmen's club.
(m) Surface mining.
(n) Storage depot(s) and truck staging area(s).
(o) Re-entry related operations.
(2) Accessory uses:
§ 27-401 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-401
1:680
§ 27-402. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(a) Bed-and-breakfast.
(b) Private-use helipad.
(c) Certified water storage facilities and MLVTs.
(d) Impoundments (fresh water).
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Cemetery.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or existing public utility storage or transmission structure.
(c) Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship
or school.
(d) Place of worship/place of assembly.
(e) Public utility building or structure.
(f) Schools (public or private).
(g) Veterinary clinic.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Accessory dwelling.
(b) Family day-care home.
(c) Home occupation.
1. In the A-1 Agricultural District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations, except as they may be modified by the express standards
and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Part 13:
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Agriculture: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(2) Airport or airstrip: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(3) Boarding stable: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(4) Mobile home park: five acres (435,600 square feet).
(5) Private stable, kennel or specialized animal raising: five acres
(217,800 square feet).
§ 27-401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-402
1:681
(6) Riding academy (commercial or noncommercial): 10 acres
(435,600 square feet).
(7) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: two acres (87,120 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(8) All other principal uses: two acres (87,120 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: 150 feet.
(b) With public sewers: 90 feet.
(2) All other principal uses: 200 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
D. Minimum front yard:
(1) Principal and accessory structures: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 50 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: see § 27-1403C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Principal structures:
(a) Dwellings: 20 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: 30 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 27-1403.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35 feet.
(2) Accessory farm structures: 75 feet.
(3) All other accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15
feet.
J. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-403
1:682
§ 27-403. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-404. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
§ 27-405. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
§ 27-406. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
§ 27-403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-406
1:683

Part 5
A-2 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 27-500. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to protect agricultural uses and preserve
natural features and resources while encouraging low-density single-family
residential development suited to the natural conditions and encouraging
conservation subdivisions in areas where public sewers are anticipated in
the near future and to provide for accessory uses and compatible public and
semipublic uses as conditional uses or uses by special exception.
§ 27-501. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the A-2 Agricultural District, only the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Agriculture, subject to § 27-1408.
(b) Essential services.
(c) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(d) Passive recreation.
(e) Public buildings.
(f) Riding academy, noncommercial, subject to § 27-1408.
(g) Single-family dwelling.
(h) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(i) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(j) Re-entry drilling, subject to § 27-1414.
(k) Traffic control sites, subject to § 27-1415.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Agricultural sales, subject to § 27-1408.
(b) Keeping of domestic pets.
(c) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 27-1411.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
§ 27-500 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-501
1:685
(e) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(f) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to
§ 27-1403.
(g) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts,
subject to § 27-1403.
(h) Private stable, subject to § 27-1408.
(i) Specialized animal raising.
(j) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 27-1407.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Active recreation, low-impact.
(b) Animal grooming.
(c) Boarding stable.
(d) Commercial greenhouse.
(e) Conservation subdivision.
(f) Golf course or golf or country club.
(g) Kennel.
(h) Riding academy, commercial.
(i) Oil and gas development.
(j) Storage depot(s) and truck staging area(s).
(k) Re-entry related operations.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Bed-and-breakfast.
(b) Private-use helipad.
(c) Certified water storage facilities and MLVTs.
(d) Impoundments (fresh water).
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
§ 27-501 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-501
1:686
§ 27-502. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(a) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or existing public utility storage or transmission structure.
(b) Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship
or school.
(c) Place of worship/place of assembly.
(d) Private club.
(e) Public utility building or structure.
(f) Schools (public or private).
(g) Veterinary clinic.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Accessory dwelling.
(b) Family day-care home.
(c) Home occupation.
1. In the A-2 Agricultural District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations, except as they may be modified by the express standards
and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Part 13:
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Agriculture: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(2) Boarding stable: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(3) Private stable, kennel or specialized animal raising: five acres
(217,800 square feet).
(4) Riding academy (commercial or noncommercial): 10 acres
(435,600 square feet).
(5) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(6) All other principal uses: two acres (87,120 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
D. Minimum front yard:
§ 27-501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-502
1:687
§ 27-503. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-504. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
§ 27-505. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
§ 27-506. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
(1) Principal and accessory structures: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 50 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Principal structures:
(a) Dwellings: 25 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: 30 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
G. Special yard requirements: see § 27-1403.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35 feet.
(2) Accessory farm structures: 75 feet.
(3) All other accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15
feet.
J. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-502 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-506
1:688
Part 6
R-1-V VILLAGE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 27-600. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to protect older established neighborhoods
comprised primarily of single-family dwellings on small lots, to provide
opportunities for limited commercial development on properties that front
on arterial or collector roads, to provide services to the immediate
neighborhoods and local traffic, and to provide for compatible public,
semipublic and accessory uses as conditional uses or uses by special
exception.
§ 27-601. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the R-1-V Village Residential District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Essential services.
(b) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(c) Passive recreation.
(d) Public buildings.
(e) Single-family dwelling.
(f) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(g) Two-family dwelling.
(h) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Keeping of domestic pets.
(b) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 27-1411.
(c) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
(d) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(e) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to
§ 27-1403.
§ 27-600 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-601
1:689
§ 27-602. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(f) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts,
subject to § 27-1403.
(g) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 27-1407.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Active recreation, low-impact.
(b) Limited commercial uses.
(c) Multifamily dwellings.
(d) Personal-care boarding home.
(e) Residence in combination with business.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Accessory dwelling.
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or on an existing public utility storage or transmission
structure.
(b) Day-care center or preschool in a place of worship or
school.
(c) Place of worship/place of assembly.
(d) Private club.
(e) Public utility building or structure.
(f) Schools (public or private).
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Family day-care home, subject to § 27-1303, Subsection
23.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 27-1303, Subsection 26.
1. In the R-1-V Village Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by
special exception contained in Part 13:
§ 27-601 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-602
1:690
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: 6,000 square feet. (NOTE: For
provisions governing nonconforming lots of record, see
§ 27-1703A.)
(2) Two-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: 12,000 square feet, or 6,000 square
feet per dwelling unit.
(3) Limited commercial uses: 6,000 square feet.
(4) All other principal uses: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: 100 feet.
(b) With public sewers: 60 feet. (NOTE: For provisions
governing nonconforming lots of record, see § 27-1703A.)
(2) Two-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: 100 feet.
(b) With public sewers: 80 feet.
(3) Limited commercial uses: 60 feet.
(4) All other principal uses: 150 feet.
C. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 35%.
D. Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 25 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Single-family or two-family dwellings:
(a) Without public sewers: 15 feet.
(b) With public sewers: 7.5 feet.
§ 27-602 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-602
1:691
§ 27-603. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-604. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
§ 27-605. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
§ 27-606. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
(2) All other principal structures: 25 feet.
(3) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
G. Special yard requirements: see § 27-1403.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: three stories, but no more than 35
feet.
(2) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
J. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-602 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-606
1:692
Part 7
R-2 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 27-700. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to encourage single-family developments
at suburban densities in locations in the Township where utilities and
transportation facilities exist or are anticipated in the future and to provide
for accessory uses and compatible public and semipublic uses as conditional
uses and uses by special exception.
§ 27-701. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the R-2 Suburban Residential District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Essential services.
(b) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(c) Passive recreation.
(d) Public buildings.
(e) Single-family dwellings.
(f) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(g) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(h) Re-entry drilling, subject to § 27-1414.
(i) Traffic control sites, subject to § 27-1415.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Keeping of domestic pets.
(b) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 27-1411.
(c) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
(d) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(e) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to
§ 27-1403.
§ 27-700 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-701
1:693
(f) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts,
subject to § 27-1403.
(g) Specialized animal raising.
(h) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 27-1407.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Active recreation, low-impact.
(b) Age-restricted planned community.
(c) Conservation subdivision.
(d) Hospital.
(e) Two-family dwellings.
(f) Oil and gas development.
(g) Storage depot(s) and truck staging area(s).
(h) Re-entry related operations.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Certified water storage facilities and MLVTs.
(b) Impoundments (fresh water).
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or on an existing public utility storage or transmission
structure.
(b) Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship
or school.
(c) Place of worship/place of assembly.
(d) Public utility building or structure.
(e) Schools (public or private).
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Family day-care home.
(b) Home occupation.
§ 27-701 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-702
1:694
§ 27-702. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the R-2 Suburban Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by Part 12
governing planned residential developments or by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by
special exception contained in Part 13:
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: 0.5 acre (21,780 square feet).
(2) Two-family dwelling:
(a) Minimum site required: five acres (217,800 square feet).
(b) Minimum lot area:
1) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet),
or 0.5 acre (21,780 square feet) per dwelling unit.
2) With public sewers: 0.5 acre (21,780 square feet), or
0.25 acre (10,890 square feet) per dwelling unit.
(3) All other principal uses: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: 90 feet.
(b) With public sewers: 70 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 150 feet.
(3) All other principal structures: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
D. Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 40 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Single-family dwellings: 15 feet.
(2) Two-family dwellings: 20 feet.
§ 27-702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-702
1:695
§ 27-703. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-704. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
§ 27-705. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
§ 27-706. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
(3) All other principal structures: 50 feet.
(4) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
G. Special yard requirements: see § 27-1403.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
J. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-706
1:696
Part 8
R-3 HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 27-800. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to provide for medium-density, single-family
development and to provide multifamily housing opportunities in planned
residential developments in areas served by public sewers and other public
services and to provide for compatible public, semipublic and accessory
uses as conditional uses or uses by special exception.
§ 27-801. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the R-3 High-Density Residential District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Essential services.
(b) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(c) Passive recreation.
(d) Public buildings.
(e) Single-family dwellings.
(f) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(g) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Keeping of domestic pets.
(b) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 27-1411.
(c) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
(d) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(e) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to
§ 27-1403.
(f) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts,
subject to § 27-1403.
(g) Specialized animal raising.
§ 27-800 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-801
1:697
§ 27-802. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(h) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 27-1407.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Active recreation, low-impact.
(b) Age-restricted planned community.
(c) Non-family facility, Type 1 and/or 2.
(d) Multifamily dwellings.
(e) Nursing home.
(f) Personal-care boarding home.
(g) Planned residential development, subject to Part 12.
(2) Accessory uses: None.
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or on an existing public utility storage or transmission
structure.
(b) Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship
or school.
(c) Place of worship/place of assembly.
(d) Public utility building or structure.
(e) Schools (public or private).
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Family day-care home.
(b) Home occupation.
1. In the R-3 High-Density Residential District, all uses shall be subject to
the following regulations, except as they may be modified by the
express standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses
by special exception contained in Part 13:
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
§ 27-801 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-802
1:698
§ 27-803. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-804. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
(a) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: 0.35 acre (15,246 square feet).
(2) All other principal uses: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling: 70 feet.
(2) All other principal uses: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
D. Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 30 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Single-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(2) All other principal structures: 50 feet.
(3) Accessory structures: See § 27-1403C.
G. Special yard requirements: see § 27-1403.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
I. Maximum height:
(1) Principal structures:
(a) Single-family dwellings: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35
feet.
(b) All others: four stories maximum.
(2) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
J. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-802 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-805
1:699
§ 27-805. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
§ 27-806. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
§ 27-805 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-806
1:700
Part 9
C-1 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 27-900. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to provide retail shopping and service
facilities that serve the needs of the general community and are located on
arterial and collector streets in appropriate locations to allow convenient
access and to minimize traffic impacts on neighborhoods and local streets.
§ 27-901. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the C-1 Highway Commercial District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Automobile service station.
(b) Bakery, candy or ice cream shop, including processing
primarily for on-site sale.
(c) Bar or tavern.
(d) Beer distributor.
(e) Business or professional offices.
(f) Catering service, including rental hall.
(g) Commercial greenhouse.
(h) Commercial school.
(i) Convenience store.
(j) Day-care center.
(k) Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship
or school.
(l) Drug store.
(m) Dry-cleaning pick-up store.
(n) Essential services.
(o) Financial institution.
(p) Food store.
(q) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(r) Funeral home.
§ 27-900 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-901
1:701
(s) Health club.
(t) Hotel or motel.
(u) Laundromat.
(v) Medical offices.
(w) Passive recreation.
(x) Personal services.
(y) Pet services.
(z) Pharmacy.
(aa) Place of worship/places of assembly.
(bb) Private club.
(cc) Public utility building or structure.
(dd) Residence in combination with business.
(ee) Restaurant, carry-out.
(ff) Restaurant, fast-food.
(gg) Restaurant, sit-down.
(hh) Retail businesses.
(ii) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(jj) Vehicle accessories sales and installation.
(kk) Vehicle rental, sales and service.
(ll) Vehicle repair garages.
(mm) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Drive-through facilities, subject to § 27-1406.
(b) No-impact home-based business.
(c) No-impact home-based business or home occupation in a
dwelling that is a nonconforming use.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
§ 27-901 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-901
1:702
§ 27-902. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(e) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(f) Temporary construction trailer or sales office, subject to
§ 27-1407.
(g) Off-site vehicle inventory storage, subject to § 27-1418.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Active recreation, low-impact.
(b) Comparable uses not specifically listed.
(c) Contracting business.
(d) Group-care facility.
(e) Nursing home.
(f) Personal-care boarding home.
(g) Transitional dwelling.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Keeping of domestic pets.
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Car wash.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or on an existing public utility storage or transmission
structure.
(c) Veterinary clinic.
(d) Self-storage, interior.
(2) Accessory uses: None.
1. In the C-1 Highway Commercial District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by
special exception contained in Part 13:
A. Minimum lot area:
§ 27-901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-902
1:703
§ 27-903. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-904. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
(1) Multifamily dwellings: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) All other uses:
(a) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: 0.5 acre (21,780 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
D. Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) All principal and accessory structures:
(a) Adjoining any R District: 40 feet.
(b) Adjoining all other districts: 20 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) All principal and accessory structures:
(a) Adjoining any R District: 40 feet.
(b) Adjoining all other districts: 10 feet.
G. Maximum dwelling unit density: 12 units per acre.
H. Minimum distance between buildings: (where two or more
buildings are on the same lot): 20 feet.
I. Special yard requirements: see § 27-1403.
J. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
K. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: four stories maximum.
(2) All Accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
L. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-902 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-905
1:704
§ 27-905. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
§ 27-906. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
§ 27-905 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-906
1:705

Part 10
C-2 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 27-1000. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to accommodate shopping, lodging,
entertainment and supporting facilities that are regional attractions and
tourist destinations in areas immediately accessible to the regional highway
network and the Meadows Race Track.
§ 27-1001. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the C-2 Regional Commercial District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Automobile service station.
(b) Bakery, candy or ice cream store, including processing
primarily for on-site sale.
(c) Bar or tavern.
(d) Beer distributor.
(e) Betting parlor.
(f) Business or professional offices.
(g) Casino or gaming facility.
(h) Catering service, including rental hall.
(i) Commercial greenhouse.
(j) Commercial school.
(k) Convenience store.
(l) Day-care center.
(m) Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship
or school.
(n) Drug store.
(o) Dry-cleaning pick-up store.
(p) Essential services.
(q) Financial institution.
(r) Food store.
§ 27-1000 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1001
1:707
(s) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(t) Grocery store.
(u) Health club.
(v) Hotel or motel.
(w) Indoor entertainment.
(x) Laundromat.
(y) Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to § 27-1417.
(z) Medical offices.
(aa) Passive recreation.
(bb) Personal services.
(cc) Place of worship/place of assembly.
(dd) Private club.
(ee) Public utility building or structure.
(ff) Racetrack.
(gg) Restaurant, carry-out.
(hh) Restaurant, fast-food.
(ii) Restaurant, sit-down.
(jj) Retail businesses.
(kk) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(ll) Vehicle accessories sales and installation.
(mm) Vehicle rental, sales and service.
(nn) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Drive-through facilities, subject to § 27-1406.
(b) No-impact home-based business.
(c) No-impact home-based business or home occupation in a
dwelling that is a nonconforming use.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
§ 27-1001 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1001
1:708
§ 27-1002. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(e) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use authorized in this district.
(f) Temporary construction trailer or sales office, subject to
§ 27-1407.
(g) Off-site vehicle inventory storage, subject to § 27-1418.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Active recreation, high-impact.
(b) Active recreation, low-impact.
(c) Billboards.
(d) Comparable uses not specifically listed.
(e) Day-care, animal.
(f) Nightclub.
(g) Planned office park.
(h) Planned shopping center.
(i) Public parking lot or public parking garage.
(2) Accessory uses: None.
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Car wash.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or on an existing public utility storage or transmission
structure.
(c) Communications tower.
(d) Veterinary clinic.
(e) Self-storage, interior.
(2) Accessory uses: None.
1. Minimum lot area:
A. Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. With public sewers: 0.5 acre (21,780 square feet).
§ 27-1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1002
1:709
§ 27-1003. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-1004. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
§ 27-1005. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
2. Minimum lot width:
A. Planned shopping center: 200 feet.
B. All other uses: 100 feet.
3. Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
4. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
5. Minimum rear yard:
A. All principal structures:
(1) Adjoining any R District: 75 feet.
(2) Adjoining all other districts: 40 feet.
B. Accessory structures: 20 feet.
6. Minimum side yard:
A. All principal structures:
(1) Adjoining any R District: 75 feet.
(2) Adjoining all other districts: 20 feet.
B. Accessory structures: 20 feet.
7. Special yard requirements: see § 27-1403.
8. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
9. Maximum height:
A. All principal structures:
(1) Hotel or motel: six stories, but no more than 60 feet.
(2) All other principal structures: four stories maximum.
B. All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 20 feet.
10. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-1002 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1006
1:710
§ 27-1006. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
§ 27-1006 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1006
1:711

Part 11
I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 27-1100. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The purpose of this district is to encourage development of light industrial
uses in appropriate locations in the Township, consistent with sound
planning and environmental controls.
§ 27-1101. Authorized Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. In the I-1 Industrial District, only the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Automobile service station.
(b) Business or professional offices.
(c) Cleaning and dyeing plant.
(d) Commercial greenhouse.
(e) Contracting business.
(f) Contractor's yard.
(g) Day-care center.
(h) Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship
or school.
(i) Essential services.
(j) Flex space.
(k) Food and related products, packaging, storage and
distribution.
(l) Forestry, subject to § 27-1410.
(m) Hotel or motel.
(n) Landscaping contractor/landscaping supply.
(o) Light manufacturing, provided that all storage and
operations are within a completely enclosed building.
(p) Medical marijuana grower/processor.
(q) Mini-warehouse or self-storage facilities.
(r) Mobile home sales, service and storage.
§ 27-1100 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1101
1:713
(s) Packaging and delivery services.
(t) Printing establishment.
(u) Public utility building or structure.
(v) Repair shop.
(w) Research and development, including pilot manufacturing.
(x) Restaurant, carry-out.
(y) Restaurant, fast-food.
(z) Restaurant, sit-down.
(aa) Self-storage, interior.
(bb) Supply yard.
(cc) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction
trailer, model home or sales office, subject to § 27-1905.
(dd) Vehicle repair garage.
(ee)Warehousing and distribution.
(ff) Wholesale business.
(gg) Oil and gas pipelines and temporary water pipelines,
subject to § 27-1413.
(hh) Re-entry drilling, subject to § 27-1414.
(ii) Traffic control sites, subject to § 27-1415.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) No-impact home-based business.
(b) No-impact home-based business or home occupation in a
dwelling that is a nonconforming use.
(c) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Part 15.
(d) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
(e) Retail sales of products produced on-site.
(f) Temporary construction trailer or sales office, subject to
§ 27-1407.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Principal uses:
§ 27-1101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1101
1:714
(a) Active recreation, low-impact.
(b) Active recreation, high-impact.
(c) Adult business.
(d) Coal mine adjunct facilities.
(e) Coal mine facilities, underground.
(f) Comparable uses not specifically listed.
(g) Juvenile incarceration facility.
(h) Landfill.
(i) Planned industrial park.
(j) Planned office park.
(k) Planned research and technology park.
(l) Surface mining.
(m) Truck terminal.
(n) Oil and gas development.
(o) Compressor stations and processing plants.
(p) Certified water storage facilities and MLVTs.
(q) Storage depot(s) and truck staging area(s).
(r) Re-entry related operations.
(s) Impoundments (fresh water, re-use/waste water).
(t) Deep injection wells.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Private-use helipad.
C. Uses by special exception:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building
or on an existing public utility storage or transmission
structure.
(b) Communications tower.
(c) Equipment storage yard.
(d) Junkyard.
§ 27-1101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1101
1:715
§ 27-1102. Area and Bulk Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(e) Truck and heavy equipment rental, sales and service.
(2) Accessory uses: None.
1. Minimum lot area:
A. Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. With public sewers: 0.5 acre (21,780 square feet).
2. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
3. Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
4. Distance between buildings: (where two or more buildings occupy the
same lot): 40 feet.
5. Maximum building length: 400 feet.
6. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
7. Minimum rear yard:
A. Principal structures:
(1) Adjoining any R District: 100 feet.
(2) Adjoining all other districts: 50 feet.
B. Accessory structures: 30 feet.
8. Minimum side yard, principal structures:
A. Adjoining any R District: 100 feet.
B. Adjoining all other districts: 20 feet.
C. Accessory structures: 20 feet.
9. Special yard requirements: see § 27-1403.
10. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 27-1404.
11. Maximum height:
A. Principal structures:
(1) Hotel or motel: six stories, but no more than 60 feet.
(2) All others: three stories, but no more than 45 feet.
B. All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 20 feet.
12. Height exceptions: see § 27-1405.
§ 27-1101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1103
1:716
§ 27-1103. Parking and Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 15.
§ 27-1104. Signs. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See Part 16.
§ 27-1105. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1402.
§ 27-1106. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
See § 27-1409.
§ 27-1103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1106
1:717

Part 12
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
§ 27-1200. Purpose. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1201. Applicability and Relationship to Other Ordinances.
[Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The provisions of this Part for approval of a planned residential development
shall be a modification to and in lieu of procedures and criteria for approvals
otherwise required in this chapter and the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.52 Failure to comply with the provisions of this Part
1. The purpose of these regulations is to permit residential development
that is more creative and imaginative than is generally possible under
conventional zoning district controls and subdivision requirements.
Further, these regulations are intended to promote more effective and
efficient relationships between development, existing and planned
public infrastructure and the Township's roadway network while
providing a compatible blend of housing types, amenities and
community facilities of high quality, oriented to the specific
development site and preserving the natural scenic qualities of open
space. Based upon the context of the Township's Comprehensive Plan,
established development patterns, roadway characteristics and public
infrastructure systems existing and planned within the Township, two
planned residential development options (PRD A and PRD B) are
applicable within the Township's designated R-3 Zoning District.
2. Each planned residential development should be designed to
accomplish the following:
A. Choices in the types of dwelling units and living environments.
B. Open space and recreation areas directly related to the intended
users.
C. A pattern of development that preserves trees, outstanding natural
topography and geological features and prevents soil erosion.
D. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development.
E. An efficient use of land, resulting in efficient networks of utilities
and streets.
F. An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding
development and public improvements.
G. A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other parts of this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1200 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1201
1:719
with respect to a recorded development plan shall be deemed to constitute
a violation of this chapter.
§ 27-1202. Site Area, Ownership, Use and Density Requirements.
[Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. Site Area. PRD A shall be a minimum of 50 contiguous acres. PRD B
shall be a minimum of 30 acres. Sites that are divided by a public or
private street right-of-way shall not be construed as contiguous for the
purposes of a planned residential development.
2. Site Ownership. The site proposed for a planned residential
development shall be under single ownership and control. Prior to
submitting an application for tentative approval, the applicant shall
demonstrate that he is the landowner, as defined by this chapter. Legal,
as well as equitable, ownership shall be demonstrated coincident with
approval of the final development plan.
3. Dwelling units authorized.
A. Any of the following dwelling units may be included in a planned
residential development:
PRD A PRD B
(1) Single-family dwelling. (1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling. (2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Triplex. (3) Quadruplex.
(4) Quadruplex.
(5) Townhouse.
(6) Garden apartment.
B. All PRDs must have single-family dwellings comprising a minimum
of 80% of the total dwelling unit mix.
C. Within a planned residential development that proposes a mix of
dwelling unit types, a single phase of the PRD may contain only one
dwelling unit type. Each phase that contains a different dwelling
unit type shall be accessed from the principal circulation system
within the PRD. The plan shall be designed to provide existing
natural buffers or landscaped buffers between phases containing
different dwelling types.
4. Recreational and other common facilities for the residents.
A. In addition to the residential uses permitted in a planned
residential development, recreation facilities designed for the use
of the residents of the planned residential development shall be
permitted, including but not limited to hiking, biking or exercise
trails; tennis, paddle tennis, basketball, volleyball or other playing
§ 27-1201 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1202
1:720
courts; swimming pool and related facilities; golf course or putting
green; community building for meetings and social activities; picnic
pavilions; and other passive and low-impact active recreational
uses deemed appropriate to the needs and interests of the
proposed residents of the planned residential development by the
Board of Supervisors.
B. Passive recreation facilities may be provided within the common
open space. Low-impact active recreation shall be provided based
on the ratio of 500 square feet per dwelling unit. The total area
devoted to low-impact active recreation shall be located within the
common open space. The specific facilities proposed shall be
subject to approval by the Township based on the anticipated needs
of the residents. In lieu of providing the area devoted to active
recreation, the developer may pay the fee in lieu of dedication of
open space required by the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance53 Payment of the fee in lieu shall not
relieve the developer of the requirement to reserve 20% of the site
as common open space or the requirement that 40% of the required
common open space be suitable for active recreation.
5. Maximum dwelling unit density.
A. For both PRD A and PRD B, regardless of whether a planned
residential development is comprised of a mix of dwelling unit
types or a single type of dwelling unit, the maximum dwelling unit
density shall be four units per acre in any PRD.
B. Dwelling unit density shall be calculated using the net acreage.
6. Minimum lot area.
A. In no case shall the minimum lot area required for any dwelling be
reduced to less than 10,890 square feet.
7. Maximum number of dwelling units.
A. To determine the maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a
planned residential development, perform the following
calculation:
Step 1. Identify gross acreage _____Line 1
Step 2. Calculate 20% of the gross acreage _____Line 2
20% accounts for the minimum required percentage of open space.
Step 3. Subtract Line 1 - Line 2 _____Line 3
Step 4. Identify acreage of remaining environmentally sensitive resources
not already accounted for in open space.
_____Line 4
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1202
1:721
Step 5. Identify proposed right-of-way acreage _____Line 5
Step 6. Subtract Line 3 - (Line 4 + Line 5) _____Line 6
Step 7. Multiply Line 6 by 4.0 _____Line 7
This result shall be the maximum number of units permissible to be
developed as part of the planned residential development.
Step 8. Confirm gross density (= Line 7 / Line 1) _____Line 8
Step 9. Confirm net density does not exceed what is
permissible in accordance with Subsection 5.1 (=
Line 7/Line 6)
_____Line 9
8. Minimum building setback on the perimeter of the planned residential
development site. Where the planned residential development options
are authorized, no garden apartment, townhouse, triplex or quadruplex
shall be located closer to any boundary of the planned residential
development site than 75 feet. All other structures shall be located at
least 50 feet from the boundary of the planned residential development
site. No accessory structure and no off-street parking shall be located in
this required perimeter setback area.
9. Internal setbacks and distance between buildings.
A. The minimum required front yard setback from a public or private
street shall be 25 feet. There shall be no other required setback
internal to the PRD, provided that, where two or more principal
residential buildings (regardless of dwelling type) are proposed on
the same lot, the minimum distance between the buildings shall be
20 feet.
B. In the case of lots proposed for fee-simple ownership, all principal
structures shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from a rear
property line. Decks or other structures attached to the principal
building may encroach into the rear yard if the rear lot line adjoins
common open space; any encroachment into a rear yard shall not
be closer than five feet to a property line. Attached units shall be
permitted to have a zero side yard along common walls.
C. All other side yards shall be a minimum of five feet on one side of
the lot, with a combined total of two side yards on the lot equaling
not less than 20 feet, provided that, in every case, the total distance
between proposed structures on adjacent lots shall be not less than
20 feet.
D. Any and all accessory structure(s) on a lot shall be not be closer
than five feet to a property line.
10. Buffer areas.
A. Buffer Area A, as defined in § 27-1402, Subsection A of this chapter,
shall be provided along all property lines on the perimeter of a
§ 27-1202 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1202
1:722
§ 27-1203. Access and Availability of Public Services. [Ord. No. 376,
7/24/2018]
planned residential development site adjoining an A-1, A-2, R-1-V
or R-2 District.
B. Buffer Area B, as defined in § 27-1402, Subsection A of this chapter,
shall be provided along all other property lines on the perimeter of
a planned residential development.
C. Buffer Area C, as defined in § 27-1402, Subsection A of this chapter
shall be required along all property lines within the PRD site that
separate single-family dwellings in the PRD from two-family,
triplex, quadruplex, townhouse or garden apartment dwellings.
Where these units are separated by a public or private street rightof-
way, a buffer area shall not be required.
D. All buffer areas shall be incorporated in the common open space
and shall not be permitted to be part of any individual lot in the
planned residential development.
11. Modifications to otherwise applicable zoning and subdivision
regulations.
A. The design and construction standards of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance shall apply to all public and
private improvements proposed in a planned residential
development, unless a waiver or modification is granted by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with the procedure for
granting waivers and modifications specified in the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.54
B. All requests for modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application for tentative and final
approval. Such written request shall specify the ordinance section
from which a modification is requested and shall state the grounds
for the request, the unreasonable hardship on which the request is
based and the minimum modification necessary to relieve the
hardship.
C. Whenever a request for modification is granted or denied, the
reasons for such grant or denial shall be stated within the official
written communication to the landowner. The grant of a
modification request may be subject to reasonable conditions
designed to promote the purposes set forth in this Part.
1. Access and Traffic Control. The site of a planned residential
development shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter. The projected
traffic volumes associated with the proposed planned residential
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1203
1:723
§ 27-1204. Common Open Space. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
development shall be capable of being accommodated by the adjacent
street network. The site proposed for a planned residential
development shall have a minimum of two means of ingress and egress
from the existing street network. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 1,200
feet in length; quadruplexes, if present, shall, to the greatest extent
possible, be located at intersections to take advantage of lot and road
configurations.
2. Traffic Impact Study. The developer shall submit a traffic impact study
prepared in accordance with the requirements specified in the
definition of "traffic impact study" in § 27-201 of this chapter. The traffic
impact study shall identify the traffic impact of the proposed planned
residential development and the recommendations to mitigate those
impacts, as warranted. Ingress and egress to and from the site shall be
designed to comply with the minimum requirements of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
3. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on at least one side of every
street in the planned residential development. Sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and Construction
Specifications. Within PRD A, sidewalks may be constructed within
common open space rather than within the public right-of-way.
4. Public water and Sewer Service. All dwelling units and other principal
structures in a planned residential development shall be connected to a
public water supply and public sanitary sewer service.
5. Storm Drainage. The developer shall provide a storm drainage system
within a planned residential development that shall be of sufficient size
and design to collect, carry off and dispose of all predictable surface
water runoff within the planned residential development and shall be so
constructed to conform with the statutes, ordinances and regulations of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the stormwater management
regulations contained in the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
1. Areas required.
A. Common open space shall comprise at least 20% of the total gross
site area of the PRD.
B. Of the required open space area, not more than 50% may be
covered by water. Stormwater management facilities may be
included in the common open space but shall not be considered to
be areas covered by water.
C. Recreational facilities or structures and their accessory uses
located in common open space areas shall be considered improved
§ 27-1203 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1204
1:724
open space as long as the total impervious surface area constitutes
no more than 5% of the total common open space.
D. No more than 50% of the required open space area shall be in
excess of a 25% slope.
E. To the extent feasible, steep slopes, streams, lakes, ponds,
woodlands and other environmentally sensitive areas shall be
incorporated into the common open space.
F. Required buffer areas shall be included in the common open space
and shall be maintained in perpetuity by the organization created
to own and maintain the common open space. Restrictive
covenants and/or provisions in the organization's bylaws shall
specify this responsibility.
G. At least 40% of the minimum required common open space (that is
20% of the gross site area) shall be suitable for active recreation
and shall have slopes of 15% or less. This common open space shall
be located on a portion of the site that is easily accessible by
pedestrians. The actual amount of this common open space that is
developed for active recreation shall be subject to approval by the
Township in accordance with the provisions of § 27-1202,
Subsection 4. If the developer proposes to reserve common open
space in excess of the minimum required 20% of the gross site
area, this Subsection G shall not apply to the common open space
in excess of the minimum requirement.
2. Protection of Common Open Space. Common open space in a planned
residential development shall be protected by adequate covenants
running with the land or by conveyances or dedications. Said covenants
shall restrict the further subdivision of the common open space. A
planned residential development shall be approved subject to the
submission of a legal instrument or instruments setting forth a plan for
the permanent preservation, care and maintenance of such common
open space, recreational areas and other facilities owned in common by
an organization established for such purposes. No such instrument
shall be acceptable until approved by the Board of Supervisors as to
legal form and effect. In cases where the Township will not be accepting
dedications of streets, recreation areas or common open spaces, the
developer shall create an organization or trust for ownership and
maintenance of the common open space and common facilities.
3. Common Open Space Maintenance. In the event that the organization
established to own and maintain the common open space, or any
successor thereto, shall, at any time after establishment of the final
development plan, fail to maintain the common open space, including
all streets, driveways and recreational facilities, in reasonable order
and condition in accordance with the development plan granted final
approval, the Township may take remedial action to cause the common
open space and common facilities to be properly maintained, as
§ 27-1204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1204
1:725
§ 27-1205. Administration and Procedures. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
provided for in Section 705(f) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
1. The planned residential development provisions of this chapter shall be
administered by the Board of Supervisors. The Planning Commission
shall review all applications on the basis of the standards specified in
this Part and make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors. The
Board of Supervisors shall conduct the public hearings required by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and shall have the final
authority to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove a planned
residential development.
A. Pre-application conference.
(1) Prior to filing an application for tentative approval, the
applicant or his representative may meet with Township staff
to obtain application forms and to discuss application
procedures and applicable ordinance requirements.
(2) In addition, the developer may request a pre-application
conference with the Planning Commission to discuss the
conceptual design for the development of the property and the
feasibility and timing of the application. The applicant shall
contact the Township Zoning Officer or his or her designated
representative at least five calendar days prior to the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission to request a preapplication
conference with the Planning Commission.
(3) The pre-application conference with the Planning Commission
is voluntary, and no formal application or fee is required. This
opportunity is afforded to the developer to obtain information
and guidance before entering into binding commitments or
incurring substantial expenses for plan preparation.
(4) While no formal application is required for a pre-application
conference, the applicant should provide one copy of readily
available information with the request for a pre-application
conference, which shows the location of the property and any
special features such as streams, floodplains or other
conditions that may affect the development of the property.
Readily available resources that may be used include the deed
for the property, a property survey, the tax parcel maps
prepared by the Washington County Assessor's office, U.S.G.S.
Quadrangle Map showing natural features and topography, the
National Flood Insurance Administration (NFIA) Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, Natural Resources Conservation Service
Maps of Soil Types and the U.S. Bureau of Mines Coal Mine
Maps.
§ 27-1204 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1205
1:726
(5) A pre-application conference shall not constitute formal filing
of any application for approval of a planned residential
development, shall not bind the Planning Commission to
approve any concept presented in the pre-application
conference and shall not protect the application from any
subsequent changes in ordinance provisions adopted between
the pre-application conference and the official date of filing of
an application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development that may affect the proposed development under
the terms of this chapter.
B. Application for Tentative Approval. At least 20 calendar days prior
to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission, two copies of
an application for tentative approval shall be submitted. The
application shall be in sufficient detail for the Planning Commission
to determine compliance with the standards of this Part and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following information. Following initial
review and receipt of comments provided by the Township in
accordance with § 27-1205C, the applicant shall submit seven
copies of the application for review at the next regular monthly
meeting of the Planning Commission.
(1) A legal description of the total tract proposed for development,
including a statement of present and proposed ownership.
(2) A written statement of planning objectives to be achieved by
the planned residential development through the particular
approach proposed by the developer. The statement shall
include a description of the character of the proposed
development and its relationship to the immediate area in
which it is to be located.
(3) A written statement setting forth the reasons why the proposed
planned residential development would be in the public
interest and would be consistent with the Township's
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) A written statement of the requested modifications to the
Township Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance otherwise applicable to the property,
if any.
(5) Evidence, in the form of a transmittal letter, that the
application has been submitted to the Washington County
Planning Commission for review, subject to payment of the
required fee.
(6) A location map that clearly shows the location and area of the
site proposed for development with relation to all lands,
buildings and structures within 200 feet of its boundaries, the
location and distance to existing streets and highways and the
names of landowners of adjacent properties.
§ 27-1205 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1205
1:727
(7) A traffic impact study, as defined in § 27-201 of this chapter.
(8) A development plan, prepared at a scale no smaller than one
inch equals 50 feet, showing the following information:
(a) Existing contours at intervals of five feet; watercourses;
floodplains; wetlands; woodlands; soils; steep slopes; and
other natural features.
(b) Proposed lot lines and subdivision plat, if any.
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures and other improvements, including maximum
heights, types of dwelling units and dwelling unit density.
Preliminary elevations and architectural renderings shall
be provided.
(d) The location and size, in acres or square feet, of all areas
to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open
space.
(e) A tabulation of zoning requirements, including density
calculation, setbacks, distance between buildings,
percentage of open space and other applicable
requirements.
(f) The existing and proposed vehicular circulation system of
local and collector streets, including off-street parking
areas required by § 27-1502, service areas, loading areas
and major points of access from the planned residential
development to public rights-of-way.
(g) The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system,
showing, at a minimum, sidewalks on one side of each
street, including its interrelationship with the vehicular
circulation system and proposed treatment for any points
of conflict between the two systems.
(h) A street lighting plan, as required by the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.55
(i) The existing and proposed utility systems, including
sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water, electric, gas and
telephone lines.
(j) Subsurface conditions, including slope stability.
(k) A minimum of three cross-sections showing existing and
proposed contours and their relationship to proposed
buildings, structures, highways, streets, parking areas,
walkways and existing woodlands.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1205 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1205
1:728
(l) A general landscaping plan indicating the treatment and
materials proposed to be used in buffer areas and common
areas on the site.
(m) Evidence of compliance with the environmental
performance standards of § 27-1401 of this chapter.
(n) Information required by the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, including application filing
and application review fees.
(9) In the case of development plans that call for development over
a period of years, a schedule for phasing the development shall
be provided. This phasing schedule shall be reviewed annually
with the Planning Commission on the anniversary of tentative
approval or as each phase is completed, whichever occurs first.
C. Review of application.
(1) The Zoning Officer or his or her designated representative
shall review the application to determine whether it is
complete and properly filed in accordance with all
requirements of this chapter. If the Zoning Officer determines
that the application is not complete and properly filed, written
notice shall be provided to the applicant specifying the defects
in the application and returning the application for
resubmission. If a revised application is resubmitted within 60
days of the date of the written notice from the Zoning Officer,
another application filing fee shall not be required. Any
application submitted after 60 days shall be considered a new
application and shall be accompanied by the required
application filing fee.
(2) If the Zoning Officer determines that the application is
complete and properly filed, the date that the application is
first reviewed by the Planning Commission at its next regular
meeting shall constitute the official date of filing. Within five
days of receipt of a complete and properly filed application, the
Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Township
Engineer for review and comment. The Township Engineer's
comments shall be provided to the applicant. If revisions are
required, the applicant shall submit seven copies of the revised
application for consideration at the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission.
(3) If, during review by the Planning Commission, the applicant
revises the application to address comments from the Planning
Commission or to demonstrate compliance with this chapter, a
new application shall not be required. If, during review by the
Planning Commission, the applicant initiates substantive
revisions to the application which are not the result of Planning
Commission comments and which are not mandated to
§ 27-1205 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1205
1:729
demonstrate compliance with this chapter, the applicant shall
withdraw the application and submit a new application that
shall be subject to the payment of the required application
filing fee.
(4) The Planning Commission shall forward a written
recommendation on the application for tentative approval to
the Board of Supervisors in time for the Board of Supervisors
public hearing (See § 27-1205D).
D. Public Hearing.
(1) Within 60 days following the official date of filing of an
application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development which contains all of the required documentation,
a public hearing pursuant to public notice shall be held by the
Board of Supervisors. At least 14 days prior to the hearing, the
Zoning Officer shall mail a copy of the notice, by first-class
mail, to each property owner within 300 feet of the entire
perimeter of the property, including those located across a
street right-of-way. The cost of mailing the notices shall be paid
by the applicant.
(2) The public hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, and all references to the "Zoning Hearing
Board" in Article IX shall apply to the Board of Supervisors.
The public hearing or hearings shall be concluded within 60
days of the first hearing.
(3) The Township may offer mediation as an aid in completing
these proceedings, provided that, in exercising such an option,
the Township and the mediating parties shall meet the
stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in § 27-1809.
E. Tentative approval.
(1) Within 60 days following the conclusion of the public hearings,
or within 180 days after the Official date of filing, whichever
occurs first, the Board of Supervisors shall, by Official written
communication, either:
(a) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted;
(b) Grant tentative approval of the development plan, subject
to specified conditions not included in the development
plan as submitted; or
(c) Deny tentative approval.
(2) Failure to act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant
of tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In
§ 27-1205 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1205
1:730
§ 27-1206. Criteria for Tentative Approval. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
the event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject
to conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after
receiving a copy of the Official written communication of the
Board of Supervisors, notify the Board of Supervisors of his
refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case, the Board of
Supervisors shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval
of the development plan. In the event that the land-owner
does not, within said period, notify the Board of Supervisors of
his refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of
the development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as
granted.
1. The Board of Supervisors shall grant tentative approval if, and only if,
all applicable requirements of this Part are met and all of the following
criteria are met.
A. The proposed application for tentative approval complies with all
standards, restrictions, criteria, requirements, regulations and
procedures of this Part; preserves the community development
objectives of this chapter; and is found by the Board of Supervisors
to be compatible with the public interest and consistent with the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Where the proposed application for tentative approval provides
standards that vary from this chapter and the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance56 otherwise applicable to the
subject property, such departure shall promote protection of the
environment and public health, safety and welfare and shall be in
the public interest.
C. The proposals for the maintenance and conservation of any
proposed common open space are reliable and meet the standards
of this chapter, and the amount and extent of improvements within
the common open space are appropriate with respect to the
purpose, use and type of the residential development proposed.
D. The physical design of the proposed development plan adequately
provides for public services, traffic facilities and parking, light, air,
recreation and visual enjoyment.
E. The proposed development plan is beneficially related to the
immediate area in which it is proposed to be located.
F. The proposed development plan will accord adequate protection of
natural watercourses, wetlands, topsoil, woodlands, steep slopes
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1205 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1206
1:731
§ 27-1207. Application for Final Approval. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
and other natural features and will prevent erosion, landslides,
siltation and flooding.
G. In the case of a development plan that proposes development over
a period of years, the terms and conditions thereof are sufficient to
protect the interests of the public and of the residents of the
planned residential development in the integrity of the final
development plan.
1. After the development plan is granted tentative approval by the Board
of Supervisors, the developer shall submit seven copies of the
application for final approval at least 20 calendar days prior to the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission. The final application shall
consist of detailed plans for any phase or section of the development
plan. No building permit shall be issued until final approval has been
granted by the Board of Supervisors for the phase or section in which
the proposed development is located. Final approval for any phase or
section shall expire if construction is not initiated for the phase or
section within one year of the date of final approval of the phase or
section by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Review of Application.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall review the application to determine
whether it is complete and properly filed in accordance with all
requirements of this chapter. If the Zoning Officer determines
that the application is not complete and properly filed, written
notice shall be provided to the applicant specifying the defects
in the application and returning the application for
resubmission.
(2) If the Zoning Officer determines that the application is
complete and properly filed, the date that the application is
received by the Zoning Officer shall constitute the official date
of filing. Within five days of receipt of a complete and properly
filed application, the Zoning Officer or his or her designated
representative shall refer the application to the Township
Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
(3) The applicant shall submit the application to the Washington
County Planning Commission for review and comment, subject
to payment of the required fee.
(4) Within 35 days of receipt of a complete and properly filed
application for final approval, the Planning Commission shall
forward a written recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors.
(5) A public hearing on an application for final approval shall not
be required, provided that the development plan is in
§ 27-1206 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1207
1:732
compliance with the development plan given tentative
approval and with any specified conditions attached thereto.
B. Action by Board of Supervisors. In the event that an application for
final approval has been filed, together with all drawings,
specifications and other documentation in support thereof, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the official
written communication granting tentative approval, the Board of
Supervisors shall, within 45 days of the official date of filing, grant
final approval to the development plan.
C. Variations from the Plan Granted Tentative Approval.
(1) In the event that the development plan submitted contains
variations from the development plan granted tentative
approval, the Board of Supervisors may refuse to grant final
approval and may, within 45 days of the official date of filing of
the application for final approval, advise the applicant, in
writing, of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the reasons
why one or more of the variations are not in the public interest.
In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile the application for final approval without the
variations objected; or
(b) File a written request with the Board of Supervisors that it
hold a public hearing on the application for final approval.
(2) If the landowner wishes to take either alternate action, he may
do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for
final approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the
time when the landowner was advised that the development
plan way not in substantial compliance.
(3) If the landowner fails to take either of these alternate actions
within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan.
D. Public Hearing, if Applicable.
(1) Any public hearing held on an application for final approval
shall be held pursuant to public notice within 30 days after the
request for the hearing is made by the landowner, and the
hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this
Part for public hearings on an application for tentative
approval. At least 14 days prior to the hearing, the Zoning
Officer shall mail a copy of the notice, by first class mail, to
each property owner within 300 feet of the entire perimeter of
the property, including those located across a street right-ofway.
The cost of mailing the notices shall be paid by the
applicant.
§ 27-1207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1207
1:733
(2) Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the
Board of Supervisors shall, by official written communication,
either grant or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final
approval of the development plan shall, in cases where a public
hearing is required, be in the form and contain the findings
required for an application for tentative approval.
E. Changes in the Approved Plan. Changes in the location and siting of
buildings and structures deemed minor by the Board of Supervisors
may be authorized without additional public hearings, if required
by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time of
tentative approval. However, gross density and/or any increase in
the total number of townhouses or garden apartments established
at the time of tentative approval shall not be changed without a
public hearing.
F. Application for Final Approval. The application for final approval
shall comply with all applicable ordinance provisions and the
development plan shall include, as a minimum, the following
information:
(1) All data required by the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance57 for a final plan, including application
filing, application review, inspection fees and performance
bond.
(2) Accurately dimensioned locations for all proposed buildings,
structures, parking areas and common open space.
(3) The number of families to be housed in each residential
building or structure and the intended use of each
nonresidential building or structure.
(4) Building elevation drawings for all principal structures, other
than single-family dwellings.
(5) A lighting plan, showing the location, height and type of any
exterior lighting fixtures proposed, and a photometric plan,
showing the distribution of lighting on the site and at the site
boundaries.
(6) A landscaping plan, as defined by this chapter, including the
location and types of plant materials, sidewalks, trails and
recreation facilities authorized by this chapter.
(7) Supplementary data, including any covenants, grants of
easements or other restrictions to be imposed on the use of the
land, building and structures and the organization proposed to
own, maintain and operate the common open space facilities.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1207 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1207
1:734
(8) An engineering report that shall include the following data,
wherever applicable:
(a) Profiles, cross-sections and specifications for proposed
public and private streets.
(b) Profiles and other explanatory data concerning installation
of water distribution systems, storm sewers and sanitary
sewers.
(c) Feasibility of the sanitary sewerage system in terms of
capacity to serve the proposed development.
(9) A grading plan prepared in compliance with the requirements
of the Township Grading Ordinance.58
(10) Evidence that the applicant has submitted plans to the
Washington County Conservation District for review and
approval.
(11) An erosion and sedimentation control plan that shall
specifically indicate all erosion and sedimentation control
measures to be utilized on the site. The erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be designed to prevent
accelerated erosion and sedimentation. The plan shall include
but not be limited to the following:
(a) The topographic features of the site.
(b) The types, depth, slope and extent of the soils by area.
(c) The proposed alterations to the site.
(d) The amount of runoff from the site area and the upstream
watershed.
(e) The staging of earthmoving activities.
(f) Temporary control measures and facilities during
earthmoving.
(g) Permanent control measures and facilities for long-term
protection.
(h) A maintenance program for the control facilities, including
disposal of materials removed from the control facilities or
site area.
(12) A stormwater management plan prepared in compliance with
the requirements of the Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance.59
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 9, Grading and Excavating.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 26, Water.
§ 27-1207 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1207
1:735
(13) Performance bond and development agreement as required by
the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.60
G. Recording. A final development plan, or any part thereof, that has
been granted final approval shall be so certified without delay by
the Board of Supervisors and shall be filed of record in the office of
the Washington County Recorder of Deeds before any development
shall take place in accordance therewith. Approval for recording
shall be subject to posting of the financial security required by the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for public
and private improvements in the development plan.
H. Revocation of Final Approval. In the event that a development plan,
or section thereof, is given final approval and thereafter the
landowner shall abandon such plan, or section thereof, that has
been finally approved, and shall so notify the Board of Supervisors,
in writing, or in the event that the landowner shall fail to
commence and carry out the planned residential development in
accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code after final approval has
been granted, no further development shall take place on the
property included in the development plan until a new application
for tentative approval of a planned residential development is
submitted for said property or the property is developed in
accordance with the then-applicable zoning district regulations.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1207 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1207
1:736
Part 13
EXPRESS STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR GRANTING
CONDITIONAL USES AND USES BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
§ 27-1300. Applicability. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The following procedures shall apply to all applicants for approval of a
conditional use or use by special exception in all zoning districts.
§ 27-1301. Procedure for Approval. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. Approval of Conditional Uses. The Board of Supervisors shall hear and
decide requests for conditional uses; however, the Board of Supervisors
shall not approve a conditional use application unless and until:
A. A written application for conditional use approval is submitted to
the Zoning Officer or his or her designated representative no less
than 20 calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission. The applications shall indicate the section of this
chapter under which conditional use approval is sought and shall
state the grounds upon which it is requested. The application shall
include the following:
(1) A preliminary land development plan, if required by the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, or, if
a land development plan is not required, a current property
survey indicating all existing and proposed structures and all
proposed construction, additions or alterations on the site in
sufficient detail to determine the feasibility of the proposed
development and compliance with all applicable requirements
of this chapter.
(2) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable
express standards and criteria of this Part for the proposed
use.
(3) A traffic impact study, as defined herein, for any use that,
according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, will generate 75 or
more additional trips during the adjacent street's peak hours.
(4) The application fee required by § 27-1908 of this chapter.
B. A written recommendation is received from the Township Planning
Commission or 45 days have passed from the date of the Planning
Commission meeting at which the application is first considered as
complete and properly filed for approval.
C. A public hearing is conducted by the Board of Supervisors pursuant
to public notice and said hearing is scheduled no more than 60 days
following the date of submission of a complete and properly filed
§ 27-1300 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1301
1:737
application, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time.
D. Each subsequent hearing before the Board of Supervisors shall be
held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to
by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall
complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of
the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board of
Supervisors shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing.
Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation
of their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first
hearing held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief.
And the applicant may, upon request, be granted additional
hearings to complete his case-in-chief, provided that the persons
opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon
the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and
the Township, be granted additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application, provided that the applicant is granted
an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
E. The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision within 45
days after the last public hearing. Where the application is
contested or denied, the decision shall be accompanied by findings
of fact and conclusions based thereon. Conclusions based on any
provision of this chapter or any other applicable rule or regulation
shall contain a reference to the provision relied upon and the
reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the
facts found.
F. Where the Board of Supervisors fails to render a decision within
the required 45 days or fails to commence, conduct or complete the
required hearing as specified in Subsection 1C and E, above, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on the
record, to an extension of time. The Board of Supervisors shall give
public notice, as defined herein, of said deemed approval within 10
days from the last day it could have met to render a decision. If the
Board of Supervisors shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant
may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of
any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court
of competent jurisdiction.
G. In considering an application for conditional use approval, the
Board of Supervisors may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with the spirit and intent of this Part. A
violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of
the terms and conditions under which conditional use approval is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the enforcement provisions of § 27-1901 of this chapter.
§ 27-1301 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1301
1:738
2. Expiration of Conditional Use Approval. Conditional use approval shall
expire automatically, without written notice to the applicant, if no
application for a grading permit, a building permit or an occupancy
permit to undertake the construction or authorize the occupancy
described in the application for conditional use approval is submitted
within 12 months of said approval, unless the Board of Supervisors, in
its sole discretion, extends conditional use approval upon written
request of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum
extension permitted shall be one twelve-month extension.
3. Approval of Uses by Special Exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for uses by special exception. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall not approve an application for a use by special
exception unless and until:
A. A written application for approval of a use by special exception is
submitted to the Zoning Officer or his or her designated
representative at least 20 days prior to the Zoning Hearing Board
meeting at which the appeal is to be heard. The application shall
indicate the section of this chapter under which approval of the use
by special exception is sought and shall state the grounds upon
which it is requested. The application shall include the following:
(1) A current property survey indicating all existing and proposed
structures and all proposed construction, additions or
alterations on the site in sufficient detail to determine the
feasibility of the proposed development and compliance with
all applicable requirements of this chapter.
(2) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable
express standards and criteria of this Part for the proposed
use.
(3) A traffic impact study, as defined herein, for any use that,
according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, will generate 75 or
more additional trips during the adjacent street's peak hours.
(4) The application fee required by § 27-1908 of this chapter.
B. A public hearing pursuant to public notice is conducted by the
Zoning Hearing Board within 60 days of submission of a complete
and properly filed application, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time. Said hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures specified by § 27-1907 of this
chapter.
C. In considering an application for approval of a use by special
exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with the spirit and intent
of this Part. A violation of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms and conditions under which approval of a
§ 27-1301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1301
1:739
use by special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of
§ 27-1901 of this chapter.
D. If land development approval is required for the use by special
exception, the application for approval of a land development
required by the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall be submitted to the Township Planning
Commission following approval of the use by special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
4. Expiration of approval of a use by special exception. Approval of a use
by special exception shall expire automatically, without written notice
to the applicant, if no application for a land development plan, a
grading permit, a building permit or an occupancy permit to undertake
the construction or authorize the occupancy described in the
application for approval of the use by special exception is submitted
within 12 months of said approval, unless the Zoning Hearing Board, in
its sole discretion, extends approval of the use by special exception
upon written request of the applicant received prior to its expiration.
The maximum extension permitted shall be one twelve-month
extension.
5. Conditional use application for oil and gas development, drilling and
related operations shall require an application as set forth herein in
order to begin the permitting process. All aspects of conditional use
approval contained in § 27-1301 of the Township Code shall apply. No
hearing will be scheduled until all of the information set forth
hereinafter has been received by the Township. In addition to the
applicable standards for the zoning district of the proposed use, the
express standards and criteria for granting conditional uses contained
in the Township Code, the application must contain the following
information:
A. Information.
(1) The name and address of the applicant, including the name and
telephone number of a local representative;
(2) The mineral and/or oil and gas lease royalty and surface
owner(s);
(3) A copy of the oil and gas or mineral lease (recorded
memorandum) and any drilling permits issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or if a state permit has not yet
been issued, the application, if submitted, shall be attached;
(4) The exact description of the location of the proposed facility/
operation;
(5) Setbacks. Certification that the applicable setbacks will be
met; and
§ 27-1301 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1301
1:740
(6) The name and address of all property owners within 300 feet of
the proposed site.
B. Work Hours. Provide the proposed timeline and hours of
development/site work and the use of trucking and heavy
equipment during each phase of the process, from initial site
preparation to drilling operations and post drilling operations.
C. Road Bonding and Maintenance. The applicant will review and
execute a joint road maintenance agreement with the Township and
provide the appropriate bonding and list of subcontracts.
D. Blast Study. Operator's application shall contain a blast study
showing compliance with the standards contained in the American
Petroleum Institute's (API) Recommended Practice 752 and 753.
E. PPC Plan. The operator shall provide to the Township's first
responders, including Fire Department, Police Department,
ambulance service(s), and to the Zoning Officer/Code Enforcement
Officer a copy of its preparedness, prevention and contingency
("PPC") plan. Before drilling, the applicant shall confirm in writing
that the Township's first responders have secured adequate
training to deal with any potential dangerous conditions that may
result due to construction activities on each site. First responders
shall have a minimum of five hours of training per year to meet this
standard. Upon request from the Township, the operator will, prior
to drilling of its first oil and gas well in Township, make available,
with at least 30 days' notice, at its sole cost and expense, one
appropriate group training program of up to five hours for first
responders. Such training shall be made available at least annually
during the period when the operator anticipates oil and gas related
activities in the Township.
F. The applicant shall provide a schedule indicating the following
dates, which the Township acknowledges is subject to change:
(1) Anticipated site preparation beginnings and endings.
(2) Anticipated drilling or mining activity beginnings and endings.
(3) Anticipated completion (perforating) work to begin and end.
(4) Anticipated simulation (fracturing) work to begin and end.
(5) Anticipated production work to begin and end.
(6) Anticipated plugging date.
(7) Anticipated site restoration.
G. Permits. All applicable, state, local and federal permits must be
attached to the application or provided upon issue.
§ 27-1301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1301
1:741
§ 27-1302. General Standards. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
H. Insurance. Operator/applicant and/or its contractors shall as part
of the conditional use furnish to the Township a certificate of
liability insurance naming the Township as an additional insured
with respect to operations conducted within the Township and
showing liability insurance covering commercial, personal injury,
and general liability in the amounts not less than $25,000,000 per
person, $25,000,000 per occurrence, and $25,000,000 property
damage. The operator/applicant shall fully defend, protect,
indemnify, and hold harmless the Township, its departments,
agents, officers, employees, or volunteers from and against such
and every claim, except for those claims relating to any negligent,
willful or intentional acts of the Township, its department, agents,
officers, employees, or volunteers. The insurance coverage may
consist of a combination of self-insurance, excess coverage and
umbrella coverage. The Township reserves the right to approve
said coverage.
I. On-Site Trailers. Information on the number of trailers anticipated
to be located at the site, including essential work trailers and
workers' bunk trailers.
J. Review Hearings. The operator of an oil and gas development shall
meet with the Township annually to discuss new technology,
operation procedures, and any community concerns. If the
Township deems necessary, after working with the operator, a
public meeting may be scheduled to respond to questions from
Township residents.
K. Approval. The procedure for conditional use approval is outlined in
Chapter 27, § 27-1301 of the Township Code.
1. In addition to the specific standards and criteria listed for each use in
§ 27-1303 below, all applications for conditional uses and uses by
special exception listed in each zoning district shall demonstrate
compliance with all of the following general standards and criteria:
A. The use shall not endanger the public health, safety or welfare nor
deteriorate the environment, as a result of being located on the
property where it is proposed.
B. The use shall comply with the performance standards of § 27-1401
of this chapter.
C. The use shall comply with all applicable requirements of Part 14
providing supplementary regulations, Part 15 governing parking
and loading, Part 16 governing signs, and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
§ 27-1301 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1302
1:742
§ 27-1303. Standards for Specific Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
In addition to the general standards and criteria for all conditional uses and
uses by special exception listed in § 27-1302 above, an application for any
of the following uses that are listed in any zoning district as a conditional
use or use by special exception shall comply with the applicable standards
and criteria specified below for that use.
D. Ingress, egress and traffic circulation on the property shall be
designed to ensure safety and access by emergency vehicles and to
minimize congestion and the impact on local streets.
E. Outdoor lighting, if proposed, shall be designed with cutoff
luminaires that direct and cut off the light at a cutoff angle of 60° or
less. (See illustration in Appendix B.61) Spillover illumination shall
not exceed 0.2 footcandle at the property line.
F. For all uses that are subject to the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), the applicant shall certify that all
applicable ADA requirements have been met in the design.
1. Accessory dwelling or residence in combination with business, subject
to:
A. A residence in combination with business shall be located on the
upper floors above the business or, if located on the first floor, shall
be in a separate unit from the business.
B. Dwelling Units in Basements shall not be Permitted. Dwelling units
may be located in an accessory garage.
C. Each dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance that does not
require passing through any area devoted to office or retail use or
any other dwelling unit.
D. Accessory dwellings may be authorized only in the A-1 and A-2
Districts when the applicant can demonstrate a need to house a
relative needing supervision and care.
E. The accessory dwelling may be located in a detached garage or in
the principal dwelling.
F. The accessory dwelling shall not be conveyed unless a subdivision
is recorded that complies with all applicable requirements of this
chapter and the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance creating a separate lot for the dwelling.
G. When an accessory dwelling is no longer needed to house a
relative, the dwelling unit may be used as a rental property.
61.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-1302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:743
H. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling
unit. Shared parking for residential and commercial uses shall not
be permitted.
2. Active recreation, low-impact and high-impact, subject to:
A. The minimum site required for low-impact active recreation where
only one activity is proposed shall be one acre.
B. The minimum site required for low-impact active recreation where
more than one activity is proposed shall be five acres.
C. The minimum site required for high-impact active recreation with
fewer than 200 participants and/or spectators shall be 10 acres.
D. The minimum site required for high-impact active recreation with
200 or more participants and/or spectators shall be 50 acres.
E. The site proposed for high-impact active recreation shall have
frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street or the nearest site boundary shall be located no more than
1,000 feet, measured along public street rights-of-way, from an
intersection with an arterial or collector street.
F. The minimum setback for principal and accessory structures
proposed for low-impact active recreation shall comply with the
setback requirements of the district in which they are located.
G. The minimum setback for all principal and accessory structures for
high-impact active recreation shall be 300 feet from any property
line adjoining an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3 District and shall be 100
feet from any property line adjoining any other zoning district.
H. Along all property lines adjoining property in an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2
or R-3 District, Buffer Area C, as defined in § 27-1402, Subsection
1, shall be provided for an adequate distance along the property
line to screen all parking areas, principal structures and intensively
used facilities such as playing fields or courts, bleachers, pavilions,
concession stands and similar facilities associated with passive
recreation and low-impact active recreation.
I. Along all property lines adjoining property in an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2
or R-3 District, Buffer Area A, as defined in § 27-1402, Subsection
1, shall be provided for an adequate distance along the property
line to screen all parking areas, principal structures and intensively
used areas associated with high-impact active recreation.
J. The uses shall comply with the performance standards of § 27-1401
of this chapter.
K. All lighting shall be shielded away from adjoining streets and
properties.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:744
L. Any outdoor facilities shall cease operations at 11:00 p.m.
M. If outdoor loudspeakers are proposed, the applicant shall present a
plan for noise attenuation.
N. For high-impact active recreation uses, a plan for security and
traffic control during events shall be presented.
O. Adequate security shall be provided when the site is not in use.
3. Adult businesses, subject to:
A. Adult businesses, as defined by this chapter, shall not be permitted
in any zoning district other than the I-1 Industrial District.
B. All adult businesses shall comply with the requirements of
Township Ordinance No. 259, as now or hereafter amended.62
C. An adult business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any of
the following uses: a place of worship; public or private preelementary,
elementary or secondary school; public library; daycare
center or nursery school; public park; or residential dwelling.
The distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest
portion of the building or structure containing the adult business to
the nearest property line of the premises of any of the above-listed
uses.
D. Any adult business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the
premises, in a viewing room (a separate compartment or cubicle) of
less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film or videocassette or
other video or image production or reproduction which depicts
nudity or sexual conduct shall comply with the following:
(1) At least one employee shall be on duty and shall be situated in
each manager's station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises.
(2) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's
station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction or viewing
equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is unobstructed view of
each area of the premises to which any person is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required by this subsection shall be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 13, Part 8.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:745
(3) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and any agents
and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
viewing area remains unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, walls racks or other materials at all times and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises that has been designated in the application submitted
to the Township as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.
(4) No viewing room shall be occupied by more than one person at
a time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing
room shall be permitted.
(5) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place in which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
one footcandle, as measured at the floor level. It shall be the
duty of the owners and operators and any agents and
employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
(6) If live performances are to be given, the premises in which
such live performances are to be offered shall contain a stage
separated from the viewing area, and the viewing area shall
not be accessible to the performers.
E. If the adult business involves live performances, the performers
shall not have easy access to the viewers present.
F. The owner and operator of any adult nightclub shall provide
security officers, licensed under the laws of the commonwealth, if
the maximum permitted occupancy exceeds 50 persons.
G. No stock-in-trade which depicts nudity or sexual conduct shall be
permitted to be viewed from the sidewalk, street or highway.
H. No signs or other displays of products, entertainment or services
shall be permitted in any window or other area that is visible from
the street or sidewalk.
I. Windows shall not be covered or made opaque in any way.
J. Notice shall be given at the entrance stating the hours of operation
and restricting admittance to adults only. The term "adult" shall
have the meaning provided by applicable statutory law.
K. Owners and operators of adult businesses shall obtain a license to
operate from the Township. In addition, such owners or operators
shall supply to the Township such information regarding ownership
and financing of the proposed business as is required by the
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:746
Township's licensing application. Applications for licensing shall be
filed with the Township Manager.
L. The adult business shall be initially licensed upon compliance with
all requirements of this section and provisions of the required
licensing application. For each year thereafter that the adult
business intends to continue, the owner or operator shall seek a
renewal of the license. The application for renewal shall be
submitted to the Township Manager by November 1 of the year
preceding the year for which renewal is sought. The lack of license
or failure to renew such license in a timely manner shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for denial or
revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the adult business.
4. Age-restricted planned community, subject to:
A. General.
(1) Connectivity.
(a) All age-restricted communities shall be located such that
the development has direct access to an arterial or
collector road in the Township, as defined.
(b) All units within an age-restricted community shall have
frontage on a public roadway.
(c) All roads in an age-restricted community shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction standards
for Township roads.
(d) Sidewalks shall be required on one side of all streets.
(e) The applicant shall provide projected traffic volumes
associated with the proposed community and shall ensure
that the existing and proposed street networks are capable
of accommodating these traffic volumes.
(f) Age-restricted communities with 50 or more dwelling units
are required to have more than one access point to a
public road provided that the applicant has demonstrated
that emergency vehicles have a reasonable route to turn
vehicles for exit(s) from the plan, by either an adequately
designed cul-de-sac or an internal traffic circulation
pattern.
(g) Length of any one cul-de-sac in an age-restricted
community shall not exceed 1,200 feet.
(h) Conditional use approval may require that the applicant
perform improvements to the existing adjacent Township
roads for safety-related issues. This shall be evaluated on a
case-by-case basis per application submitted.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:747
(2) Minimum lot size shall be the footprint of the dwelling.
(3) Maximum height shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is greater.
(4) All single-family detached dwelling units and two-family
dwelling units in an age-restricted community shall comply
with the most recent version of both the IBC (International
Building Code) and NFDA code for fire suppression/sprinkler
systems.
(5) All dwelling units shall be served by both public sewer and
public water.
(6) Front Setback. The front lot line shall be a minimum of 12 feet
from right-of-way.
(7) Other Lot Setbacks. Building to building distance shall be a
minimum of 20 feet.
(8) Within the required open space, the developer shall construct
private recreation facilities for all residents of the development
and their guests and invitees. At a minimum, this recreation
area shall include an indoor community center, a swimming
pool or spa, and an accessory outdoor recreation area. The
pool (not including surrounding deck and/or supporting
structures) shall be sized so that there is a minimum of five
square feet of pool area per dwelling unit. The community
center shall include a minimum of 30 net square feet (net floor
area) of interior building space per dwelling unit or 3,000 net
square feet (net floor area), whichever is greater. The
community center shall include, at minimum, the following:
multipurpose room, kitchen, restrooms, and areas for
activities.
(9) Buffer Area A shall be designed/placed along the perimeter of
the site. A minimum building setback on the perimeter of the
age-restricted planned community shall be 40 feet from the
boundary.
(10) Permitted yard projections shall be in accordance with
§ 27-1404 of this chapter with the exception that decks shall
not be permitted to project into any yard setbacks.
(11) Accessory structures shall not be permitted unless associated
with open space recreation.
(12) An age-restricted community may be subject to regulations of
the Planned Communities Act.63In the event an age-restricted
community is subject to the Act, then individual lots in the plan
63.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:748
may be created by designation in the declaration and
amendments thereto. This shall be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis per application submitted.
B. R-2 Suburban Residential District.
(1) Permitted Uses. Single-family detached dwellings or a
combination of attached single-family dwelling units and
single-family detached dwelling units provided that at least
50% of all units are single-family detached dwelling units, and
further provided that no more than two units may be attached
to one another.
(2) The maximum density of an age restricted community shall be
four dwelling units per net acre.
(3) The net acreage of an age restricted community shall be
calculated based upon the following: Gross acreage minus 20%
of gross acreage reserved for open space minus 15% for road/
infrastructure rights-of-way and or easements.
(4) Minimum site size shall be 20 acres.
C. R-3 High-Density Residential District.
(1) Permitted Uses. Single-family detached dwellings or a
combination of attached single-family dwelling units and
single-family detached dwelling units provided that at least
40% of all units are single-family detached dwelling units, and
further provided that no more than two units may be attached
to one another.
(2) The maximum density of an age restricted community shall be
four dwelling units per net acre.
(3) The net acreage of an age restricted community shall be
calculated based upon the following: Gross acreage minus 20%
of gross acreage reserved for open space minus 15% for roads/
infrastructure.
(4) Minimum site size shall be 20 acres.
5. Airports or airstrips, subject to:
A. The conditional use application shall show the following
information:
(1) The approximate location, use and height of all structures
within 2,600 lineal feet of the ends of landing strips and within
1,200 lineal feet of the side of landing strips.
(2) The exact location of landing strips and the use and height of
structures on the immediate property.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:749
(3) The anticipated types of aircraft to be accommodated and the
volume of activity contemplated.
(4) Plans for lighting and fuel handling shall be submitted.
(5) Copies of required approvals from all state and federal
agencies responsible for regulation of aircraft and aircraft
facility operations shall be supplied to the Township.
B. Lighting shall be shielded away from adjacent properties and
streets.
C. The applicant shall submit a report from a reputable acoustic or
aviation consultant showing the computer prediction model
developed by the FAA referred to in 14 CFR Part 150, § A150.103.
D. The applicant shall submit proof of ownership of liability insurance
in an amount not less than $5,000,000 for any one accident or
occurrence.
E. No takeoffs or landings shall occur between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
6. Bed-and-breakfast, subject to:
A. The operator shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling in which
the bed-and-breakfast is located.
B. The lot shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined herein.
C. The minimum lot area required shall be 21,780 square feet.
D. No meals, other than breakfast, shall be served on the premises.
Food may be prepared on the premises for consumption off the
premises by overnight guests. Food shall not be served to any
customers who are not overnight guests.
E. The maximum length of stay for any guest shall be 14 days in any
calendar year.
F. One identification sign shall be permitted, and such sign may either
be attached to the wall of the building or may be freestanding in the
front yard, provided that the surface area of the sign shall not
exceed six square feet, the height of the freestanding sign shall not
exceed four feet and the freestanding sign shall be located at least
five feet from any property line.
G. The identification sign shall contain no information other than one
or more of the following items:
(1) The street address.
(2) The name of the establishment.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:750
(3) The name of the proprietor.
(4) A small logo or other decorative symbol.
H. In addition to the parking required for the dwelling, one parking
space shall be provided for each sleeping room offered to overnight
guests.
I. Off-street parking shall not be located in any required front or side
yard. Parking located in the rear yard shall be screened from
adjoining residential properties by a compact six-foot-high
evergreen hedge.
7. Billboards, subject to:
A. All billboards shall be subject to the express standards and criteria
contained in § 27-1606 of this chapter.
8. Boarding stable or commercial riding academy, subject to:
A. The minimum site shall be 10 acres.
B. The site proposed for a commercial riding academy shall have
frontage on an arterial or collector street or shall have direct
vehicular access to an arterial or collector street within 2,000 feet
of a property boundary.
C. The applicant for a commercial riding academy shall submit a
traffic impact study, as defined in § 27-201.
D. Adequate parking areas with a dust-free, all-weather surface shall
be provided to accommodate vehicles and horse trailers
anticipated during peak use of the facility.
E. Parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any property
line.
F. Outdoor lighting, if any, shall be limited to security lighting for the
parking areas and the building perimeter.
G. Indoor riding arenas and outdoor riding rings or riding arenas shall
be located at least 300 feet from any property line.
H. Bridle paths shall be located at least 50 feet from any property line.
I. No camping or other overnight accommodations shall be permitted
on the site.
J. There shall be no retail sales area on the site and no display of
merchandise offered for sale on the premises; however, retail sales
of riding equipment and clothing may be offered to participants
using catalogs logs or samples, provided that orders are delivered
direct to the purchaser.
K. The use shall be subject to the requirements of § 27-1408.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:751
9. Car wash, subject to:
A. All automated washing facilities shall be in a completely enclosed
building, as defined by this chapter. All other car washing facilities
shall be under a roofed structure that has at least two walls.
B. Coin-operated self-service establishments shall have an operator on
duty at all times when the facility is open for business.
C. Drainage water from the washing operation shall be controlled so
that it does not flow or drain onto berms, streets or other property.
D. Standing spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements specified in § 27-1406 for drive-in businesses.
E. The facility shall be connected to public sanitary and storm sewers.
F. Driveway entrances shall be located at least 30 feet from the rightof-
way line of the intersection of any public streets.
10. Cemetery, subject to:
A. A minimum site of 10 acres is required.
B. A drainage plan shall be submitted with the application for the use
showing existing and proposed runoff characteristics.
C. A groundwater study, prepared by a hydrologist or registered
engineer qualified to perform such studies, shall be submitted with
the application.
D. Plans for ingress/egress to the site shall be referred to the
Township Police Department for comments regarding public safety.
E. All property lines adjoining a residential use or zoning classification
shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as defined by § 27-1402,
Subsection 1, of this chapter.
F. All maintenance equipment shall be properly stored in an enclosed
building when not in use.
G. In-ground burial sites shall comply with the setbacks required for
principal structures in the zoning district. All mausoleums, chapels
and other structures shall not be located within 100 feet of any
property line adjoining a residential use or zoning district
classification.
11. Certified Water Storage Facilities and MLVTs. In addition to the
applicable provisions of § 27-1301 and § 27-1303.41, certified water
storage facilities and MLVTs shall be subject to:
A. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot size shall be two acres to be
designated on the site plan for said use.
B. Operations Outside of Township.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:752
(1) Any certified water storage facility servicing oil and gas
development and/or related operations outside of the Township
shall require site-specific (name of unit/project outside of
Township) conditional use approval. Approval shall
automatically expire 12 months from the date said water
facility is installed unless extension is given by the Board.
C. Design Criteria.
(1) The applicant for a certified water storage facility or MLVT
shall provide:
(a) Proof of certification by the manufacturer and/or
appropriate independent testing or laboratory
organization; and
(b) If applicable, copies of any required re-use tank permit,
WMGR 123-solid waste permits, etc., from the appropriate
state, federal, or independent certifying agency prior to
the operation of the certified water storage facility.
(2) The applicant for a certified MLVT shall provide:
(a) Certification that the proposed tanks comply with the
design standards set forth in the American Water Works
Association (AWWA) B-1039 design manual or provide
testimony that equivalent or greater standards are met.
(b) All MLVTs must meet the containment requirements
(110%) of Act 13 and a geotechnical report must be
obtained certifying that:
1) The site can withstand 3,000 square feet of pressure.
2) Core test results.
3) Tanks to be placed on cut or engineered fill certified
by a registered professional geotechnical engineer per
the recommendations of the geotechnical report for
the site.
(c) If applicable, copies of any required re-use tank permit,
WMGR 123-solid waste permits, etc., from the appropriate
state, federal, or independent certifying agency prior to
the operation of the certified water storage facility.
(3) Residual Waste Use and Storage:
(a) Any certified water storage facility or MLVT that shall be
used to hold residual waste must meet AWWA D103-9 tank
standards or provide testimony that equivalent or greater
standards are met.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:753
D. Site Plan. A survey/site plan sealed by a licensed professional
engineer or surveyor must be provided indicating water storage
location, other buildings, access roads, setbacks from adjoining
property lines and structures.
E. Liners. All liners must be welded and tested in accordance with the
applicable ASTM international standards. Any repairs to liners
must be made using acceptable practices and applicable standards.
F. Filling. The operator or its contractor must supervise initial filling
of all water storage operations and inspect for leaks during filling.
If leaks are observed, filling must cease, the leaks must be
repaired, and the integrity of the tank must be evaluated prior to
continuing to fill. Contractors can observe initial and future fillings,
provided they are granted the authority to stop work if unsafe or
upset conditions are observed.
G. Setbacks. Certified water storage facilities and MLVTs shall be 20
feet from a wellhead, fired vessel, heater, compressor with a rating
of 200 horsepower or greater; a separator, well test unit or other
non-fired equipment.
H. Time Frame. The time period in which the certified water storage
facility or MLVT will be constructed and destructed along with use
in between the start/finish dates.
I. Notice. At least seven days prior to a new oil and gas well site being
serviced by a certified water storage facility or MLVT, operator
must provide notice to the Township with updated information,
including truck traffic information, truck routes, etc.
J. Surface. The surface of the certified water storage facility or MLVT
shall be constructed and designed in a manner that would
reasonably minimize water runoff in the event of a major leak.
K. Signage, Tank Identification. Signs must be posted at the site of any
certified water storage facility or MLVT to indicate the contents of
the water storage facilities.
L. Spill Containment.
(1) A spill containment plan shall be provided.
(2) Containment shall be provided for indoor facilities.
(3) If a spill, fire, or other violation of any federal, state or local law
occurs at the drill site or in the Township by operator or its
subcontractors, operator shall notify the Township
immediately, in all circumstances, no later than 24 hours after
the incident occurred or, if the incident is ongoing, no later
than 24 hours after it began.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:754
M. Reclamation Procedure. To the best of the operator/applicant's
knowledge, the operator or applicant shall provide the time frame
for site restoration.
12. Coal mine adjunct facilities, subject to:
A. The conditional use application shall provide the following
information:
(1) A description of the character, timing and duration of the
proposed operation, including maps and plans showing the
location of the site, all access routes from the public roads,
area and extent of the proposed activity.
(2) The location and identity of ownership of all structures and
land uses that may be accepted by the proposed operation and
measures that will be taken to protect all structures and land
uses from adverse impacts from the proposed use.
(3) The plans for restoring and reclaiming the areas following
discontinuance of the underground mining.
(4) A description of plans for transportation of materials and
equipment to construct the facility and measures that will be
taken to maintain all roads within the Township that are used
to transport materials and equipment and repair any damages
to the roads which may occur as a result of this activity.
(5) A description of how the proposed use and facility will meet all
applicable regulations concerning construction standards,
sewage disposal, water supply and fire protection.
(6) A site plan of the proposed facility showing all structures,
facilities access ways, fencing and screening provisions.
B. Every bore hole shall be constructed and landscaped in a manner
appropriate to the district in which it is located. The lot for a bore
hole shall not be less than 1/2 acre, and such bore hole shall not be
located within 50 feet of any property line. Open areas shall be
covered with an appropriate vegetative material and properly
maintained.
C. Every ventilating shaft, including all structures intended to supply
air or power to underground coal mines, shall be constructed and
landscaped in a manner appropriate to the district in which it is
located. The lot for a ventilating shaft shall not be less than one
acre, and such ventilating shaft shall not be located within 100 feet
of any property line. Open areas shall be covered with an
appropriate vegetative material and properly maintained. Suitable
baffles shall be utilized to protect the adjacent properties from
noise of exhaust fans, consistent with the following requirements:
(1) Maximum noise level, 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.: 75 dBA.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:755
(2) Maximum noise level, 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: 70 dBA.
(3) Noise level readings shall be taken at adjacent property lines,
sound measurements shall be made using a sound-level meter
that conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 as specified in ANSI
Specifications SI 4-1971.
D. All uses shall be completely enclosed by a metal fence not less than
six feet high, with the top portion above the height of six feet
(above ground level) to be constructed of barbed wire or other
security material, with the entire fence being constructed in such a
manner so as to prevent the entry onto the portion of the premises
on which the use is situate by unauthorized persons, domestic
animals or livestock.
E. For each use that is visible from any structure used for residential,
cultural, social, educational, recreational, religious or similar
purposes in an A-1 District, there shall be a buffer strip of land
planted and maintained for screening purposes. The required
screen shall have a height adequate to achieve its purpose. Plant
materials used for screening shall consist of dense evergreen
plants. They shall be of a kind or used in a manner to provide a
continuous opaque screen within 12 months after commencement
of operations in the area to be screened. The Board of Supervisors
shall require that either new planting or alternative screening be
provided if, after 12 months, the plant materials do not provide an
opaque screen.
13. Coal mine facilities (underground), subject to:
A. The conditional use application shall provide the following
information:
(1) A description of the character of the proposed operation, its
timing and proposed duration, together with duplicates of
maps and plans to be submitted to state and federal regulators
agencies or authorities for the issuance of necessary permits.
(2) Identification of seams of coal to be removed in connection
with the proposed facilities.
(3) An analysis of the possible impact of extractive operations
upon groundwater supplies in all affected areas of the
Township and the measures that will be taken to guarantee
that any loss, diminution or pollution of water supply will be
corrected.
(4) The location and identity of ownership of all structures and
land uses that may be affected by the proposed operation and
the measures that will be taken to protect all structures and
land uses from adverse impacts from the proposed operation.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:756
(5) Receipt of a certification from each state or federal agency or
authority having enforcement jurisdiction for the issuance of
all necessary permits, licenses or grants of authority for the
installation and operation of the proposed operation, that the
owner or operator seeking the conditional use has fully
complied with all requirements for the issuance of such
permits, licenses or grants of authority.
(6) A description of plans for the transportation of materials,
products and equipment to be used, removed from or marketed
in connection with the proposed operation, including routes of
travel, number and weight of vehicles to be used and
procedures which will be made to maintain and repair roads
that are targeted for use.
(7) The location of access ways, facilities, buildings and utility and
stormwater systems.
B. Prior to beginning operation, the designated operator shall deposit
a bond, issued by a reputable bonding company, in the amount of
$100,000 for each and every mile of Township road or portion
thereof proposed to be traversed for delivering and removing
material from the site. The period designated for the bond shall
start with the issuance date of the permit. Said bond shall be
returned to the operator upon completion of the backfilling
operation and reconstruction of any damaged roadway due to
excess weight. Any failure to complete the reconstruction as
required by this Part shall result in the forfeiture of the required
bond. Those portions of Township roads that have been damaged
shall be determined by the Township Engineer and reconstructed
to Township specifications.
C. A minimum site of five contiguous acres shall be required for all
facilities.
D. Site boundaries within 1,000 feet of existing residential, religious
or educational uses shall be buffered by a landscaped screen
consisting of evergreen plant materials at least six feet in height.
E. All structures and facilities shall be setback a minimum of 250 feet
from property lines.
14. Communications antennas mounted on an existing building or existing
public utility storage or transmission tower, subject to:
A. Building-mounted antennas shall not be permitted on any dwelling.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the electromagnetic fields
associated with the proposed antennas comply with safety
standards now or hereafter established by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:757
C. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and any applicable airport
zoning regulations.
D. Building-mounted antennas shall be permitted to exceed the height
limitations of the district by no more than 20 feet. Antennas
mounted on an existing public utility or transmission tower shall
not project more than 20 feet above the height of the tower.
E. Omnidirectional or whip antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height
or seven inches in diameter.
F. Directional or panel antennas shall not exceed five feet in height or
two feet in width.
G. Satellite and microwave dish antennas mounted on the roof of a
building shall not exceed six feet in diameter.
H. Satellite and microwave dish antennas mounted on an existing
public utility storage or transmission structure shall not exceed two
feet in diameter.
I. The height and location of the proposed antennas shall be designed
so that, in the event of collapse, the antennas will fall within the
boundaries of the property on which they are to be located.
J. The applicant proposing a building-mounted antenna shall submit
evidence from a structural engineer certifying that the proposed
installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building
considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna's
location.
K. Evidence of lease agreements and easements necessary to provide
access to the building or structure for installation and maintenance
of the antennas and placement of the equipment cabinet or
equipment building shall be provided to the Township.
L. The placement of the equipment cabinet or equipment building
shall not obstruct the free flow of traffic on the site, shall not
reduce any parking required or available for other uses on the site
and shall not obstruct any right-of-way or easement without the
permission of the owner or grantor of the right-of-way or easement.
M. Unless located within a secured building, the equipment cabinet or
equipment building shall be fenced by a ten-foot-high chain-link
security fence with locking gate. If the equipment cabinet or
equipment building is visible from any public street or adjoining
residential property, the equipment cabinet or equipment building
shall be screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen
hedge.
N. If vehicular access to the equipment cabinet or equipment building
is not provided from a public street or paved driveway or parking
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:758
area, an easement or right-of-way shall be provided that has a
minimum width of 20 feet and that shall be improved with a dustfree,
all-weather surface for its entire length.
O. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on the site
within a reasonable walking distance of the equipment cabinet or
equipment building to facilitate periodic visits by maintenance
workers.
15. Communications tower, subject to:
A. The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to operate a commercial
communications tower.
B. Any applicant proposing a new freestanding commercial
communications tower shall demonstrate that a good-faith effort
has been made to obtain permission to mount the antenna on an
existing building or other structure or an existing commercial
communications tower. A good-faith effort shall require that all
owners within a one-fourth-mile radius of the proposed site be
contacted and that one or more of the following reasons for not
selecting an alternative existing building or communications tower
or other structure apply:
(1) The proposed equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing building, commercial communications tower or
other structure and reinforcement of the existing building,
tower or other structure cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed equipment would cause RF (radio frequency)
interference with other existing or proposed equipment for
that building, tower or other structure and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Existing buildings, commercial communications towers or
other structures do not have adequate space to accommodate
the proposed equipment.
(4) Addition of the proposed equipment would result in NIER
(nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) levels that exceed any
adopted local, federal or state emission standards.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower and the electromagnetic fields associated with the antennas
proposed to be mounted thereon comply with safety standards now
or hereafter established by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:759
D. The applicant for the communications tower shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) and any applicable airport zoning regulations.
E. In the C-2 and I-1 Districts, the maximum height of a
communications tower shall be 200 feet.
F. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the
communications tower is the minimum height necessary to function
effectively.
G. The setback from all property lines (excluding lease lines) required
for the tower shall be 100% of the height of the tower.
H. Tower height shall be measured from the ground level to the top
point of the tower or top point of the highest communications
antenna, whichever is higher.
I. Communications towers shall be setback from all overhead
electrical transmission or other aboveground lines a distance equal
to the height of the tower.
J. A communications tower shall not be located op any property that
is listed on an historic register or in an officially designed state or
federal historic district.
K. Communications towers shall not be located closer than 2,500 feet
to another communications tower, measured as a horizontal
straight-line distance between the towers.
L. The communications tower shall be designed and constructed to all
applicable standards of the American National Standards Institute,
ANSI/EIA-222 Manual, as amended.
M. A soils report complying with the standards of Appendix I,
Geotechnical Investigations, of the ANSI/EIA-222-E Manual, as
amended, shall be submitted to the Township to document and
verify design specifications of the foundation of the
communications tower and anchors for the guy wires, if used. The
soils report shall be signed and sealed by an engineer registered in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
N. The tower and all appurtenances, including guy wires, if any, and
the equipment cabinet or equipment building shall be enclosed by a
minimum ten-foot-high chain-link security fence with locking gate.
O. The applicant shall submit evidence that the tower and its method
of installation has been designed by a registered engineer and is
certified by that registered engineer to be structurally sound and
able to withstand wind and other loads in accordance with the
Township Building Code and accepted engineering practice.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:760
P. Equipment cabinets and equipment buildings shall comply with the
height and yard requirements of the zoning district for accessory
structures.
Q. Access shall be provided to the tower and equipment cabinet or
equipment building by means of a public street or right-of-way to a
public street. The right-of-way shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
width and shall be improved with a dust-free, all-weather surface
for its entire length.
R. Recording of a plat of subdivision shall not be required for the lease
parcel on which the tower is proposed to be constructed, provided
that the equipment building is proposed to be unmanned and the
required easement agreement for access is submitted for approval
by the Township.
S. Approval of a land development plan, prepared in accordance with
the requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,64 shall be required for all towers.
T. The owner of the communications tower shall be responsible for
maintaining the parcel on which the tower is located, as well as the
means of access to the tower, including clearing and cutting of
vegetation, snow removal and maintenance of the access driveway
surface.
U. The owner of any communications tower that exceeds 50 feet in
height shall submit to the Township proof of an annual inspection
conducted by a structural engineer, at the owner's expense, and an
updated tower maintenance program based on the results of the
inspection. Any structural faults shall be corrected immediately
and reinspected and certified to the Township by a structural
engineer, at the owner's expense.
V. The owner of the communications tower shall notify the Township
immediately upon cessation or abandonment of the operation. The
owner of the communications tower shall enter into an agreement
with the Township guaranteeing that the tower shall be dismantled
and removed within six months of the cessation of operations, if
there is no intention to continue operations, evidenced by the lack
of an application to the Township to install antennas on the existing
tower. If the owner of the communications tower fails to remove the
tower, then the landowner shall be responsible for its immediate
removal. Failure to remove an abandoned communications tower
shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of § 27-1901 of this
chapter.
W. All tower structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as
approved by the manufacturer for the type of installation proposed.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:761
X. All antennas and tower structures shall be subject to all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and airport zoning
regulations.
Y. No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the tower structure,
except as may be required or approved by the FCC, FAA or other
governmental agency.
Z. The exterior finish of the tower shall be compatible with the
immediate surroundings. The tower, the equipment cabinet or
equipment building and the immediate surroundings shall be
properly maintained.
AA. The base of the tower shall be landscaped suitable to the proposed
location of the tower, if the base of the tower is visible from
adjoining streets or residential properties.
BB. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on the site to
facilitate periodic visits by maintenance workers. Manned
equipment buildings shall provide one parking space for each
employee working on the site.
CC. No antenna or tower structure shall be illuminated, except as may
be required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
16. Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to:
A. Uses of the same general character as any of the uses authorized as
permitted uses by right, conditional uses or uses by special
exception in the zoning district in which the property is located
shall be allowed if the Planning Commission determines that the
impact of the proposed use on the environment and adjacent
streets and properties is equal to or less than any use specifically
listed in the zoning district. In making such determination, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following characteristics of
the proposed use:
(1) The number of employees.
(2) The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to
the proposed use.
(3) The type of products, materials and equipment and/or
processes involved in the proposed use.
(4) The magnitude of walk-in trade.
(5) Hours of operation.
(6) The traffic and environmental impacts and the ability of the
proposed use to comply with the performance standards of
§ 27-1401 of this chapter.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:762
(7) For those uses included in the most recent edition of the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the
Office of Management and Budget, whether the proposed use
shares the same SIC code or major group number as one or
more uses that are specifically listed in the zoning district.
B. The proposed use shall comply with all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
C. The proposed use shall comply with any applicable express
standards and criteria specified in this Part for the most nearly
comparable use by special exception or conditional use listed in the
zoning district in which the comparable use is proposed.
D. The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose statement
for the zoning district in which it is proposed and shall be
consistent with the community development objectives of this
chapter.
17. Compressor Stations and Processing Plants. In addition to the
provisions contained in § 27-1301 of the Township Code and the
applicable provisions of § 27-1303.41, an applicant/operator desiring to
engage in the construction and operation of compressor stations and/or
processing plants shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. Written Summary. Applicant must include a written summary of
how the compressor station or processing plant will operate.
(1) Information on the method of transportation for the processed
gas/liquids to market (pipelines, Township roads, etc.).
(2) Overall site development time frame and calendar.
B. Minimum Lot Size.
(1) The minimum lot size for a processing plant shall be 100 acres.
At least 80% of the surface area of the processing plant
building (based upon square footage) must be located in an I-1
Zoning District; however contiguous properties located in
(either A-1 or I-1) can be combined to meet the minimum
acreage requirements.
(2) The minimum lot size for a compressor station facility footprint
shall be five acres with a maximum compressor station facility
footprint of 10 acres.
C. Setbacks.
(1) The edge of the main operation facility that houses the
compressor engines must be at least 500 feet from an occupied
structure.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:763
(2) Protected Structures: 1,000 feet from the edge of the facility's
developed area (this shall be the main fence line of the site and
shall not include the green space used for stormwater
management or the toe of the slope for any grading) to the
nearest existing protected structure.
(3) Additional Setbacks: All aboveground equipment including
compressor engines and any structure in which the
compressors are enclosed must be set back a minimum of 200
feet from any adjacent property lines.
(4) Owner Waiver: applicant must meet the setbacks listed herein
unless the owner of a property, occupied and/or protected
structure located within the setback limits provides written
consent to the proposed use.
D. Screening.
(1) Compressor station sites shall have a landscaped buffer of 50
feet of trees placed strategically around the perimeter of the
site to screen the location from other properties.
(2) Both operations will be subject to the applicable standards of
the zoning district the proposed use is located in.
E. Design Standards.
(1) The location and design of structures and site improvements
shall be integrated with the natural color, form, and texture of
the surrounding area to the extent possible.
(2) Applicable equipment must have remote/local shutdowns.
(3) No equipment or surplus materials, including the placement of
permanent or moveable storage containers or other portable
equipment, shall be stored on the facility. This includes the
removal of idle equipment unnecessary for the operation of
such facility. These restrictions shall not apply during
construction phase of the site.
F. Building Approval. Building plans must be approved by the
designated Code Inspection Department of the Township and must
meet the minimum safety standards as set forth in the International
Building Code ("IBC"), Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code
("UCC") or applicable Code adopted by the Township. The Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Township Board of Supervisors shall
have the authority to grant waivers to the requirements if applicant
is able to demonstrate the design and safety measures meet or
exceed those of the IBC, UCC, etc.
G. Environmental Study. A baseline environmental study shall be
conducted by an approved person or firm for air and noise for
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:764
quality and emissions and approved by the DEP. Operator/applicant
shall provide Township with a copy of the DEP permit.
H. Spill Containment.
(1) A spill containment plan shall be provided and designed by a
registered design professional of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and approved by the DEP.
I. State and Federal Compliance. The applicant shall comply with all
applicable state and federal regulations and shall show evidence of
obtaining the required state and/or federal permits, including proof
of insurability, before initiating any work and maintaining the
required permits throughout the duration of all operations. The
applicant shall notify the Township immediately of any suspension
or revocation of the required state and/or federal permits. Upon
notification of said suspension or revocation, the Township-issued
permits will hereby be deemed suspended or revoked until state
and/or federal compliance is reached.
J. Expansion. In the event the facility or project is expanded in size,
scope, use, etc., beyond what was included in the initial approval,
the applicant must submit a written request to the Township. The
decision to require a subsequent conditional use hearing will be in
the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors and will be
announced at a public meeting, although the Township may not
require hearings on the subsequent conditional use application,
and the appropriate information concerning the expansion
operations must be submitted. This shall include, but not be limited
to, additional identification of disturbed areas beyond the scope
initially presented, additional facilities being used on the site that
were not included in the initial application and/or material changes
such as different truck routes, access roads, sound impacts,
additional water containment devices, tanks, etc.
K. Supplemental Regulations. The facility must meet all of the
supplemental regulations of Chapter 27, Zoning, Parts 13 (Express
Standards, General Standards) and 14 (Supplemental Regulations),
of the Township Code of Ordinances. Any and all uses categorized
as conditional uses shall, in addition to the specific conditions set
forth herein and the supplemental regulations of Parts 13 and 14,
shall also be subject to the general standards contained in the
applicable zoning district(s); and may be further subject to
additional applicable conditions and safeguards as deemed
necessary and appropriate by the Township to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the Township and its residents.
18. Conservation subdivision, subject to:
A. The permitted uses shall be limited to single-family detached
dwellings.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:765
B. The minimum site size required shall be 10 acres.
C. Public sewage and public water services shall be provided to all
dwelling units within the development.
D. Before determining the maximum number of lots to be permitted
on a given tract, the total acreage of the tract (excluding existing
rights-of-way) proposed for a conservation subdivision shall be
reduced by 15% to accommodate potential new rights-of-way.
E. In the A-2 District, the maximum dwelling unit density shall be one
unit per acre. The number of dwelling units authorized in the
conservation subdivision shall be equivalent to the net site area
determined by Subsection 18D above, expressed in acres,
multiplied by the density factor of one. Any portion of an acre shall
be rounded to the nearest acre.
F. In the R-2 District, the maximum dwelling unit density shall be two
units per acre. The number of dwelling units authorized in the
conservation subdivision shall be equivalent to the net site area
determined by Subsection 18D above, expressed in acres,
multiplied by the density factor of two. Any portion of an acre shall
be rounded to the nearest acre.
G. In the A-2 District, the minimum lot area required for a singlefamily
detached dwelling may be reduced, provided that it shall not
be less than 21,780 square feet.
H. In the R-2 District, the minimum lot area required for a singlefamily
detached dwelling may be reduced, provided that it shall not
be less than 10,890 square feet.
I. In the A-2 District, the minimum lot width required for a singlefamily
detached dwelling may be reduced, provided that it shall not
be less than 90 feet.
J. In the R-2 District, the minimum lot width required for a singlefamily
detached dwelling may be reduced, provided that it shall not
be less than 60 feet.
K. In a conservation subdivision, the front yard setback required for a
single-family detached dwelling may be reduced, provided that it
shall not be less than 25 feet; and the rear yard setback may be
reduced, provided that it shall not be less than 20 feet.
L. In a conservation subdivision, side yard setbacks required for a
single-family detached dwelling may be reduced, provided that
each side yard shall not be less than 10 feet.
M. The maximum permitted lot coverage for each individual lot in the
conservation subdivision shall be 25%.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:766
N. No lot proposed for a conservation subdivision shall front on a
Township street or state road existing prior to the approval of the
requested conservation subdivision. All proposed streets located in
the conservation subdivision and intended by the developer to be
taken over by the Township shall meet the construction
specifications of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.65
O. The development shall be so designed that privacy is preserved,
views are protected and groups of dwellings are arranged to
preserve the open space atmosphere intended under the
conservation subdivision.
P. A buffer area of open space shall be located at the perimeter of the
development. A minimum twenty-five-foot-wide buffer area shall be
provided around the perimeter of the site to act as a visual screen.
Per every 40 linear feet of perimeter, the buffer shall contain a
combination of one deciduous tree having a caliper of not less than
three inches and two evergreen trees having a height of not less
than eight feet at time of planting, plus five shrubs per 40 linear
feet of perimeter. All species shall be chosen from the list of plant
types for North Strabane Township. Trees and shrubs shall be
creatively planted within the twenty-five-foot buffer area to include
linear, staggered and/or clustering placement of shrubs. Existing
trees four inches and greater measured from a point 4 1/2 feet
above ground level in accordance with the DBH standard
(American Standard for Nursery Stock) shall be credited to the
required buffer area planting at the following ratio: two proposed
trees for each one existing tree.
Q. Open space shall be provided in an amount equal to the difference
between the minimum lot area for single-family dwellings
otherwise required in the zoning district and the lot size proposed
in the conservation subdivision. In no case shall the open space be
less than 20% of the total area of the development site. The balance
of the land not contained in the lots shall be contiguous and easily
accessible to the lots in the conservation subdivision and shall be of
such condition, size and shape as to be usable for recreation, park
or open space areas or to serve to protect an environmentally
sensitive area.
R. Safe and easy access to recreation, park and open space areas shall
be provided by adjoining road frontage, easements or paths. Access
ways to recreation, park and open space areas shall be sufficiently
wide so that maintenance equipment shall have reasonable and
convenient access to such area.
S. Recreation, park and open space land shall be owned and managed
in one of the two following ways:
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:767
(1) Shall be held in common ownership by the owners of the lots
within the development and shall be protected by legal
arrangements satisfactory to the Township sufficient to assure
its maintenance and preservation.
(a) In this regard, covenants or other legal arrangements
shall:
1) Obligate purchasers to participate in a homeowners'
association and to support maintenance of the open
space areas by paying to the association assessments
sufficient for such maintenance and subjecting their
properties to a lien for enforcement of the respective
assessments.
2) Obligate such an association to maintain the
recreation, park and open space areas and private
streets and utilities.
3) Provide that the Township, as well as other purchasers
in the development, can enforce the covenants in the
event of failure of compliance.
4) Provide for agreement that, if the Township is
required to perform any work pursuant to the item
above, such purchasers would pay the cost thereof,
and the same shall be a lien upon their properties until
such cost has been paid; provided that the developer
shall be responsible for the formation of the
homeowners' association of which the developer, or if
the developer is not the owner of the development,
then such owner shall be a member until all of the lots
of record are sold; provide assurance that such
covenants will be evidenced by recording in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds of a perpetual maintenance
of facilities as prescribed hereinabove and identifying
the tract and each lot therein. The declaration shall be
included in the deed or other instrument of
conveyance of each lot of record and shall be made
binding on all purchasers, provided that such
declaration may, as to subsequent conveyances other
than the initial conveyance of each lot of record, be
incorporated by reference in the instrument of
conveyance.
5) Guarantee that any association formed to own and
maintain common open space will not be dissolved
without the consent of the Board of Supervisors and
any other specifications deemed necessary by the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:768
6) Guarantee that the recreation, park and/or open space
areas shall not be further subdivided or further
developed. Improvements may be made to said areas
for the purposes for which they were originally
proposed upon approval of the Planning Commission
and the Board of Supervisors.
(b) All such covenants set forth herein shall be submitted for
preliminary review with the preliminary plan and
conditional use application and shall be reviewed and
approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to the granting
of final approval for the conservation subdivision.
(2) Shall be dedicated to the Township for public usage upon final
plan approval. This provision shall not, in any manner, obligate
the Township to accept the open space or any part thereof.
T. Preliminary plans for a conservation subdivision shall be
accompanied by information providing calculations of net site area
and dwelling unit density and describing how the lots, frontage and
setbacks differ from the otherwise applicable requirements of the
zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is proposed.
The preliminary plan submitted with the conditional use
application shall contain all the information required by the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for a
preliminary plat.
U. Proposed development of 50 units or more shall have two direct
vehicular access ways to an arterial or collector street, as defined
by this chapter.
V. A plan for a conservation subdivision with 50 or more dwelling
units are required to have more than one access point to a public
road provided that the applicant has demonstrated that emergency
vehicles have a reasonable route to turn vehicles for exit(s) from
the plan, by either an adequately designed cul-de-sac or an internal
traffic circulation pattern.
19. Contracting business, subject to:
A. The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
C. All materials and equipment shall be located within a completely
enclosed building. No outside storage of any kind shall be
permitted.
D. The business may include one or more of the following activities:
(1) Administrative offices.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:769
(2) Indoor storage of materials and equipment.
(3) Product display and sales areas.
E. All property lines adjoining a residential use or zoning classification
shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as defined by § 27-1402,
Subsection 1, of this chapter.
20. Day-care center or preschool facility in a place of worship or school,
subject to:
A. The facility shall be registered with or licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. In the A-1, A-2, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, the facility shall be
permitted to be located only in a place of worship or school. In the
R-1-V Zoning District, this restriction shall not apply if the site has
frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street, as defined by this chapter.
C. Outdoor play areas shall be provided, which shall have a minimum
area of 65 square feet per child and which shall be secured by a
fence with self-latching gate. The location of the outdoor play area
shall take into account the relationship to adjoining properties.
D. Outdoor play areas that adjoin residential lots shall be screened by
Buffer Area C, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this
chapter.
E. The general safety of the property proposed for a day-care center,
nursery school or preschool facility shall meet the needs of small
children. There shall be no potential hazards in the outdoor play
area, and a safe area for dropping off and picking up children shall
be provided.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Part 15 of this chapter.
21. Deep Injection Wells/Class II Wells. In addition to the applicable
provisions of § 27-1301 and § 27-1303.41, deep injection wells/Class II
wells shall be subject to the following:
A. Minimum lot size: 20 acres.
B. Notice. Operator must provide Township with notice of any
materials being disposed of as part of a deep injection well.
C. Permits. Operator must provide Township copies of all state and
federal permits associated with the proposed use.
D. Setbacks: 1,500 feet from a protected structure. All other setbacks
listed in § 27-1303.41, Oil and Gas Development, shall apply unless
otherwise regulated by state or federal law.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:770
22. Equipment storage yard, subject to:
A. The minimum site required for an equipment storage yard shall be
five acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
C. All areas used for storage and movement of equipment shall be
improved with a dust-free, all-weather surface. Any areas not paved
with hard surface shall have a dust control plan that is submitted to
the Township Engineer for review and approval.
D. Buffer Area B, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this
chapter, shall be provided along all property lines adjoining an R
Zoning District.
E. No repair of vehicles or equipment shall be permitted outside a
completely enclosed structure.
F. All operations shall comply with the performance standards of
§ 27-1401 of this chapter.
G. Engines shall not be started or kept running before 6:30 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m. if the site is located within 500 feet of an existing
dwelling.
H. All lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from streets and
any adjoining residential properties.
I. A stormwater management plan to control runoff of surface water
shall be submitted for review and approval by the Township
Engineer.
23. Family day-care home, subject to:
A. All of the applicable criteria for a home occupation specified in
§ 27-1303, Subsection 26, shall be met.
B. Evidence shall be submitted that all applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare have been met, and
continuing compliance shall be maintained.
C. An adequate and safe off-street area shall be provided for dropping
off and picking up children.
D. An adequate outdoor play area shall be provided and shall be
secured by a fence with self-latching gate. Such play area shall be
screened from adjoining residential properties by a minimum fourfoot-
high compact, dense evergreen hedge or opaque fence.
E. Outdoor play areas shall have a minimum area of 400 square feet.
24. Golf course or golf or country club, subject to:
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:771
A. Golf courses and golf or country clubs shall have a minimum site of
20 acres; driving ranges and putting courses shall have a minimum
site of five acres.
B. Clubhouses shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line
adjoining property in any R Residential Zoning District and at least
50 feet from all other property lines.
C. The clubhouse and all parking areas shall be screened from any
adjoining residential property by Buffer Area B, as defined in
§ 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
D. Where eating and/or drinking facilities are provided, parking
requirements for restaurants shall apply in addition to the parking
requirements for golf courses.
E. Where a swimming pool is provided, parking requirements for
swimming pools shall apply in addition to the parking requirements
for golf courses.
F. Outdoor operations shall be discontinued between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
G. Any driving range that is proposed to be illuminated shall provide a
photometric plan and cross-sections showing impacts on adjoining
properties and shall be subject to testing after installation to show
compliance with § 27-1401G.
H. The backstop for any driving range shall be buffered from adjacent
residential properties using a combination of landscaping, earthen
mounding and materials to minimize the visual impact.
25. Group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or transitional
dwelling, subject to:
A. The minimum area and bulk regulations for a group-care facility,
personal-care boarding home or transitional dwelling shall be the
same as those required for a principal use in the zoning district in
which the facility is located.
B. In the R-1-V District, a personal-care boarding home shall have
frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street, as defined by this chapter.
C. In the R-1-V District, the maximum number of residents housed in a
personal-care boarding home shall be 10.
D. No group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or transitional
dwelling shall be located within 500 feet of another existing or
proposed group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or
transitional dwelling.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:772
E. Adequate provisions shall be made for access for emergency
medical and fire-fighting vehicles.
F. Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by
the sponsoring agency.
G. Adequate open space opportunities for recreation shall be provided
on the lot for the residents consistent with their needs, and the
area shall be secured by a fence with self-latching gate.
H. Where applicable, licensing or certification by the sponsoring
agency shall be prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy,
and a copy of the annual report with evidence of continuing
certification shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of
each year.
26. Home occupation, subject to:
A. The home occupation shall be carried on by a member of the family
residing in the dwelling unit. No more than one person who is not a
resident of the dwelling unit shall be employed in the dwelling unit.
B. No more than 25% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling
shall be devoted to the conduct of the home occupation.
C. In the R-1-V, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the home occupation shall be
carried on wholly within the principal dwelling. The home
occupation shall not be conducted in any accessory structure. In
the A-1 and A-2 Districts, the home occupation may be carried on in
an accessory structure, provided that the gross floor area of the
accessory structure shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of
the principal dwelling.
D. There shall be no mass production of products on the premises of
the home occupation that involves processing of raw materials.
Assembly of products from finished materials may be accomplished
on the premises.
E. A limited number of samples of articles produced on the premises
may be displayed for the purposes of accepting orders. Articles
produced on the premises shall be displayed in quantity only off the
premises at a retail outlet, consignment shop or product or craft
show.
F. There shall be no display on the premises of merchandise available
for sale that has been produced off the premises; however,
merchandise may be stored on the premises for delivery off the
premises, such as Amway, Tupperware or similar products stored
for distribution to customers or salespersons at their residence or
place of business. In addition, small amounts of products may be
sold as an accessory use to the principal use, such as sale of beauty
products accessory to a beauty shop and similar situations.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:773
G. There shall be no exterior displays or signs, either on or off the
premises, other than a small identification sign, no more than one
square foot in surface area, containing only the name of the
resident and the nature of the home occupation, which may be
attached to the wall of the dwelling or to the mailbox.
H. The use shall not require internal or external alterations or
construction features that are not customary to a dwelling or that
change the fire rating of the structure.
I. Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance,
odors, heat or glare shall not be produced. The use shall comply
with the performance standards of § 27-1401 of this chapter.
J. The use shall not significantly intensify vehicular or pedestrian
traffic beyond that which is normal for the residences in the
neighborhood.
K. There shall be no use of materials or equipment except that of
similar power and type normally used in a residential dwelling for
domestic or household purposes.
L. The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewage,
electricity, garbage, public safety or any other municipal services
beyond that which is normal for the residences in the
neighborhood.
M. In the R-1-V, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the home occupation shall not
involve the use of commercial vehicles for regular delivery of
materials to or from the premises, and commercial vehicles shall
not be parked on the premises.
N. Materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall not be
stored outside.
O. Any home occupation where customers, clients or students
routinely visit the premises shall provide a paved off-street parking
area in accordance with the requirements of Part 15 for the specific
use in addition to the spaces required for the dwelling.
P. The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and
shall be restricted to the zoning districts in which they are
specifically authorized as permitted uses, conditional uses or uses
by special exception, including but not limited to:
(1) Beauty shops or barbershops containing more than two chairs.
(2) Blacksmith or metal working.
(3) Boarding stables.
(4) Clinics, hospitals or nursing homes.
(5) Funeral homes.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:774
(6) Group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or
transitional dwelling.
(7) Kennels, veterinary offices and clinics.
(8) Landscaping business, including sales or growing of plant
materials or contracting services.
(9) Private clubs.
(10) Private instruction to more than five students at a time.
(11) Restaurants or tearooms.
(12) Retail or wholesale sales or flea markets.
(13) Sale of guns, firearms and ammunition.
(14) Tanning or massage salon.
(15) Tourist or boarding home, other than bed-and-breakfast.
(16) Vehicle or equipment rental, repair or sales or vehicle repair
garages.
Q. The following are examples of permitted home occupations,
provided that all of the foregoing criteria are met:
(1) Artist, photographer or handicrafts studio.
(2) Catering/commercial kitchen for off-site service.
(3) Contracting business, excluding on-site storage of equipment.
(4) Computer programmer, data processor or writer.
(5) Consultant, clergy, counselor, bookkeeping, graphics or
drafting services.
(6) Dressmaker or tailor.
(7) Professional offices that involve routine visitation by customers
or clients.
(8) Housekeeping or custodial services.
(9) Interior designer.
(10) Jewelry and/or watch repair, not including wholesale or retail
sales.
(11) Lawnmower and small engine repair in the A-1 and A-2
Districts only.
(12) Locksmith.
(13) Mail-order business.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:775
(14) Manufacturer's representative.
(15) Repair of small household appliances that can be hand-carried.
(16) Telemarketing.
(17) Travel agent.
(18) Tutoring or any other instruction to no more than five students
at any one time.
(19)Word processing, typing or secretarial services.
R. The acceptability of any proposed home occupation not specifically
listed above shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the standards of this § 27-1303, Subsection 26,
and the applicable criteria for comparable uses not specifically
listed in § 27-1303, Subsection 16.
27. Impoundments. In addition to the applicable provisions of § 27-1301
and § 27-1303.41, impoundments shall be subject to:
A. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for a standalone
impoundment operation shall be five acres, and two acres for an
impoundment used as an accessory use.
B. Certification and Permits.
(1) The applicant for an impoundment shall provide:
(a) Proof of certification by the relevant nationally recognized
laboratory or organization;
(b) Water impoundments shall be constructed in compliance
with all applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP);
(c) A copy of any required permits from the DEP prior to the
impoundment operations occurring.
C. Site Plan. A survey/site plan sealed by a licensed professional
engineer or surveyor must be provided indicating water storage
location, other buildings, access roads, setbacks from adjoining
property lines and structures.
D. Security. Chain-link fencing must be installed around any
impoundment and shall be at least eight feet in height.
E. Setbacks. In addition to the DEP's setbacks regulations:
(1) Impoundment must be 500 feet measured horizontally from an
occupied structure to the edge of the impoundment structure.
(2) 1,000 feet from a protected structure for freshwater
impoundments.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:776
(3) 1.500 feet from a protected structure for wastewater/reuse
fluid impoundments
(4) Owner Waiver: applicant must meet the setbacks listed herein
unless the owner of a property, occupied and/or protected
structure located within the setback limits provides written
consent to the proposed use.
F. Access Road. In addition to the provisions contained in
§ 27-1303.41, Oil and Gas Development, all access roads to an
impoundment site must:
(1) Access road must be designed to accommodate all vehicle
truck traffic servicing the site without using any public
roadways for idling vehicles waiting to access the
impoundment site.
(2) Appropriate signage and idling restriction measures must be in
place to comply with Pennsylvania's Diesel-Powered Motor
Vehicle Idling Act (Act 124 of 2008).66
G. Buffers and Noise. The impoundment must be constructed in a
manner to reduce truck traffic noise. The appropriate sound
barriers shall be installed at the discretion of the Township.
H. Notice. At least seven days prior to a new oil and gas well site being
serviced by a standalone impoundment, operator must provide
notice to the Township with updated information, including truck
traffic information, truck routes, etc.
I. Surface. The surface area immediately surrounding the
impoundment shall be constructed and designed in a manner that
would reasonably minimize water/liquid runoff in the event of a
major leak.
J. Signage, Identification. Signs must be posted at the site of any
impoundment to indicate the contents of the water/liquid being
stored on site.
K. Testing and Spill Containment.
(1) A spill containment plan shall be provided.
(2) Testing of the impoundment must occur every four months
with results provided to the Township.
L. Reclamation Procedure. To the best of the operator/applicant's
knowledge, the operator or applicant shall provide the time frame
for site restoration.
28. Junkyard, subject to:
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 4601 et seq.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:777
A. The minimum site required shall be 20 acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
C. The premises shall be maintained so as to not constitute a nuisance
or menace to public health and safety.
D. No garbage, hazardous materials or hazardous waste, as defined by
federal statute, or other organic waste shall be stored on the
premises.
E. The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid and other
substances regulated by federal statute and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency. Any
suspension, revocation or violation of the PA DEP permits shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions of § 27-1901 of this chapter.
F. The manner of storage of junk or other materials or equipment on
the site shall facilitate access for firefighting, shall prevent hazards
from fire or explosion and shall prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water.
G. The junkyard operation shall comply with the performance
standards of § 27-1401 of this chapter.
H. No junk shall be stored or accumulated and no structure shall be
located within 300 feet of any dwelling or within 100 feet of any
property line or public street.
I. The premises shall be enclosed by a metal chain-link fence not less
than eight feet in height supported on steel posts with a selflatching
gate. The fence shall be located on the inside of the buffer
area required by Subsection 28K below and shall be maintained in
good condition.
J. The fence shall be supplemented with screening material that
creates a visual barrier that is at least 80% opaque.
K. Buffer Area A, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this
chapter, shall be provided along all property lines adjoining a
residential use or zoning classification.
L. The site shall be designed utilizing natural topography and/or
constructed earthen mounds so as to obstruct visibility from
adjacent public streets and properties.
M. The operator shall submit a stormwater management plan to
control runoff for review and approval by the Township Engineer.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:778
N. The operator shall obtain a license from the Township, prior to
initiating operations, that shall be renewable annually upon
payment of the required license fee established from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and subject to inspection
by the Zoning Officer to determine continuing compliance with
these standards.
29. Juvenile incarceration facility, subject to:
A. Any expansion, change of use or change in the level of custody that
is not approved as part of the original conditional use application
shall be subject to resubmission and approval of a revised
conditional use application to determine continued compliance
with these criteria.
B. The juvenile incarceration facility shall comply with and shall
provide evidence of all applicable licenses and approvals required
by Title 42 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6301 et seq., known as the "Juvenile Act," as amended.
C. The minimum site required shall be 10 acres. On properties
containing at least 10 acres but no more than 15 acres, no more
than 50 juveniles shall be housed. On properties containing more
than 15 acres but less than 20 acres, no more than 75 juveniles
shall be housed. The minimum site required to house more than 75
juveniles shall be 20 acres.
D. Buffer Area A, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this
chapter, shall be installed and maintained along all property lines,
regardless of the adjoining zoning classification.
E. The minimum front yard shall be 75 feet.
F. The minimum side or rear yard adjoining a single-family dwelling
or zoning classification shall be 100 feet. All other side and rear
yards shall be 50 feet.
G. The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
H. The maximum lot coverage shall be 35%; the maximum paved area
shall be 20%.
I. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the design
standards of Part 15, based on the ratio of one space for each
employee working on peak shift plus one for each five residents to
accommodate visitors, counselors, tutors or other personnel who
visit the site but do not work on the site on a daily basis.
J. Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by
the sponsoring or licensing agency.
K. A security system, appropriate to the level of custody provided for
the residents, shall be installed to control ingress and egress to the
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:779
structure and to secure the perimeter of the site, subject to
applicable state regulations.
L. The administrator of the facility shall file an emergency
management plan, including planned response to fire, security and
medical emergencies, with the Township Manager, the Township
Police Department, the Emergency Medical Service and the
responding fire companies.
M. Adequate provisions shall be made for access to all areas of the
property and the structure by emergency medical, fire and public
safety vehicles.
N. The applicant shall present evidence of approval of construction
drawings for a building permit as a condition precedent to
obtaining a certificate of occupancy.
O. The applicant shall comply with fire protection provisions of the
current edition of the Township Building Code and Township Fire
Code.
P. The applicant shall present evidence to the Zoning Officer of all
other necessary approvals and permits from applicable federal,
state and local regulatory agencies as a condition precedent to
obtaining a certificate of occupancy.
Q. The certificate of occupancy shall be conditioned upon the
applicant presenting to the Zoning Officer, on or before January 31
of each year, evidence of continuing validity of any license issued by
the commonwealth.
R. Violation of any of the conditions attached to the approval of the
conditional use application, including noncompliance with the
express standards and criteria of this subsection, shall result in
revocation of the certificate of occupancy.
S. Any suspension or revocation of any required license or
certification by any federal, state or county agency shall result in
the automatic suspension or revocation of the certificate of
occupancy. Reinstatement of the certificate of occupancy shall be
subject to submission of all valid certifications and licenses and
certification by the Zoning Officer that there is continuing
compliance with all conditions attached to the approval of the
conditional use.
T. Conditional use approval shall expire automatically, without
written notice to the applicant, if no application for a grading
permit, building permit or an occupancy permit to undertake the
construction or to authorize the occupancy described in the
application for conditional use approval is submitted within 12
months of said approval, unless the Board of Supervisors, in its sole
discretion, extends conditional use approval upon written request
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:780
of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum
extension permitted shall be one twelve-month extension.
U. Conditional use approval shall be valid for one year from the date of
approval by the Board of Supervisors and shall be renewed
annually by submitting evidence of compliance with the original
conditional use approval to the Zoning Officer. Renewal shall not
require processing of an application for conditional use approval,
unless the Zoning Officer determines that there have been
substantive changes in an amended conditional use application.
30. Kennel, subject to:
A. In the A-1 and A-2 Districts, kennels shall be accessory to a farm or,
when proposed as a principal use, shall have a minimum site area
of five acres.
B. Outdoor kennels shall be located at least 300 feet from any
occupied dwelling on an adjacent lot and at least 200 feet from any
property line adjoining property in an R-1-V, R-2 or R-3 District.
C. Outdoor runs and similar facilities shall be constructed for easy
cleaning, shall be adequately secured by a minimum six-foot-high
fence with self-latching gate and shall be screened by Buffer Area
C, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
D. The operator shall submit an animal waste management and
disposal plan to the Township.
E. Domestic pets kept in an outdoor kennel shall be limited to a
maximum of 10 animals on the first five acres plus two animals for
each additional acre or portion thereof, up to 10 acres. There shall
be no limit on the number of animals kept on properties of 10 acres
or more.
F. If a kennel is located on the same property with specialized animal
raising, the combined number of animals shall not exceed 20 on
properties of less than 10 acres.
31. Landfill, subject to:
A. The minimum site area shall be 50 acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector road, as defined by this chapter.
C. All landfill operations shall be located at least 1,200 feet from any
occupied dwelling.
D. The driveway or haul road entering the site from a public street
shall be paved for a distance of 600 feet from the public street.
E. A tire washing station shall be located on the site to service trucks
exiting the facility.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:781
F. The operator shall post a bond in favor of the Township, and in a
form acceptable to the Township, prior to beginning operations, in
the amount of $100,000 for each mile of Township road or portion
thereof proposed to be traversed by vehicles traveling to the site.
The term of the bond shall begin on the date that conditional use
approval is issued. The bond shall be returned to the operator upon
completion of all operations and any backfilling or reconstruction
of a damaged roadway due to weight in excess of the posted weight
limits for the road. Any failure to complete the reconstruction of a
damaged roadway due to weight in excess of the posted weight
limits for the road. Those portions of the Township roads that have
been damaged shall be determined by inspection of the Township
Engineer and shall be reconstructed to current Township
specifications for street construction.
G. Landfill operations shall not be conducted within 300 feet of any
property lines adjoining a residential use or zoning district
classification.
H. All property lines adjoining any existing residential use or any R
Residential Zoning District classification shall be screened by
Buffer Area A, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this
chapter. The buffer area shall be comprised of a combination of
earthen mounding and the required plantings.
I. Fencing at least eight feet in height shall be provided around any
work area for security and to control windblown refuse.
J. The applicant shall show compliance with applicable state and
federal laws regulating landfills.
K. The applicant shall obtain the required permits from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP)
and/or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency prior to initiating
any operation.
L. The required state and federal permits shall be maintained
throughout the duration of all operations. The applicant shall notify
the Zoning Officer of any suspension or revocation of the required
state or federal permits.
M. Any suspension or revocation of the required state or federal
permits shall constitute a violation of this chapter and will result in
the suspension or revocation of the certificate of occupancy or
enforcement of the penalty provisions of this chapter, or both.
N. In January of each year, the operator shall apply to the Zoning
Officer for renewal of the certificate of occupancy in accordance
with § 27-1904. Subsection 1, and shall present evidence of
continuing compliance with all conditions of approval and required
state or federal permits.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:782
32. Limited commercial uses in the R-1-V District, subject to:
A. The lot shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined herein.
B. Contiguous lots under single ownership shall be consolidated in
order to use them for limited commercial uses.
C. The structure shall have a minimum gross floor area, excluding
area in the basement or attic, of 1,500 square feet or more.
D. No part of the business shall be operated from an accessory
structure, other than storage of items that are related to the
business.
E. The uses shall be limited to one or more of the following:
(1) Antiques or interior decorating.
(2) Art, book or stationery store.
(3) Bakery.
(4) Bar or tavern.
(5) Business or professional office.
(6) Business services.
(7) Candy or ice cream store.
(8) Card or gift shop.
(9) Convenience store.
(10) Craft or hobby shop.
(11) Day-care center, subject to § 27-1303, Subsection 20.
(12) Florist shop.
(13) Personal services.
(14) Private club, subject to § 27-1303, Subsection 45.
(15) Carry-out restaurant, delicatessen or food store.
(16) Travel agent.
(17) Video store, excluding adult video store.
F. The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet; the minimum lot
width shall be 60 feet.
G. Area and bulk regulations applicable to "other uses" in the R-1-V
District shall apply.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:783
H. No use shall be conducted outside a completely enclosed building
unless authorized in accordance with § 27-1905 of this chapter.
I. Any proposed use that includes a residence in combination with
business shall be further subject to § 27-1303, Subsection 1, of this
chapter.
J. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the requirements of
§ 27-1604B of this chapter.
K. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by § 27-1502C for
the specific use.
33. Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor.
A. Medical marijuana grower/processor uses shall meet the same
conditional use criteria applicable to uses under § 27-1303.43,
Planned Industrial Park, Planned Office Park or Planned Research
or Technology Park.
34. Mobile home park, subject to:
A. The application shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance67
governing mobile home parks.
B. The minimum site required for a mobile home park shall be five
contiguous acres and the maximum shall be 30 contiguous acres.
C. The site shall be served by public water and public sewers.
D. The minimum mobile home lot shall be 6,000 square feet in area.
The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet.
E. Minimum setbacks and distances between mobile homes shall
comply with the requirements of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
F. Every mobile home slab shall have access to a public or private
street in accordance with the requirements of the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
G. Each mobile home lot shall provide two off-street parking spaces.
H. Mobile homes located in the A-1 District shall be classified as a
single-family dwelling. The minimum site required for mobile
homes in this district shall be one acre provided it is serviced by
public sewage and two acres without public sewage.
35. Multifamily dwellings in the R-3 District, subject to:
A. The maximum dwelling unit density shall be 16 units per acre.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:784
B. Where two or more buildings are proposed on one lot, the minimum
distance between buildings shall be 20 feet.
C. All property lines adjacent to a single-family use or zoning
classification shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as defined by
§ 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
D. All parking areas adjacent to a single-family use or zoning
classification that are not screened by a buffer area shall be
screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge.
E. All portions of the property not covered by buildings, driveways,
parking, pools, shelters, gazebos or other paved areas shall be
suitably landscaped with grass, ground cover and decorative
shrubs or trees.
F. The design and orientation of the buildings on the property shall
take into account compatibility with the visual impact on adjacent
single-family residential properties. The building and the property
shall be effectively landscaped to minimize such impacts on
adjacent residential properties.
G. On lots containing more than 50 dwelling units, indoor or outdoor
recreational facilities appropriate to the needs of the prospective
residents shall be provided, subject to approval by the Township
Supervisors.
H. Off-street parking shall be 1.75 spaces per dwelling unit.
36. Multifamily dwellings in the R-1-V District, subject to:
A. The minimum site area required shall be one acre.
B. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
C. The maximum dwelling unit density shall be eight units per acre.
D. All other area and bulk regulations of the R-1-V District in § 27-602
shall apply.
E. Where two or more buildings are proposed on one lot, the minimum
distance between buildings shall be 20 feet.
F. All property lines adjacent to a single-family use or zoning
classification shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as defined by
§ 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
G. All parking areas adjacent to a single-family use or zoning
classification that are not screened by a buffer area shall be
screened by a minimum six-foot-high compact evergreen hedge.
H. All portions of the property not covered by buildings, driveways,
parking, pools, shelters, gazebos or other paved areas shall be
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:785
suitably landscaped with grass, ground cover and decorative
shrubs or trees.
I. The design and orientation of the buildings on the property shall
take into account compatibility with the visual impact on adjacent
single-family residential properties. The building and the property
shall be effectively landscaped to minimize such impacts on
adjacent residential properties.
J. On lots containing more than 50 dwelling units, indoor or outdoor
recreational facilities appropriate to the needs of the prospective
residents shall be provided, subject to approval by the Township
Supervisors.
K. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 27-1502C.
37. Nightclub, subject to:
A. Nightclubs shall cease operations between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m.
B. There shall be no noise or vibration discernible along any property
line greater than the average noise level occurring on adjacent
streets and properties.
C. All operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building, and doors and windows shall remain closed during hours
when entertainment is presented.
D. The owner/operator of the nightclub shall provide private security,
licensed under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, if
the maximum permitted occupancy allowed by the Township
building or Fire Codes for the nightclub exceeds 100 persons.
E. Any nightclub that proposes a maximum permitted occupancy
allowed by the building or Fire Codes of 200 or more persons shall
be located at least 500 feet from any property line that adjoins a
residential zoning classification.
F. Any nightclub that offers adult entertainment, as defined herein,
shall be further subject to § 27-1303, Subsection 3, of this Part.
38. Noncommercial wind energy conversion system (WECS), subject to:
A. Setbacks from all property lines, utility lines and structures shall be
1 1/2 times the total height of the WECS (tower or pole height plus
rotor radius). The lowest part of the rotor blade must be a minimum
of 30 feet higher than the surrounding structures and/or
obstructions.
B. Only one WECS shall be permitted as an accessory structure on a
lot or parcel.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:786
C. Maximum 50 kilowatt rating and 5-7m rotor diameter.
D. One-hundred-foot maximum height (tower or pole plus rotor
radius) that shall be self-supporting and in compliance with the
manufacturer's recommendation.
E. A site-specific wind resource assessment by a qualified professional
is required.
F. Standard installation drawings shall be submitted showing the
wind turbine structure, including the tower, the base and the
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance
with the Uniform Construction Code and certified by a licensed
professional engineer shall be provided.
G. Submission of manufacturer's electrical drawings must
demonstrate that the WECS is equipped with manual braking and
meets all building and electrical codes.
H. The applicant shall comply with all applicable regulations of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission governing generation of
electricity for private use and shall provide evidence that he/she/it
has notified the applicable utility company of his/her/its intent to
install a WECS.
I. Artificial lighting is not permitted, whether directly or indirectly,
except as required by the FAA.
J. Fencing is required only if the WECS has climbing features below
12 feet.
K. The tower and related structures and fencing shall be designed to
blend in with the natural settings.
L. Abandoned WECS must be immediately removed at the expense of
the property owner. A WECS is considered abandoned if it is
inoperable or unsafe and unattended for a period of 12 months.
M. WECS cannot be used as or used to support signage that is
otherwise permitted by the Township's Sign Ordinance.
N. WECS cannot be used to support cell phone or transmission
antennas or satellite communications.
39. Non-Family Facility, Type 1 and/or 2, subject to:
A. The minimum site required shall be five acres.
B. The maximum dwelling unit density of a facility licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Health shall be 20
dwelling units per acre. The maximum dwelling unit density of a
facility that is not licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Health shall be 12 dwelling units per acre. When
any unit or sleeping arrangement (bed) in a facility does not meet
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:787
the Township's definition of dwelling unit, the density of beds shall
not exceed the density herein prescribed for dwelling units in
accordance of those facilities with and without licensing by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. A facility shall include common leisure and/or recreational areas.
D. In addition, a facility may include one or more of the following
supporting uses, subject to approval by the Township:
(1) Postal station for use of the residents and staff only.
(2) Banking facility for use of the residents and staff only.
(3) Pharmacy and/or medical offices for use of the residents only.
(4) Personal services for the use of the residents only, including
beauty shop, barbershop, common laundry facilities and drycleaning
valet.
(5) Ice cream parlor and/or florist/gift shop for the use of residents
and their invited guests only.
(6) Elderly day-care center licensed by the commonwealth.
(7) Taxi, van or similar transportation services for the residents.
E. Buffer areas, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this chapter,
shall be provided along all property lines adjacent to property in an
A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3 District.
F. Parking shall be provided in accordance a minimum of 0.5 spaces
per dwelling unit.
40. Nursing home, hospital, hospice or medical clinic, subject to:
A. The minimum lot area required for a clinic or nursing home shall be
two acres. The minimum lot area required for a hospital shall be 10
acres.
B. In the R-3 District, a medical clinic shall only be established in
conjunction with, part of and adjacent to a non-family facility type
1, non-family facility type 2 or nursing home.
C. In the R-3 District, a clinic shall not include methadone or similar
type of treatment.
D. In the R-2 District, a hospice shall only be established in
conjunction with, part of and adjacent to a hospital.
E. The property shall be served by public water and public sewers.
F. All nursing homes and hospitals shall be licensed by the
commonwealth, and the license shall be maintained throughout the
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:788
occupancy. Failure to maintain the license shall be grounds for
revocation of the certificate of occupancy.
G. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.
H. Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
I. The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to the Township
Police Department and volunteer fire company for comments
regarding traffic safety and emergency access.
J. Nursing homes shall have a bed capacity of at least 20 beds but no
more than 200 beds.
K. All property lines adjoining a residential use or zoning classification
shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as defined by § 27-1402,
Subsection 1, of this chapter.
L. Disposal of medical waste shall be in accordance with all applicable
permits and handling requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
M. If a private-use helipad for air ambulances is proposed, the use
shall comply with § 27-1303, Subsection 46, of this chapter.
41. Oil and Gas Development. In addition to the provisions contained in
§ 27-1301 of the Township Code, an applicant/operator desiring to
engage in any oil and gas development shall be subject to the following
conditions:
A. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for an oil and gas
development shall be 20 acres. Contiguous properties can be
combined to meet the minimum acreage requirements if the
properties being combined are adjoining each other.
B. Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply for oil and gas
development unless specifically stated otherwise:
(1) Unconventional Wellhead:
(a) 500 feet from the edge of the well production pad to an
occupied structure.
(b) 200 feet from the well bore/well head to any solid blue
lined stream, spring or body of water as identified on the
most current 7 1/2 minute topographic quadrangle map of
the United States Geological Survey.
(c) 300 feet from an unconventional well bore/well head to
any solid blue lined stream, spring or body of water as
identified on the most current 7 1/2 minute topographic
quadrangle map of the United States Geological Survey.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:789
(d) 300 feet from unconventional well bore/well head to
wetlands greater than one acre in area.
(e) 200 feet from the well bore/well head to wetlands greater
than one acre in area.
(f) 1,000 feet from the edge of the well production pad to any
protected structure.
(2) Conventional Wellhead:
(a) 500 feet from the edge of the well production pad to an
occupied structure.
(b) 200 feet from the well bore/well head to any solid blue-line
stream, spring or body of water as identified on the most
current 7 1/2 minute topographic quadrangle map of the
United States Geological Survey.
(3) Owner Waiver: Applicant must meet the setbacks listed herein
unless the owner of a property, occupied and/or protected
structure located within the setback limits provides written
consent to the proposed use.
C. Sound.
(1) A sound study may be conducted by the operator prior to any
activity beginning on the site to demonstrate that sound will
not exceed the permitted decibel levels for the applicable
zoning district as set by Township ordinance or the applicable
standard imposed by state or federal law, whichever is more
stringent.
(a) In Agricultural and Residential Districts: Not to exceed 60
dBA at the nearest property line.
(b) In Commercial Districts: Not to exceed 65 dBa at the
nearest property line.
(c) In Industrial Districts: Not to exceed 75 dBa at the nearest
property line
(2) In the event of multiple zoning districts within the Township,
the more-restrictive sound level standards shall govern. In the
event that contiguous properties are combined for the oil and
gas development, the permitted decibel levels shall apply at
the exterior boundary line of the combined parcel area. In the
event operator is unable to comply with the stated standards, it
must put in place measures that may include, but shall not be
limited to:
(a) Sound Walls/Noise Barriers. The erection of sound walls/
noise barriers to bring the dBa within acceptable levels.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:790
(b) Enclosure. Enclosure of sound-generating equipment in a
sound-reduction structure that conforms to the character
of the zone in which it exists. All applicable development
plans, permits and regulations shall apply to the
enclosure. During normal operations, the structure shall
remain fully enclosed, with all doors and windows
remaining closed unless during times of egress.
(c) Mufflers. Equipment of internal combustion engine or
compressor with an exhaust muffler or an exhaust box.
Said muffler/box shall be constructed of noncombustible
material designed and installed to suppress sound and
disruptive vibrations.
(d) Obtain a release waiver of the applicable noise
requirements from the owners of the impacted property.
D. Lighting. Operator shall place lights, to the extent practicable
taking into account safety considerations, at locations so as to
avoid shine directed at public roads, protected structures and
adjacent dwellings and buildings.
E. Security Measures. Adequate security measures shall be in place at
all times to protect well sites.
F. Access Roads. Access to any oil and gas development shall be
designed to ensure safety and reduce inconvenience to adjacent
properties. The following shall also apply:
(1) The access road to the well site, beginning with its intersection
with a paved Township road, shall be paved for the first 100
feet and the remainder constructed with materials that
reasonably minimize water, sediment or debris carried onto
any public road.
(2) All access roads shall be constructed and maintained to
prevent dust and mud to the surrounding area. Operator, at its
discretion, is to implement reasonable dust abatement
measures, during dry weather conditions and under no
circumstances shall brine water, sulphur water or water in
mixture with any type of hydrocarbon be used for dust
abatement.
G. Truck Routes.
(1) The applicant shall submit a road use plan showing the
proposed routes of all trucks to be utilized for hauling
equipment, supplies and the like and the estimated weights of
those trucks and the estimated number of trucks entering and
exiting the well site on a daily basis. In conjunction with the
Township, the applicant shall design the hauling routes to and
from the facility to minimize the impact on local roads. At no
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:791
time shall any overweight vehicle travel upon any Township
roads, or portion thereof, other than the specified portion of
Township roads for which security has been provided.
(2) The operator shall also coordinate its truck route with the local
school bus schedules, which shall be provided to the Township
by the operator.
H. Signage, Site Identification. The well site signage shall comply with
act of February 2, 2012 (P.L. 67, No. 9) (Act 9), codified at 35
Pa.C.S.A. § 7321 (relating to unconventional well 911 emergency
response information), as amended.
I. Operating Times. All site preparation and preproduction activities
on the well site, as well as access road maintenance, site
reclamation activity and other ongoing ancillary activities shall be
permissible Mondays through Saturdays (with the exception of
federal and/or state holidays) between the applicable hours of
operation as set forth in the Township Code or as otherwise
authorized by the Board of Supervisors. The active drilling phase
and completions (hydraulic fracturing) are exempt from this
subsection.
J. Impoundments. The operator will provide the following information
to the Township where an operator constructs an impoundment
within the Township:
(1) A copy of the DEP impoundment permit, if applicable, must be
provided at the time of application or when available;
(2) Chain-link fencing must be installed around any impoundment
and shall be at least eight feet in height;
(3) Thirty-day advance written notice must be provided when
transitioning from freshwater to re-use water storage and the
applicant must provide a copy of the revised DEP permit when
available;
(4) The applicant shall provide a copy of the notice of termination
to the Township upon reclamation of the impoundment;
(5) Any storage of hazardous waste at the impoundment will
require signage in accordance with federal law; and
(6) Any DEP-reportable spills must be reported to the Township
within 24 hours of the incident.
K. Water Storage. In the event a certified water storage facility or
MLVT shall be placed on the site, it shall be subject to the
provisions contained in § 27-1303.11. Separate conditional use
approval shall not be required for a certified water storage facility
located on site and used as an accessory to an oil and gas
development.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:792
L. Engine and Motor Enclosures. All engines and motors not involved
in the active drilling/fracturing phase but used to facilitate the
movement of gas or regulate the pressure of gas must be enclosed.
Must also have remote/local shutdowns.
M. On-site Trailers. Operator must identify the number of temporary
trailers at the well site that accommodate rest and meals for
essential personnel during the drilling phase of operations and
such temporary trailers are subject to applicable permit fees.
Temporary trailers used to store equipment and used as office
space at the well site are not subject to fees.
N. Pipeline Information. Any oil or gas pipelines running from the well
site shall be subject to the provisions contained in § 27-1413 of the
Township Code.
O. State and Federal Compliance. The operator shall comply with all
applicable state and federal regulations. The operator shall notify
the Township immediately of any suspension or revocation of the
required state and/or federal permits associated with the well site.
P. Supplemental Regulations. The facility must meet all of the
supplemental regulations of Chapter 27, Zoning, Parts 13 (Express
Standards, General Standards) and 14 (Supplemental Regulations),
of the Township Code of Ordinances. Any and all uses categorized
as conditional uses, in addition to the specific conditions set forth
herein and the supplemental regulations of Parts 13 and 14, shall
also be subject to the general standards contained in the applicable
zoning district(s); and may be further subject to additional
conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary and appropriate by
the Township to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
Township and its residents.
42. Place of worship, schools (public and private), fire and emergency
medical services and public buildings, subject to:
A. The minimum lot area required for a secondary or postsecondary
school shall be 10 acres. The minimum lot area required for all
other uses shall be two acres.
B. If a residential facility (such as a convent or monastery) is proposed
as part of a place of worship, no more than 10 persons shall be
housed.
C. A dwelling (such as a manse or parsonage) may be located on the
same lot with a place of worship, provided that all requirements of
this chapter for single-family dwellings in the zoning district can be
met in addition to the minimum lot area, lot width and yard
requirements applicable to the place of worship.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:793
D. All uses shall be landscaped along any property line adjoining a
single-family use or zoning district classification by Buffer Area B,
as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
E. Ingress and egress to and from police, fire and emergency medical
services shall be located so as to maximize sight distance along
adjacent public streets and enhance safety for vehicles exiting the
property.
F. Fire and emergency medical services, police stations and municipal
maintenance facilities shall be located on the property so that
vehicles and equipment can be maneuvered on the property
without interrupting traffic flow or blocking public streets.
G. If a fire station includes a rental hall or banquet facilities, the
following criteria shall be met:
(1) Any rental of the facility to nonmembers shall require on-site
management and/or security personnel during the event.
(2) Off-street parking for the facility or rental hall shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of § 27-1502C
for restaurants.
(3) Activities on the site and within the building shall comply with
the noise standards specified in § 27-1401C.
(4) If entertainment is presented, doors and windows shall remain
closed during any entertainment involving a speaker system
and/or amplification.
(5) Parking areas adjoining a residential use or zoning
classification shall be screened by Buffer Area C, as defined in
§ 27-1402, Subsection 1.
H. All schools shall be designed to provide convenient access for
emergency vehicles and access to all sides of the building by firefighting
equipment.
I. All outside storage shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot-high
hedge or solid fence.
J. The proposed use shall have direct access to a public street with
sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic generated by the
proposed use.
43. Planned industrial park, planned office park or planned research or
technology park, subject to:
A. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
B. The minimum site area required shall be eight acres.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:794
C. Once the improvements are completed in an approved planned
industrial park, planned office park or planned research or
technology park, lots within an approved and recorded plan may be
sold and developed as independent entities for any authorized use
in the zoning district in which it is located.
D. Only the uses permitted by right or authorized as conditional uses
or uses by special exception in the zoning district in which the
planned industrial park, planned office park or planned research or
technology park is located shall be permitted in the planned
industrial park, planned office park or planned research or
technology park.
E. The site plan shall be designed to minimize points of access to the
public street, shared driveways shall be utilized where feasible and
cross-easements dedicated for common access where necessary.
F. The site shall be planned as a unit, and uniform signage and
landscaping and common parking and loading areas shall be
proposed to promote efficiency and preserve a common design
theme.
G. A perimeter setback of 100 feet shall be maintained along the side
and rear property lines abutting any residential district or use, and
50 feet shall be maintained along the side and rear property lines
abutting any commercial or industrial district or use.
H. The entire perimeter of the site shall be screened by Buffer Area A,
as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
I. All proposed uses shall comply with the performance standards of
§ 27-1401 of this chapter.
44. Planned shopping center, subject to:
A. The minimum site required shall be five acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
C. Once the improvements are completed in an approved shopping
center, lots within the approved and recorded shopping center may
be sold and developed as independent entities for any authorized
use in the district.
D. Private streets may serve lots that are subdivided within an
approved shopping center, provided that the shopping center has
frontage on a public street. Outparcels created within the shopping
center shall meet the minimum lot area requirements of the zoning
district, subdivisions along building walls within the shopping
center shall not be required to meet minimum lot area, lot width or
yard requirements, provided that the shopping center site
complies.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:795
E. Only uses permitted by right or authorized as conditional uses or
uses by special exception in the district in which the shopping
center is located shall be permitted in the shopping center.
F. Buffer Area A, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this
chapter, shall be provided along all property lines that adjoin any R
Residential Zoning Districts.
G. Sidewalks shall be installed in front of all stores.
H. The site plan shall be designed to minimize points of access to the
public street, shared driveways shall be utilized where feasible and
cross-easements shall be dedicated for common access where
necessary.
I. The site shall be planned as a unit, and uniform signage and
landscaping and common parking and loading areas shall be
proposed to promote efficiency and preserve a common design
theme.
J. Site lighting, if proposed, shall be designed with cutoff luminaires
with a maximum cutoff angle of 60°. (See illustration in Appendix
B.68) The maximum illumination at any property line adjoining
property in any R Residential Zoning District shall be 0.2
footcandle.
45. Private club, subject to:
A. Any establishment that includes a restaurant shall further be
subject to the off-street parking requirements of Part 15 for the
portion of the building devoted to restaurant use.
B. Any rental of the facility to nonmembers shall require on-site
management and/or security personnel during the event.
C. Activities on the site and within the building shall comply with the
noise standards specified in § 27-1401 of this chapter.
D. All off-street parking that adjoins residential zoning classification
shall be screened by a Buffer Area C, as defined by § 27-1402,
Subsection 1, of this chapter.
46. Private-use helipad, subject to:
A. Only one private-use helipad shall be permitted on a lot or parcel.
B. Private-use helipads shall be located at least 250 feet from any
property line or public street, except for helipads accessory to a
hospital that may be located so as to maximize accessibility to
existing emergency facilities.
68.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:796
C. Evidence of compliance with all applicable regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration and Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, shall be submitted.
D. The helicopter landing pad shall be clearly marked with the
insignia commonly recognized to indicate a private-use helipad.
E. The helicopter landing pad shall be paved, level and maintained
dirt free. Rooftop pads shall be free of all loose stone and
aggregate.
F. An application for a helipad on a roof shall be accompanied by a
certification by a registered engineer that the loads imposed by the
helicopter will be supported by the structure.
G. Maintenance of aircraft shall be prohibited, except for maintenance
of an emergency nature.
H. There shall be no storage of fuel at the helipad.
I. There shall be no basing of aircraft at the helipad.
J. The helipad shall be fenced and secured at all times to preclude
access by the general public.
K. Clear areas for emergency landings of the helicopter in the event of
mechanical failure shall be provided. These emergency landing
areas shall be located within the normal glide range of the
helicopter with one engine off when operating in the approved
takeoff or landing lane from the helipad.
L. Lighting shall be shielded away from adjacent properties.
47. Public parking lot or public parking garage, subject to:
A. All public parking lots or public parking garages shall be designed
to have direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street, as
defined by this chapter, unless they are located within the site of an
approved planned shopping center, planned industrial park,
planned office park or planned research or technology park.
B. All public parking lots or public parking garages shall be designed
to minimize traffic congestion on the site or within the garage and
for traffic entering or leaving the site or parking lot or garage.
C. The design of any parking garage proposed to be located on
property that adjoins an R Residential Zoning District shall take
into account the height, visual, light and air impacts on adjoining
residences and shall utilize architectural materials for the exterior
walls facing those residential areas that are compatible with the
residential character of adjoining properties.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:797
D. Any public parking garage structure, whether proposed as a
principal structure or an accessory structure, shall comply with the
yard requirements for a principal structure.
E. Any public parking lot that is reserved, in part, for the customers or
employees of a specific use shall be located within 500 feet of the
specific use that it is intended to serve.
48. Public utility building or structure, subject to:
A. The minimum lot area required shall be 21,780 square feet.
B. Maintenance vehicles shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
C. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment, other than
maintenance vehicles, shall be permitted only if the storage area is
completely enclosed by a minimum eight-foot fence with locking
gate and is screened by 100% opaque screening material placed in
the fencing or by a six-foot dense, compact evergreen hedge.
D. Any area of the building that is used for business offices shall
comply with the parking requirements of Part 15 of this chapter for
that use. Any area of the building that is used for storage of
material, vehicles or other equipment shall provide one parking
space for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area devoted to that
use.
49. Re-Entry Related Operations. In addition to the applicable provisions of
§ 27-1301 and § 27-1303.41, Re-entry related operations shall be
subject to the following:
A. Application. The operator shall also provide the following:
(1) Written certification that the operator is in compliance with the
conditions contained in the initial conditional use approval;
(2) Updated truck routing schedule over Township roads;
(3) Updated compliance with the Township's road maintenance
and bond agreement for the roads to be utilized;
(4) Updated drilling and related operations schedule/timeline; and
(5) Copies of any new or revised permits and approvals required
for the re-entry related operation.
B. Scope. The conditional use hearing will be limited to testimony and
exhibits explaining the specific related operations not covered by
the initial conditional or permitted use approval.
C. Standards and Criteria.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:798
(1) Operator may rely on the conditions set forth in the original
conditional use approval. The Township may not change or
amend the original conditions or ordinance terms concerning
setbacks, well site and/or access road location so long as they
do not adversely affect the health, welfare and safety of the
residents.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the criteria
applicable to the specific proposed re-entry related operation
(e.g., truck staging area or certified water storage facility).
50. Self-Storage, Interior, subject to:
A. All parking and loading areas shall be paved and properly drained
in accordance with the off- street parking and loading requirements
of this chapter.
B. In addition to required parking and loading area, adequate
stacking space for vehicles awaiting loading and unloading shall be
provided.
C. A manager's office may be permitted as an accessory use thereto.
Sanitary facilities shall be located indoors.
D. Outdoor lighting shall be installed in such a manner as to be
directed away from adjacent residential uses and shall be shielded
to prevent spillage of light onto adjoining properties.
E. The exterior finish of any self-storage facility shall consist primarily
of stucco or masonry (such as brick or split face block) type
materials. Thirty percent of the front face shall be highperformance
glass.
F. All buildings within a self-storage facility shall be situated so as to
comply with the minimum yard requirements set forth in § 27-1402
of this chapter. Bufferyards in accordance with § 27-1402 of this
chapter shall be maintained along all lot lines.
G. The perimeter of the site shall be fenced with a minimum six-foothigh
fence with self-latching gate. Fencing shall be of a type
approved by the Planning Commission. Chain link and/or privacy
fencing shall be prohibited along any street frontage.
H. No building within a self-storage facility shall exceed 300 feet in
length.
I. Elevations and architectural renderings shall be provided as part of
any site plan.
J. No door openings accessing storage units shall face an adjacent
residential use unless screened from view with landscaping,
mounding or other buffers.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:799
K. Storage units may not be equipped with sanitary sewer service.
L. In no event shall storage units be designed to accommodate nor
shall they be used for the storage of flammable liquids, highly
combustible or explosive materials or hazardous chemicals,
including propane or gasoline engine or storage tanks, and the use
of a self-storage facility for the same is prohibited.
M. The following activities are prohibited in conjunction with this use:
(1) Human occupancy beyond that required to transport, arrange,
and maintain stored material;
(2) Retail sales other than the ancillary sale of supplies such as
boxes, tape or similar products to those leasing individual units
within the self-storage facility (disposal of abandoned goods
pursuant to the Self-Storage Facility Act shall be permitted);
(3) The servicing, repair or fabrication of engines, motor vehicles,
boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, furniture or other
similar equipment;
(4) The operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment, table
saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns or other
similar equipment; and
(5) Transfer and storage businesses.
N. Fire hydrants shall be installed as required by the NSTMA and/or
NSTFD Fire Chief(s).
51. Specialized animal raising, animal grooming, or commercial
greenhouse, subject to:
A. A minimum site of five contiguous acres shall be required for
specialized animal raising and animal grooming.
B. A minimum site of 10 contiguous acres shall be required for a
commercial greenhouse.
C. The primary residence of the animal owner or groomer shall be
located on the same parcel of land on which the animals are
maintained.
D. The primary residence of the owner of the commercial greenhouse
shall be located on the same parcel where the greenhouse is
located.
E. The retail sales area for a greenhouse shall not exceed 1,200
square feet. The growing area shall not be considered sales area.
F. Animals shall not be bred or sold and shall be kept only for
noncommercial purposes, for recreation and/or food production for
the immediate resident family.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:800
G. Animals kept shall be limited only to those species normally raised
in the area. The number of such species shall be limited as follows:
(1) Large animals such as cattle, horses, lambs, goats and the like
shall be limited to one animal for the first five acres, plus one
for each additional acre or portion thereof up to 10 acres, not
to exceed a total of six large animals. [There is no limit on
properties of 10 acres or more.]
(2) Small mammals and fowl, such as rabbits and poultry,
excluding chickens, pigs, hogs, and swine, shall be limited to a
maximum of 10 animals for the first five acres, plus two
animals for each additional acre or portion thereof up to 10
acres, not to exceed a total of 20 mammals, fowl or any
combination thereof. [There is no limit on properties of 10
acres or more.]
H. Under no circumstances shall the raising and maintenance of pigs,
swine and hogs be permitted.
I. Animals kept shall not include any species specifically prohibited
by Township Ordinance No. 286, as now or hereafter amended.69
J. Buildings used for animal raising shall be a minimum of 75 feet
from any property line, and all corral and pasture areas shall be
fenced.
K. All activities shall be conducted so as not to create nuisances or
dangers to public health and safety.
L. The property shall be fenced by a minimum six-foot-high fence
enclosing the entire area used for specialized animal raising.
M. Agricultural sales shall not be permitted as part of specialized
animal raising. Commercial greenhouses shall be further subject to
the requirements of § 27-1408H governing agricultural sales.
N. Storage of manure or odor- or dust-producing substances shall be
located at least 200 feet from any property line.
O. All activities shall be subject to the applicable provisions of
§ 27-1408.
52. Sportsmen's club, subject to:
A. The minimum site required shall be 10 acres.
B. Any outdoor lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from
streets and adjoining properties.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Part 4.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:801
C. All outdoor activities, except the discharging of firearms, shall not
be located within 500 feet of an existing residence and shall cease
operations at sunset.
D. Discharging of firearms shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any
existing residence.
E. The use shall comply with the performance standards of § 27-1401
of this chapter.
F. All properties adjoining a residential use or zoning classification
shall be screened by buffer areas, as defined by § 27-1402,
Subsection 1, of this chapter.
G. If the club proposes an outdoor shooting range, the following
criteria shall be met:
(1) The shooting range shall not be illuminated; and
(2) Two parking spaces shall be provided for each shooting
position or station.
53. Storage Depots, Truck Staging Areas. In addition to the applicable
provisions of § 27-1301 and § 27-1303.41, storage depots and/or truck
staging areas shall be subject to the following:
A. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area required for a site shall
be two acres. A certified survey of the site area must be provided
prior to operations commencing.
B. Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks must be met from the
edge of any truck staging area (measured from the edge of the
parking pad) and storage depot (measured from the edge of
disturbed area not including any fencing) unless waived by the
owner of the property adjacent to the delineated setback:
(1) No part of the parking pad may be located within 50 feet of a
public road or public right-of-way;
(2) At least 200 feet from an occupied structure;
(3) At least 1,000 feet from a protected structure.
C. Surface. The surface of the staging area/storage depot shall be
designed in a manner that would reasonably minimize water,
sediment or debris carried onto any public road.
D. Application Information. In addition to the application
requirements set forth in § 27-1101, the applicant shall provide:
(1) A location map showing the location of the site in the Township
and the proposed ingress to and egress from the site.
(2) The anticipated types of vehicles to be accommodated.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:802
(3) Applicant/operator must provide a list of materials to be stored
on site to the best of its ability. This list must be provided to the
Township's emergency responders in the event of an incident
on site.
(4) Copies of any permits or approvals required for the
construction or operation of the storage depot or truck staging
area.
E. Site Circulation.
(1) Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be
designed to ensure safe access by all vehicles.
(2) Signs must be posted to direct traffic within the truck staging
area.
F. Operator must reclaim the site in accordance with state and federal
law.
G. No garbage, hazardous materials or hazardous waste, as defined by
federal statute, or other organic waste shall be stored on the
premises.
H. A truck staging area may be located on a parcel with other uses as
long as the parcel provides parking for the other uses in
accordance with the Township's Zoning Ordinance, off-street
parking and loading provisions.
I. Supplemental Regulations. The facility must meet all of the
supplemental regulations of Chapter 27, Zoning Parts 13 (Express
Standards, General Standards) and 14 (Supplemental Regulations),
of the Township Code of Ordinances. Any and all uses categorized
as conditional uses shall, in addition to the specific conditions set
forth herein and the supplemental regulations of Parts 13 and 14,
also be subject to the general standards contained in the applicable
zoning district(s); and may be further subject to additional
applicable conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary and
appropriate by the Township.
54. Supporting commercial uses in a planned office park or a planned
research or technology park, subject to:
A. Supporting commercial uses shall be limited to one or more of the
following uses:
(1) Business services.
(2) Travel agency.
(3) Pharmacy, in a building housing medical offices, a clinic or a
diagnostic or testing facility.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:803
(4) Sale of medical supplies and equipment, in a building housing
medical offices, a clinic or diagnostic or testing facility.
(5) Newsstand or tobacco shop.
(6) Card and gift shop or stationers store.
(7) Florist.
(8) Beauty shop or barbershop.
(9) Coffee shop, delicatessen or sandwich shop providing either
sit-down or take-out service primarily for convenience of
employees of the office park or research or technology park.
(10) Restaurant.
B. Supporting commercial uses may be located on the ground or first
floor of any principal building or may be located in a freestanding
principal or accessory building. The uses shall be located within the
site of the planned office park or planned research or technology
park and shall be accessed from the interior street system.
Outparcels fronting on arterial or collector streets shall not be
permitted to be developed for supporting commercial uses.
C. The maximum gross floor area devoted to any single restaurant
establishment that is open to the general public shall be 10,000
square feet.
D. Except for restaurants as regulated by Subsection 54C, above, the
maximum gross floor area devoted to any single supporting
commercial establishment shall be 5,000 square feet.
E. Off-street parking for restaurants shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of Part 15 of this chapter for the use.
F. Off-street parking for supporting commercial uses other than
restaurants shall be provided at the ratio of one parking space for
each 500 square feet of gross floor area.
G. The gross floor area devoted to all supporting commercial uses
shall not exceed 15% of the gross floor area devoted to office or
research use.
55. Surface mining, subject to:
A. Removal of minerals encountered during the routine grading of a
site for the purposes of an approved land development or for the
construction of public improvements shall be excluded from these
regulations and the requirement to obtain approval of a conditional
use application, provided that evidence is presented to the
Township that all applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) are met.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:804
B. There shall be no removal of minerals or vegetative cover within
100 feet of the bank of any stream or natural watercourse identified
on maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (UDGD).
C. Mineral removal shall be prohibited in watersheds or rivers or
streams now or hereafter designated by the Pennsylvania Fish
Commission as a "wilderness trout stream," by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection as part of the scenic
rivers system or designated under the Federal Wild and Scenic
Rivers Act.
D. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 300 feet of the
property line of any public building, school, place of worship,
community or institutional building, commercial building, public
park or private recreational area.
E. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 100 feet of the
outside right-of-way line of any public street, except where access
roads or haulage roads join the right-of-way line and where the
appropriate state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the
conduct of mineral removal operations shall permit it in accordance
with law.
F. No mineral removal shall be conducted that will adversely affect
any publicly owned park or places included in the National Register
of Historic Sites, unless approved by the governmental agency with
jurisdiction over the park or historic site.
G. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 100 feet of the
property line of a cemetery.
H. No mineral removal shall be conducted within 300 feet of the
property line of an occupied dwelling, unless the consent of the
owner has been obtained in advance of the filing of the application
for zoning approval.
I. The applicant shall submit to the Township a copy of all materials
provided to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP) with the permit application.
J. The applicant shall show the proposed routes of all trucks to be
utilized for hauling and the estimated weights of those trucks. The
applicant shall show evidence of compliance with designated
weight limits on Township streets and shall design the hauling
routes for the mineral removal operation to minimize the impact on
local streets within the Township.
K. The operator shall post a bond in favor of the Township and in a
form acceptable to the Township prior to beginning operations to
guarantee restoration of Township streets that may be damaged
during the mineral removal operations.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:805
L. Portions of the site where mineral removal operations are
conducted may be required to be fenced or screened, as necessary,
to provide security and protect adjacent properties.
M. No top-of-slope or quarry wall shall be located closer than 100 feet
to any property or street line. The perimeter surrounding the area
of operation shall be fenced with a chain-link fence of a minimum
height of six feet to prevent access by both animals and children.
N. No rock crusher, cement plant or other crushing, grinding,
polishing or cutting machinery or other physical or chemical
process for treating such products shall be permitted.
O. The applicant shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations and shall show evidence of obtaining the required state
and federal permits, including proof of insurability, before initiating
any work and shall maintain the required permits throughout the
duration of all operations. Any suspension or revocation of the
required state or federal permits shall constitute a violation of
zoning approval and will result in the suspension or revocation of
zoning approval and/or enforcement of the penalty provisions of
this chapter.
P. If blasting is proposed, it shall be subject to approval by the Board
of Supervisors.
(1) Applications for approval of blasting shall include the following
information:
(a) A site survey documenting the land uses on the perimeter
of the site.
(b) Photographs of preexisting conditions on immediately
adjacent properties.
(c) Credentials, certifications and experience of the
contractor selected to perform the blasting.
(d) References from previous projects of similar size and
nature.
(e) A geotechnical report prepared by a qualified geotechnical
engineer documenting subsurface conditions on the site
and the potential impacts on adjoining properties and
recommendations to mitigate negative impacts.
(2) If blasting is approved, a seismograph shall be placed on the
site during all times when blasting is performed. Seismograph
readings shall be monitored by an independent engineering
consultant whose credentials are acceptable to the Township
and whose fee is paid by the applicant.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:806
Q. Approval of the conditional use shall expire if work authorized in
the application for the conditional use is not commenced within six
months of the date of approval of the conditional use application by
the Board of Supervisors, unless the applicant submits a written
request for an extension prior to the expiration of the six months
after the date of approval.
R. Once work is initiated under an approved application for
conditional use, zoning approval shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of conditional use approval by the Board of
Supervisors. An application for renewal of zoning approval shall be
submitted prior to the expiration of zoning approval and shall be
approved by the Zoning Officer upon demonstration by the
applicant that all conditions of approval of the conditional use and
the required federal and state permits remain in full force and
effect and that the applicant is diligently pursuing the completion
of the mineral removal operation.
S. During the mineral removal operation, the Township Engineer may
inspect the site at the request of the Board of Supervisors to
determine continuing compliance with these standards and criteria
and any conditions of approval. The cost of inspection by the
Township Engineer shall be borne by the operator.
56. Truck and heavy equipment rental, sales and service, subject to:
A. The minimum site required shall be five acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
C. No part of any truck or heavy equipment or accessories displayed
outdoors shall be less than 35 feet from any A or R District nor less
than 20 feet from any other property line. No vehicle or equipment
shall be parked on adjacent property or in any public street rightof-
way.
D. No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale that does not have
all of the mechanical and body components necessary for its safe
and lawful operation.
E. A permanent structure for office administration, sales, rental and/
or servicing shall be provided.
F. All property lines adjoining an A or R District shall be screened by
Buffer Area A, as defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, of this
chapter.
57. Truck terminal, subject to:
A. The minimum site required shall be five acres.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:807
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter. Access to a
local street, as defined by this chapter, shall not be permitted.
C. No point on the site boundary shall be located within 300 feet of
any point on a site boundary of a property containing a residential
dwelling.
D. Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure safety and minimize congestion.
E. Site lighting shall be designed with cutoff luminaries that have a
maximum cutoff angle of 60°. (See illustration in Appendix B.70)
The maximum illumination at any property line shall be 0.2
footcandle.
F. All property lines adjoining a residential use or zoning classification
shall be screened by Buffer Area A, as defined by § 27-1402,
Subsection 1, of this chapter.
G. In the front yard, an earthen mound shall be provided along the
entire public street frontage and Buffer Area A shall be planted on
the earthen mound. All landscaping shall comply with the
provisions of § 27-1403D regarding visibility at driveway entrances.
H. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of Part 15 of this chapter.
I. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building.
J. No repair of vehicles shall be permitted outside a completely
enclosed building.
K. All operations shall comply with the performance standards of
§ 27-1401 of this chapter.
58. Two-family dwellings, subject to:
A. The minimum site required to develop two-family dwellings shall be
five contiguous acres.
B. The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to a
street defined by this chapter as an arterial street or collector
street.
C. The minimum lot area required for a two-family dwelling shall be
21,780 square feet (that is, 10,890 square feet per dwelling unit).
D. If the properties are proposed to be subdivided for fee-simple
ownership of each dwelling unit, the units may be divided along the
common walls without a variance for the side yard required in the
70.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-1303 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1303
1:808
R-2 District, provided that the minimum lot area of 10,890 square
feet per dwelling unit is provided and the minimum lot width of 75
feet is provided for each dwelling unit's lot and all other applicable
area and bulk regulations are met for each lot.
E. The design of the two-family dwellings shall be compatible with the
style of the single-family dwellings on adjoining properties, if any.
The orientation of the garages and entries to the two-family
dwellings shall be designed to maximize the appearance of a large
single-family dwelling.
F. Where two-family dwellings are located on corner lots, the design
of the two-family dwelling shall consider facing the entrance to
each dwelling unit on a different street frontage, if practical.
G. Two integral parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling
unit.
H. The two-family dwellings shall be designed to incorporate privacy
patios or interior courtyards for each dwelling unit, where feasible.
59. Veterinary clinic, subject to:
A. The minimum lot area required for a veterinary clinic shall be
21,780 square feet, unless the veterinary clinic is located within a
planned shopping center.
B. Outdoor kennels or runs shall not be permitted in the C-1 and C-2
Districts.
C. Overnight boarding of animals, other than for medical supervision,
shall be permitted, if the animals are housed overnight within a
completely enclosed building.
D. Kennels associated with veterinary clinics shall be licensed by the
commonwealth and shall continue to maintain a valid license
throughout their operation. Any suspension of the license shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions of § 27-1901 of this chapter.
E. Kennels shall comply with the standards of § 27-1303, Subsection
30.
F. Odors shall be controlled so as to comply with the performance
standards of § 27-1401 of this chapter.
G. The veterinary clinic shall not be located within 300 feet of an
occupied dwelling on adjacent property unless the building is
soundproofed.
§ 27-1303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1303
1:809

Part 14
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 27-1400. Applicability. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The supplemental regulations in this Part supplement the requirements of
Parts 4 through 12 governing each zoning district and shall apply to all uses
in all zoning districts.
§ 27-1401. Performance Standards. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. All permitted uses, conditional uses and uses by special exception in all
districts shall comply with the requirements of this section. In order to
determine whether a proposed use will conform to the requirements of
this chapter, the Board of Supervisors or Zoning Hearing Board may
require a qualified consultant to testify, whose cost for services shall be
borne by the applicant.
A. Fire Protection. Fire prevention and fire-fighting equipment
acceptable to the Board of Fire Underwriters shall be readily
available when any activity involving the handling or storage of
flammable or explosive materials is carried on.
B. Electrical Disturbance. No activity shall cause electrical
disturbance adversely affecting radio or other equipment in the
vicinity.
C. Noise. No operation or activity shall cause or create noise in excess
of the sound levels prescribed below:
(1) Residential districts: at no point beyond the boundary of any lot
within these districts shall the exterior noise level resulting
from any use or activity located on such lot exceed a maximum
of 60 dBA for more than four hours during a twenty-four-hour
equivalent period.
(2) Commercial districts: at no point on or beyond the boundary of
any lot within these districts shall the exterior noise level
resulting from any use or activity located on such lot exceed a
maximum of 65 dBA for more than eight hours during a twentyfour-
hour equivalent period.
(3) Industrial districts: at no point on or beyond the boundary of
any lot within these districts shall the exterior noise level
resulting from any use or activity located on such lot exceed a
maximum of 75 dBA for more than eight hours during a twentyfour-
hour equivalent period.
(4) Where two or more zoning districts in which different noise
levels are prescribed share a common boundary, the most
restrictive noise level standards shall govern.
§ 27-1400 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1401
1:811
(5) The following uses or activities shall be exempted from the
noise regulations:
(a) Noises emanating from construction or maintenance
activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(b) Noises caused by safety signals, warning devices and
other emergency-related activities or uses.
(c) Noises emanating from public or private recreational uses
between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(6) In addition to the above regulations, all uses and activities
within the Township shall conform to all applicable county,
state and federal regulations. Whenever the regulations
contained herein are at variance with any other lawfully
adopted rules or requirements, the more restrictive shall
govern.
D. Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on
neighboring property in any zoning district shall be prohibited.
E. Odors. No use shall emit odorous gas or other odorous matter in
such quantities as to be offensive at any point on or beyond the lot
lines. The guide for determining such quantities shall be the 50%
response level of Table I (Odor Thresholds in Air), Research on
Chemical Odors: Part I — Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial
Chemicals, October, 1968, Manufacturing Chemists Association,
Inc., Washington, D.C.
F. Smoke, Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors And Gases. There shall be no
emission at any point for longer than five minutes in any hour of
visible gray or other color smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors or gases
with a shade darker than No. 3 on the Standard Ringlemann Chart
issued by the U.S. Bureau of Mines; nor shall there be any emission
at any point from any source that can cause damage to health, to
animals or vegetation or to other forms of property or which can
cause excessive soiling at any point.
G. Lighting and Glare.
(1) The purpose of these provisions is to:
(a) Minimize light trespass from buildings, structures and lot
improvements;
(b) Reduce night-time light pollution that causes sky-glow;
and
(c) Reduce visibility impairing glare.
(2) The applicant shall submit a photometrics plan to measure the
light impact of the exterior lighting improvements. The
§ 27-1401 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1401
1:812
photometrics plan shall describe the maximum illumination
values and average illumination value required herein as part
of the submission.
(3) Low voltage and light emitting dioide (LED) lighting systems
are encouraged.
(4) Two lighting zones and the applicable zoning district as well as
the respective illumination levels for each zone are as follows:
(a) Light Zone 1: Agricultural and Residential Zones.
1) There shall be a maximum illumination value shall be
0.10 horizontal and vertical footcandles at all lot lines
when measured three feet above the ground surface.
2) The maximum on-site illumination value shall be three
footcandles and the average on-site illumination value
shall be less than or equal to one footcandle when
measured three above the ground surface.
3) No more than 5% of the fixture's lumens shall be
emitted at a ninety-degree angle or greater from
nadir.
4) Lights on motion sensors shall not be triggered by
movement or activity located off the property on
which the light is located.
(b) Light Zone 2: Nonresidential Zones.
1) There shall be a maximum illumination value of 0.20
horizontal and vertical footcandles at all lot lines when
measured three feet above the ground surface.
2) The maximum on-site illumination value shall be five
footcandles and the average on-site illumination value
shall be less than or equal to 1.5 footcandles when
measured three feet above the ground surface.
3) No more than 10% of the fixture's lumens shall be
emitted at a ninety-degree angle or greater from
nadir.
4) Lighting associated with any canopy constructed on
the lot shall be installed as internal illumination of the
canopy only.
(5) All outdoor lighting shall be designed, installed, located and
maintained so that nuisance glare onto adjacent lots or streets
shall be minimized and all direct illumination kept within the
boundaries of the lot.
§ 27-1401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1401
1:813
§ 27-1402. Buffer Areas and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(6) Installations producing disabling glare shall not be permitted
within the Township.
(7) Glare shall not exceed a rating of 3 on the DeBoer Scale.
H. Erosion. No runoff of water or erosion of land by wind or water
shall be permitted onto adjacent properties. Measures satisfactory
to the Township shall be installed to control runoff and/or erosion.
I. Water Pollution. Water quality shall be subject to the standards
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP).
J. Determination of Compliance with Performance Standards. During
the review of an application for zoning approval, the applicant may
be required to submit data and evidence documenting that the
proposed activity, facility or use will comply with the provisions of
this section. In reviewing such documentation, the Township may
seek the assistance of any public agency having jurisdiction or
interest in the particular issues and the Township may seek advice
from a qualified technical expert. All costs of the expert's review
and report shall be paid by the applicant. A negative report by the
technical expert and the applicant's refusal or inability to make
alterations to ensure compliance with this section shall be a basis
for denying approval of the application.
K. Continuing Enforcement.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of
the performance standards and, subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors, may employ qualified technical experts
to assist in the determination of a violation. Costs of the
services of such experts shall be paid by the owner or operator
of the facility or use accused of the violation if the facility or
use is found to be in violation. If the facility or use is found to
be in compliance with the performance standards when the
Township initiated the enforcement, said costs shall be borne
by the Township. If a complainant requests the enforcement by
the Township and the facility or use is found to be in
compliance with the performance standards, said costs shall be
borne by the complainant.
(2) If the facility or use is found to be in violation, the owner or
operator shall be given written notice of the violation in
accordance with § 27-1901 of this chapter and a reasonable
length of time to correct the violation. Failure to correct the
violation shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this
chapter and shall result in the revocation of the occupancy
permit for the facility or use.
§ 27-1401 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1402
1:814
1. Buffer Areas Described. Buffer areas, as defined by this chapter and
required by § 27-1402, Subsection 2, shall meet all of the following
criteria. (See Appendix C for illustrations of buffer areas.71)
A. Buffer Area A shall contain two rows of plantings. Each row shall
consist of a mixture of 30% deciduous and 70% evergreen plantings
spaced within the row a minimum of 15 feet apart, measured from
the vertical center lines of adjacent trees. The two rows shall be
staggered in a manner which shall result in adjacent trees on two
different rows being no more than 10 feet apart, measured from the
vertical center lines of the trees. The depth of Buffer Area A shall
be 35 feet, as measured from the property line.
B. Buffer Area B shall contain one row of plantings which shall consist
of a mixture of 30% deciduous and 70% evergreen spaced within
the row a minimum of 10 feet apart, measured from the vertical
center lines of adjacent trees. The depth of Buffer Area B shall be
25 feet, as measured from the property line.
C. Buffer Area C shall be comprised of a continuous, compact
evergreen hedge or line of evergreen trees that will grow together
when mature and that are a minimum of six feet in height at the
time of planting. The depth of Buffer Area C shall be 15 feet, as
measured from the property line.
D. None of the required plantings shall encroach across any property
line. All plantings shall be located so that, at maturity, all parts of
the tree shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 feet from any public street
right-of-way or any property line that constitutes the exterior
boundary of the buffer area.
E. In the event that existing vegetation and/or existing topography
provides screening that is adequate to meet the intent of the
required buffer area to screen the buildings, activities and parking
areas from adjoining residential properties, the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission,
may determine that the existing topography and/or vegetation
constitutes all or part of the required buffer area. If such a
determination is made, the applicant may be required to record a
conservation easement, of the depth specified by the Board of
Supervisors, to guarantee that the existing topography and/or
vegetation will not be disturbed or removed from the approved
buffer area.
F. When there are substantial differences in elevation between the
first-floor elevation of the proposed construction and the elevation
of the property line along which the buffer area is required, the
buffer area may be relocated to the top of the slope or the toe of the
slope, whichever provides the more effective visual.
71.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-1402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1402
1:815
G. In the event that a public street right-of-way, dedicated and
accepted by the Township, separates the two dissimilar uses
specified, the buffer area shall not be required.
H. In the case of a lot that is deeper than 400 feet, the requirement to
provide the buffer area along the entire perimeter of the lot may be
waived by the Township Supervisors, provided that the required
buffer area is installed along the side property lines and across the
rear yard at a sufficient depth to screen the buildings and parking
areas from adjacent properties.
I. Openings for driveways shall be permitted to cross a required
buffer area. Plantings in required buffer areas shall be located so as
to not obstruct visibility for traffic entering or leaving the site and
shall be subject to the clear sight triangle requirements of
§ 27-1403D of this chapter.
J. No structures or uses shall be permitted in the required buffer
area, other than fences, active or passive recreation facilities and
stormwater management facilities, provided that the structures or
uses do not interfere with the required plantings in the buffer area,
and provided that all plantings are located outside any stormwater
management structure. Structures or uses not permitted within the
required buffer area include but are not limited to buildings,
accessory structures, parking spaces, access drives and lighting
devices.
K. When common open space is provided on a development site, the
required buffer area shall be located within the common open
space and shall not be located on any individual residential lot.
2. Buffer Areas Required. Buffer Areas A, B and C listed in § 27-1402,
Subsection 1, above shall be required under the following
circumstances:
A. Buffer Area A. Buffer Area A shall be required:
(1) Along all property lines where any development in the C-2 or
I-1 District adjoins property in an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3
District.
(2) Where the express standards and criteria for a conditional use
or use by special exception in § 27-1303 of this chapter specify
that Buffer Area A is required.
(3) Along all property lines where a planned residential
development adjoins property in an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3
District.
(4) Along all property lines where multifamily dwellings adjoin
property in an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3 District.
B. Buffer Area B. Buffer Area B shall be required:
§ 27-1402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1402
1:816
(1) Along all property lines where any development in the C-1
District adjoins property in an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3
District.
(2) Along all property lines where the expansion of a legal
nonconforming use in any A-1, A-2 or R District adjoins
property in an A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3 District.
(3) Where the express standards and criteria for a conditional use
or use by special exception in § 27-1303 of this chapter specify
that Buffer Area B is required.
C. Buffer Area C. Buffer Area C shall be required:
(1) Where the express standards and criteria for a conditional use
or use by special exception in § 27-1303 of this chapter specify
that Buffer Area C is required.
(2) On developed nonresidential properties in the R-1-V, C-1 or C-2
District where existing conditions such as building location and
existing paving of the parking lot make it impossible to meet
the requirements for Buffer Area B along a property line that
adjoins property in the A-1, A-2, R-1-V, R-2 or R-3 District.
3. Conflict Between Buffer Area and Yard Requirements. When the width
of a required buffer area is in conflict with the minimum yard
requirements of Parts 4 through 12, the greater distance shall apply.
The buffer area planting requirement shall be adhered to regardless of
the yard requirement.
4. Existing Structures in Buffer Areas. In instances where an existing
structure is located within any required buffer area, the buffer area may
be reduced, provided that the buffer area is not less than the minimum
distance between the existing structure and the property line. This
reduced buffer area width shall apply only to the side of the existing
structure that encroaches on the required buffer area. The required
buffer area, as determined by § 27-1402, Subsection 2, shall apply on all
other sides of the existing structure.
5. Existing Trees in Buffer Areas.
A. Where trees already exist within the required buffer area, these
trees shall remain undisturbed, except that diseased or dead
material may be removed. If it is determined that some healthy
trees must be removed in conjunction with development, a written
request to remove such trees must be submitted to the Township,
along with an explanation detailing the rationale for the request.
These trees shall not be removed until the Township has given
written authorization permitting said removal. This permission will
not be unreasonably denied; however, those who violate this
section shall be subject to the maximum penalties authorized by
this chapter.
§ 27-1402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1402
1:817
B. When any trees, regardless of their physical condition, are
removed, they shall be replaced by trees suitable to the
environment. (See Appendix D for a suggested list of plant
materials.72) All such replacement planting shall be in accordance
with accepted conservation practices.
6. Size of Trees in Required Buffer Areas.
A. Any existing trees within the required buffer area that are a
minimum of four inches in diameter at a point one foot above the
ground shall be preserved and shall count as a required tree within
the buffer area. At no point, however, shall any existing trees and
required trees be separated at a distance greater than the distance
specified in the required buffer area.
B. All trees required to be planted within the buffer area shall be a
minimum of two inches in diameter at a point one foot above the
ground, measured along the trunk of the planted tree, which tree
shall be planted in accordance with accepted conservation
practices. All required trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height
at time of planting, measured from the ground adjacent to the
planted tree to the top of the tree.
7. Responsibility For Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the
landowner or lessee to assure the continued growth of all required
landscaping and/or to replace the same in the event of frost, vandalism,
disease or other reasons for the discontinued growth of the required
trees, shrubs and bushes. The landowner shall record a restrictive
covenant on the land guaranteeing perpetual maintenance and
preservation of the required buffer area. Upon inspection by the
Township and issuance of an enforcement notice in accordance with
§ 27-1901, Subsection 2, of this chapter, the landowner or lessee shall
replace required landscaping materials with like type and size if the
required plant materials do not survive for any reason at any time after
occupancy of the property.
8. Stormwater Management Facilities in Buffer Areas. Stormwater
management facilities and structures may be maintained within a
buffer area, but the existence of such facilities or structures shall not be
a basis for a failure to meet the planting requirements.
9. Landscaping of Open Areas. All yard areas not utilized for parking
facilities, driveways, gardens, the planting of trees or shrubs, flower,
vegetable or herb beds or similar uses shall be seeded, sodded or
landscaped within a reasonable period of time. The phrase "a
reasonable period of time" shall be interpreted to be within two weeks
after construction activities are completed, unless those activities are
completed between a November 1 through April 1 time period. In such
case, the required sodding or seeding shall occur by April 15, and
72.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-1402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1402
1:818
erosion and sedimentation controls acceptable to the Township
Engineer shall be installed during the winter months and until such
landscaping is completed.
10. Additional Landscaping Specifications. Landscaping shall be provided
in accordance with the following specifications:
A. Planting required in buffer areas as outlined in § 27-1402,
Subsection 2, shall not be substituted for any required planting
mandated in this section.
B. Plant materials shall be selected from the List of Suggested Plant
materials in Appendix D73 or equivalent materials.
C. The landscaping plan required by the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance74 shall contain the following
information to demonstrate compliance with this § 27-1402:
(1) All required buffer areas with proposed plantings (identifying
each proposed tree, bush or shrub), drawn to scale and
identifying the height and width of any proposed mounds.
(2) All required planting independent of any buffer area
requirements (identifying each tree, bush, shrub, the use of
sod or seeding, etc.), drawn to scale.
(3) Any planting in excess of the requirements in § 27-1402,
Subsections 1 and 2, of this chapter.
(4) Any existing trees or vegetation that are to be preserved,
accurately identifying their relative location.
(5) Any existing trees or vegetation that will be removed,
accurately identifying their relative location.
D. Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the
requirements of § 27-1501J.
E. Nonresidential Developments.
(1) In any nonresidential development, deciduous trees shall be
planted in accordance with the following schedule. These trees
shall be in addition to the trees provided in any required buffer
area or parking area.
73.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1402
1:819
Building Footprint Requirement
1,000 to 30,000 square
feet
1 tree for each 1,000 square feet of
building footprint
30,001 to 75,000 square
feet
A minimum of 30 trees, plus 1 tree
for each 3,000 square feet of
building footprint in excess of
30,000 square feet
Over 75,000 square feet A minimum of 45 trees, plus 1 tree
for each 5,000 square feet of
building footprint over 75,000
square feet
(2) The required trees shall be planted in clusters on the site and
shall be distributed throughout the site to enhance the open
space on the site. The final location of the plantings shall be
subject to approval by the Township, depending on the size of
the site, the magnitude of the required buffer area and the
amount of paving and building coverage proposed.
F. Developments Containing Multifamily Dwellings.
(1) In any development that contains multifamily dwellings,
deciduous trees shall be planted in accordance with the
following schedule. These trees shall be in addition to the trees
provided in any required.
Number of
Multifamily Dwellings Required Trees
First 25 dwelling units 1 tree for each dwelling unit
26 to 100 dwelling units 25 trees, plus 1 tree for each 2
dwelling units in excess of 25
dwelling units
101 to 200 dwelling
units
62 trees, plus 1 tree for each 3
dwelling units in excess of 100
dwelling units
201 + dwelling units 95 trees, plus 1 tree for each 4
dwelling units in excess of 200
dwelling units
(2) The required trees shall be planted as front yard trees or may
be clustered in groups around the multifamily dwelling units
and shall not be located within any public street right-of-way.
G. All trees that are required to be planted as per the regulations of
§ 27-1402 shall be a minimum of two inches in diameter at a point
one foot above the ground at the time of planting, measured along
§ 27-1402 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1402
1:820
§ 27-1403. Special Yard Requirements. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
the trunk of the planted tree, which tree shall be planted in
accordance with accepted conservation practices.
H. In conjunction with the development of property for any use, the
applicant shall show that the removal of any trees or natural
vegetation is necessary for the imminent and orderly development
of the property. "Imminent development" shall be considered to be
development which is reasonably expected to commence, and for
which there are realistic plans to commence, on a minimum eighthours-
per-day, forty-hours-per-week basis (utilizing a five-day-on,
two-day-off, standard workweek basis), within 30 days of the
removal of trees or vegetation and for which a land development
plan and landscaping plan have been submitted and approved by
the Township.
I. Any existing trees that are not disturbed and are not located within
a required buffer area and are a minimum of four inches in
diameter at a point one foot above the ground shall count towards
the required number of trees to be planted outside of the buffer
area.
1. In addition to the yard requirements specified in each zoning district,
the following yard requirements shall apply in all zoning districts to the
applicable circumstances described below:
A. Corner Lots. Corner lots shall provide front yards on each street
frontage. The remaining two yards shall constitute side yards.
B. Nonconforming Lots of Record. See § 27-1703 of this chapter.
C. Accessory Structures. In all zoning districts, the following
regulations shall apply to accessory structures:
(1) Private swimming pools and associated decks and patios
accessory to a dwelling.
(a) Swimming pools accessory to a dwelling shall be located at
least 15 feet from the rear property line. Swimming pools
accessory to a dwelling shall not be permitted in the
minimum required front yard or in the minimum required
side yard.
(b) All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a continuous
fence or wall as permitted by the most current version of
the International Building Code § 3109 not less than four
feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate
designed to prevent access to the pool when it is not in
use. The dwelling may be part of the enclosure.
§ 27-1402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1403
1:821
(c) In the case of an aboveground pool, when any point on the
top circumference of the pool is less than four feet above
the adjacent ground level, the entire pool shall be enclosed
by a continuous fence or wall as permitted by the most
current version of the International Building Code
§ 27-3109 not less than four feet in height with a selfclosing,
self-latching gate. Any aboveground pool that is at
least four feet above the adjacent ground level around the
entire top circumference of the pool shall not be required
to be fenced, provided that the pool has a retractable
ladder or steps that is kept retracted when the pool is not
in use.
(2) Private Sports Courts Accessory to a Dwelling. Sports courts
accessory to a dwelling shall be located only in a side or rear
yard and shall be no closer to the side or rear property line
than 15 feet. Lighting of the sports court shall not be
permitted. All sports courts shall be enclosed by a fence that is
a minimum of 10 feet in height and a maximum of 12 feet in
height and that shall contain openings equal to 50% or more of
the surface area of the fence. The area of the sports court shall
not exceed 50% of the total area of the rear yard.
(3) Fences.
(a) A zoning permit shall be required to erect a fence within
North Strabane Township.
(b) Fences accessory to a farm shall be permitted in any
required yard, provided that the maximum height shall not
exceed six feet. A permit shall not be required for farm
fences.
(c) The maximum permitted height of an open fence/wall/
barrier or a closed fence/wall/barrier is six feet, with the
exception of the following:
1) The only fences/walls/barriers permitted in front yards
(Refer to Figure A) in residential districts shall be
ornamental fences/walls/barriers, limited to four feet
in height. Fences/walls/barriers shall have equally
spaced open and closed sections of the same
dimension. No opening shall be less than three inches
and the fence/wall/barrier shall have a minimum
transparency of 60%. The following materials are
permitted as visible surfaces for an ornamental fence/
wall/barriers:
a) Aluminum picket (with safe picket tops).
b) Wrought iron picket (with safe picket tops).
§ 27-1403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1403
1:822
c) Brick.
d) Stone.
e) Cast concrete.
f) Wood board.
g) Wood picket.
h) Wood rail.
i) Vinyl picket.
j) Finished composite wood picket.
k) Finished or cast concrete.
l) Shadowbox fence.
2) Retaining walls necessary to support geotechnical
needs of a lot shall be permitted.
3) For commercial uses in all nonresidential zoning
districts, the maximum height of a security fence shall
be eight feet. Solid screening fences shall be
permitted as otherwise provided for by this chapter to
screen dumpsters, loading berths and outside storage
areas.
4) For industrial uses in all nonresidential zoning
district, the maximum height of a fence or wall shall
be 10 feet. Solid screening fences shall be permitted
as otherwise provided for by this chapter to screen
dumpsters, loading berths and outside storage areas.
5) A fence/wall/barrier around a tennis court may be a
maximum of 10 feet in height.
6) A fence/wall/barrier not exceeding 10 feet in height
may be erected in any required yard for schools,
playgrounds or parks or in any required side or rear
yard in commercial or industrial districts.
(d) Chainlink or cyclone fences are not permitted in front
yards.
(e) For fences/walls/barriers situated in side and rear yards
(Refer to Figure A) in any residential zoning district, the
maximum barrier height shall be reduced to four feet once
it extends into the front yard.
§ 27-1403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1403
1:823
Figure A: Fence/Wall/Barrier and Yard Regulations
(f) Hedges and shrubbery shall not constitute an open/closed
fence/wall/barrier.
(g) Any fence/wall/barrier through which an electrical current
can be passed, giving an electric shock to any person or
animal touching it, is not permitted.
(h) For fence/wall/barrier requirements for outdoor swimming
pools, refer to § 3109, Swimming Pool Enclosures and
Safety Devices, of the IBC Code for Swimming Pools (most
current version).
(i) Structural members such as stringers, rails, or the like
that are used to support or stabilize a fence/wall/barrier
shall only be situated upon the interior side of the fence/
wall/barrier, facing the interior of the lot and not visible
from adjacent lots or rights-of-way.
(j) If any fence/wall/barrier is constructed of a combination of
materials, the structural material shall only be situated on
the interior of the structure. (See Figure 2: Interior/
Exterior Face Orientation — Brick, Stone, or Cast
Concrete, on file in Township Municipal Building.)
(k) Transparent or opaque fabric windscreens affixed to a
fence/wall/barrier shall be permitted only as a temporary
§ 27-1403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1403
1:824
installation when located in the front yard. Any graphic,
illustration, and/or text that shall be subject to Township
sign requirements for the zoning district in which the lot
exists. A permanent windscreen shall only be permitted
to be affixed to a fence/wall/barrier located in the side
and/or rear yard of a lot. No graphic, illustration and/
or text shall exceed 72 square inches on any one face
of said permanent windscreen. No permanent windscreen
shall be permitted between the front lot line and the front
facade as measured farthest from the lot line. Such an
installation shall require the approval of the Township
Code Enforcement Officer. The permitted period of time
of the installation shall be six months, with the ability to
extend the permitted period by 60 days with the approval
of the Township Manager.
(4) Satellite Dish Antennas. Satellite dish antennas for personal
use by private citizens, not including communications
antennas, as defined by this chapter, shall be permitted as an
accessory use, subject to the following requirements:
(a) Satellite dish antennas that have a diameter of one meter
or less shall be exempt from these regulations.
(b) In the case of satellite dish antennas greater than one
meter in diameter, only one satellite dish antenna shall be
permitted on a residential lot. In all zoning districts,
satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted in front
yards. In R Residential Zoning Districts, the maximum
diameter of any satellite dish antenna installed on any lot
or on any roof or above any building shall be 12 feet.
(c) In zoning districts other than R Residential, any satellite
dish antenna greater than one meter in diameter that is
installed on any lot or on any roof or above any building
shall not exceed 20 feet in diameter. In all zoning districts,
the maximum height of any freestanding satellite dish
antenna shall be 25 feet, and in the case of satellite dish
antennas mounted on a roof or above a building, the
maximum height shall be no greater than 25 feet above the
highest point on the roof.
(d) In all zoning districts, no part of any satellite dish antenna
shall be located closer than 10 feet to any property line.
(5) Radio or Television Antennas. A radio or television antenna for
personal use by private citizens shall be permitted as an
accessory use, subject to the following requirements, except as
these provisions may be superseded by any applicable Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) ruling:
§ 27-1403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1403
1:825
(a) A radio or television antenna structure may be mounted on
a roof or installed in a rear yard only, provided that no such
structure shall be located within 20 feet of any property
line.
(b) The maximum height for such structure shall not exceed
that otherwise allowed in the zoning district in which it is
located by more than 20 feet. If placed on a roof, any
antenna structure exceeding eight feet in height shall be
mounted with guide wires.
(c) Any such structure shall comply with applicable airport
zoning and Federal Communications Commission
regulations.
(d) Radio or television antenna structures located on the
ground shall be screened from adjacent properties by
evergreen trees or other suitable material, as approved by
the Township.
(6) Canopies and Similar Structures. Canopies and similar
permanent freestanding roofed structures without walls shall
be permitted to cover outdoor seasonal display and sales areas
or fuel-dispensing areas accessory to authorized uses in the
C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts, provided that:
(a) Such structure shall not be attached to the principal
building;
(b) Such structure shall be located at least 10 feet from any
property line or street right-of-way;
(c) Such structure shall not be enclosed; and
(d) Such structure shall be removed immediately once the
principal use or the use of the accessory structure is
discontinued.
(7) Residential accessory storage structures and detached
garages.
(a) No detached garage or storage structure accessory to a
dwelling shall be located in the minimum required front
yard. In the R-1-V District, detached garages and storage
structures accessory to a dwelling shall be located at least
7 1/2 feet from any side or rear property line. In all other
districts, detached garages and storage structures
accessory to a dwelling shall be located at least 10 feet
from any side or rear property line if the floor area of the
structure is 500 square feet or less. If the floor area of the
structure is more than 500 square feet, the structure shall
be located at least, 15 feet from any side or rear yard. See
§ 27-1403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1403
1:826
also § 27-1202, Subsection 9, for applicable internal
setbacks and distances between buildings within a
planned residential development.
(b) In the R-1-V, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the maximum floor area
of any detached garage or residential accessory storage
structure shall be related to the size of the residential lot,
in accordance with the following:
Size of Lot
Maximum Floor Area of
Accessory Structure
Up to 21,780 square feet 500 square feet
21,780 to 43,560 square
feet
1,000 square feet
Over 43,560 square feet 1,500 square feet
(8) Structures accessory to nonresidential structures and
buildings.
(a) No structure accessory to a nonresidential building or
structure, other than a sign or off-street parking area, shall
be located in the front yard setback. Signs and off-street
parking areas shall be subject to the requirements of Parts
15 and 16.
(b) Structures accessory to nonresidential buildings or
structures shall not be located within any required buffer
area. Setbacks for accessory structures shall comply with
the requirements specified in each zoning district.
(c) Where a buffer area is not required, all structures
accessory to nonresidential buildings or structures shall
be located at least 10 feet from the rear property line and
at least 20 feet from the side property lines.
(9) Distance from Principal Building. All accessory storage
structures and garages shall be located at least 10 feet from
any principal building; except that if a detached garage
accessory to a dwelling is connected to the dwelling by
contiguous side walls, breezeways or similar connections, the
distance between the dwelling and the connected garage may
be less than 10 feet.
D. Visibility at Intersections. No object, including, without limitation,
fences, landscaping rocks, hedges, trees and other plantings,
buildings, structures, walls, signs and motor vehicles, exceeding a
height of three feet, as measured from the lowest elevation of the
centerline of any abutting street, shall be temporarily or
permanently placed, erected, installed or parked within the clear
sight triangle required at the intersection of two streets or the
§ 27-1403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1403
1:827
§ 27-1404. Permitted Projections Into Required Yards. [Ord. No.
376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1405. Height Exceptions. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to the following
structures, provided that they do not exceed the height limitations of the
district by more than 15 feet: place of worship spires, chimneys, elevator
bulkheads and other mechanical equipment that is part of the principal
structure, conveyors, flagpoles, silos, standpipes, elevated water tanks,
derricks, public utility structures and other structures not intended for
human habitation. The foregoing exceptions shall not apply to
communications towers, communications antennas and their facilities.
§ 27-1406. Drive-Through Facilities. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
intersection of a driveway or private lane with a public street. The
required clear sight triangle is illustrated in Appendix A.75
1. The following shall be permitted to project into any required yard in any
zoning district:
A. Typical architectural features of the principal structure, including
but not limited to bay windows, windowsills, chimneys, cornices
and eaves, shall be permitted to project into required yards no
more than 18 inches.
B. Decks and their stairs, stoops and unenclosed porches without
enclosed habitable foundation or space and without a roof or walls
shall be permitted to project into required front, side and rear
yards no more than three feet. Porches that have a roof or walls or
that are enclosed or have enclosed habitable foundations shall be
subject to the yard requirements for the principal structure.
C. Steps attached to the principal building and open fire escapes shall
be permitted to project into required yards no more than three feet.
1. All businesses that propose drive-through facilities, as defined by the
chapter, as accessory uses or principal uses shall meet all of the
following requirements:
A. Drive-through facilities proposed on parcels within a planned
shopping center shall have access only from the interior circulation
system within the planned shopping center site. All other
properties shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
B. In addition to the parking spaces required for the principal use, a
minimum of five standing spaces, in one lane, with a total length of
100 feet, in direct line with each service position shall be provided
75.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-1403 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1406
1:828
§ 27-1407. Temporary Construction Trailers, Model Homes or Sales
Offices. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
for vehicles to wait in line. The standing spaces shall not interfere
with the use of any required parking spaces and shall not inhibit
the free flow of traffic on the property. The standing spaces shall
be designed so that waiting vehicles shall not stand in any right-ofway
or overflow onto adjacent properties, streets or berms.
C. Entrances, exits and standing spaces shall be adequately indicated
with pavement markings and/or directional signs.
D. Parking areas and circulation patterns shall be adequately striped
and marked to facilitate traffic circulation on the property.
1. Temporary construction trailers or model homes or sales offices shall be
permitted in any zoning district, subject to the following conditions:
A. Temporary construction trailers shall be permitted only during the
period that the construction work is in progress under a valid
building permit or under Township approval to install public
improvements. The temporary construction trailer shall be
removed upon completion of the construction authorized under a
building permit or upon completion of the installation of the public
improvements in a plan of subdivision. In the event that
construction is phased, the temporary construction trailer shall be
moved from the completed phase to the next phase when 90% of
the required improvements in the completed phase have been
installed, as determined by the Township Engineer, provided that a
valid grading permit or building permit has been issued for the next
phase.
B. Model homes or sales offices shall be permitted only until 90% of
the lots or dwelling units in the development are sold. In the case of
a phased development, the use of a model home or sales office shall
be permitted to continue only if the subsequent phase is initiated
within six months of the completion of 90% of the lots or dwelling
units in the prior phase.
C. A temporary use permit for the temporary structure or use shall be
obtained from the Zoning Officer, in accordance with the
requirements of § 27-1905, prior to the commencement of
construction and shall be renewed every six months, if necessary,
until the project is completed.
D. Temporary construction trailers shall be located on the lot on which
the construction is progressing and shall not be located within 25
feet of any property line adjoining a residential use.
E. Temporary construction trailers shall be used only as temporary
field offices and for storage of incidental equipment and supplies
and shall not be used for any dwelling use whatsoever.
§ 27-1406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1407
1:829
§ 27-1408. Agricultural and Related Activities. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
F. No signs or other advertising materials for the project shall be
attached to the temporary construction trailer; however, the name
of the construction company may appear on the trailer.
G. Class 3 materials, as classified by the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), shall not be stored in temporary construction
trailers.
H. Model homes shall be located on a separate lot and shall meet all
the requirements for permanent dwellings in the zoning district in
which they are located. Sales offices may be located in a model
home or may be located in a trailer located on a vacant lot in the
plan or on the site of construction. If the sales office is located in a
trailer, the trailer shall not be located within 25 feet of any property
line adjoining a residential use. No signs or other advertising
information shall be located on the outside of the trailer or sales
office.
I. Model homes or sales offices located in a trailer shall not be utilized
for any dwelling use whatsoever during the time they are approved
as a temporary use or structure in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
J. Model homes or sales offices shall be used primarily for sales
associated with the development in which they are located and
shall not be used as the only place of business for the listing realtor.
1. In the A-1 and A-2 Districts, agriculture, as defined herein, conducted
on a farm and related activities conducted on a farm or on other
properties, when authorized by this chapter, including animal
grooming, boarding stables, commercial greenhouses, commercial
riding academies, kennels, noncommercial riding academies, private
stables and specialized animal raising, shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. Storage of manure or odor- or dust-producing substances shall be
located at least 200 feet from any property line.
B. Any stable or other building used for the sheltering, keeping,
raising or feeding of horses, livestock and poultry shall be located
at least 200 feet from any property line on properties of 10 acres or
more. Such buildings shall be located at least 75 feet from any
property line on properties having at least five acres but less than
10 acres.
C. Commercial greenhouse heating plants shall be at least 100 feet
from any property line.
§ 27-1407 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1408
1:830
D. All grazing and pasture areas shall be adequately fenced to
properly enclose the animals and to protect adjacent property.
E. Private stables on properties of five acres or more, but less than 10
acres, shall be accessory to the stable owner's dwelling.
F. The number of horses maintained in a private stable shall be
limited to one animal for the first five acres, plus one for each
additional acre or portion thereof up to 10 acres, not to exceed a
total of six horses. There shall be no limit on the number of horses
on properties of 10 acres or more.
G. Private stables shall be subject to all other applicable regulations of
this § 27-1408.
H. Agricultural sales, as defined herein, shall be permitted accessory
to a farm, as defined herein, in the A-l and A-2 Districts only, subject
to the following regulations:
(1) All sales shall be conducted on the premises of a farm, as
defined and regulated by this chapter.
(2) Products sold shall include only products raised, grown or
produced on the farm.
(3) All permanent structures shall comply with the yard
requirements for principal structures in the district in which
the property is located.
(4) Seasonal roadside stands shall be located no closer than 15
feet to any street right-of-way or property line and shall be
removed at the end of each growing season.
(5) Buildings used for retail sales of agricultural products shall not
exceed 1,000 square feet of sales floor area for every 10 acres
of land. No building used for agricultural products shall exceed
5,000 square feet of sales area.
(6) Off-street parking for permanent structures shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of § 27-1502 for retail
businesses. Off-street parking for permanent structures shall
be designed in accordance with the requirements of § 27-1501.
(7) Off-street parking for seasonal roadside stands shall be
designed in accordance with § 27-1501; however, the
requirements for surfacing, marking, screening and
landscaping shall not apply.
(8) Off-street parking for seasonal roadside stands shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of § 27-1502 for
retail businesses; however, in no case shall fewer than five
spaces be provided.
§ 27-1408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1408
1:831
§ 27-1409. Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(9) Adequate ingress, egress and traffic circulation shall be
provided so that vehicles do not back onto the street right-ofway
and do not park or stand on any street or berm.
(10) Signs shall comply with the requirements of § 27-1603. Signs
shall be located on the property and shall be removed at the
end of the growing season.
I. Seasonal activities such as hay rides, spring and fall festivals and
similar activities related to the farm shall be subject to all
applicable requirements of § 27-1905 for temporary uses, provided
that adequate parking is provided in a temporary parking area
based on the ratio specified in § 27-1502C for "all other uses."
1. Outdoor Storage in Commercial and Industrial Districts.
A. In the C-1 and C-2 Districts, storage of materials outside a
completely enclosed structure shall not be permitted, except for
convenience stores, vehicle sales, nurseries, garden supply,
building supply, custom crafting and similar businesses that
require outside storage of products offered for sale. In the case of
nurseries, garden supply, building supply, custom crafting and
similar businesses, outside storage areas larger than 1,000 square
feet shall be completely enclosed by a security fence and shall be
screened by an opaque fence or hedge that is at least six feet in
height.
B. In the I-1 District, any material or equipment stored outside an
enclosed building shall be incidental to the principal use of the lot
and shall be stored to the rear of the building or an alternative
location which screens the storage area from public view from the
street or adjacent residential property located at similar elevations
within 500 feet of the property. If existing buildings do not screen
the storage area from public view from the street or adjacent
residential property located at similar elevations within 500 feet of
the property, the area shall be screened by a hedge or opaque fence
at least eight feet in height.
2. Refuse Collection and Waste Disposal. In all districts, all organic
rubbish and discarded materials shall be placed in tight vermin-proof
containers on the property and shall be secured in side or rear yards
screened from public view by means of a solid-face fence or wall at least
six feet in height. Containers shall be emptied once a week. On
properties where food is served in paper containers, covered waste
receptacles shall be conspicuously located on the premises for use by
patrons. The management shall be responsible for maintaining the
property free of litter. All nonresidential uses shall provide trash
receptacles that are completely enclosed by a screening fence secured
by a self-latching gate.
§ 27-1408 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1409
1:832
§ 27-1410. Forestry. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
3. Storage of Recreational Vehicles. The parking or storage of recreational
vehicles shall not be permitted in any front yard in any R Residential
District. Recreational vehicles with a current license or registration and
a valid inspection sticker may be parked or stored in the side or rear
yard of property in any R Residential District. At no time shall any
parked or stored recreational vehicle be occupied or used as a dwelling.
4. Parking of Commercial Vehicles and Equipment. Commercial vehicles
and equipment, including trucks in excess of one-ton capacity, tandems,
tractor-trailers, tractors or other commercial or construction or cargomoving
vehicles or equipment, shall not, under any conditions, be
stored outside a completely enclosed building or parked outside
overnight between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any R
Residential District, other than on construction sites for an approved
subdivision or land development, on sites for which a valid grading,
zoning or building permit is in effect, or on farms that are being used
for agriculture, as defined by this chapter.
1. Forestry, as defined herein, shall be conducted in accordance with the
following provisions. Proof of compliance with all requirements shall be
submitted with the application for a zoning certificate.
A. All operations shall be located at least 300 feet from any existing
dwelling.
B. All operations shall be discontinued between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., provided further that such operations shall not take place
during any hours on Sundays or legal government holidays.
C. Routes to be used by the hauling trucks shall be approved by the
Township, and the operator shall demonstrate that there shall be
no negative impact on Township roads from the proposed
operation.
D. The operator shall provide the Township with a copy of a videotape
of the condition of all roads to be utilized in the forestry operation
prior to commencing operations.
E. A performance bond shall be posted in favor of and in the amount
required by the Township to guarantee restoration of Township
roads used as hauling route.
F. The operator shall be responsible for cleaning dirt and debris from
public streets daily during the operation.
G. The applicant shall submit a copy of the state and/or county permit
for hauling on state and/or county roads.
H. The applicant shall supply the Township with the name of an on-site
contact person.
§ 27-1409 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1410
1:833
I. Permits.
(1) The applicant shall show compliance with the following laws
and regulations of the commonwealth, and all necessary
permits shall be maintained during the operation:
(a) Erosion and sedimentation and control regulations
contained in Chapter 102, issued pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law.
(b) Stream-crossing and wetlands protection regulations
contained in Chapter 105, issued pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act.
(c) Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management
Act.
(2) Any suspension or revocation of a state permit shall constitute
revocation of zoning approval, and the operator shall be
subject to the enforcement provisions of § 27-1901 of this
chapter.
J. A logging plan prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor or
engineer shall be submitted that shows, at a minimum:
(1) The design, construction, maintenance and retirement of the
access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and
landings.
(2) The design, construction and maintenance of water-control
measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips,
filter strips and water bars.
(3) The design, construction and maintenance of stream and
wetland crossings, if any.
(4) The general boundaries of the proposed operation in relation
to Township and state or county roads, including any accesses
to those roads.
(5) The site location, including boundaries of the property and
boundaries of the proposed harvest area.
(6) Significant topographic features.
(7) The location of all earth-disturbance activities, such as roads,
landings and water-control measures and structures.
(8) The location of all crossings of waters of the commonwealth.
K. Felling or skidding on or across any public street is prohibited
without the express written consent of the Township, Washington
§ 27-1410 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1410
1:834
§ 27-1411. No-Impact Home-Based Businesses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
County or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT), whichever is responsible for maintenance of the street.
L. No remnants of trees or debris shall be left within 25 feet of any
public street or any private road providing access to adjoining
residential property during the operation.
M. All remnants of trees, stumps and debris within 50 feet of a public
street or residential property line shall be cut to a maximum of four
feet above the adjacent ground level following completion of the
forestry operation.
N. No remnants of trees or debris shall be left on any adjoining
property or across any property line without the consent of the
adjoining owner during the operation.
O. Upon completion of the forestry operation, haul roads shall be
restored to their original condition.
1. All no-impact home-based businesses, as defined herein, shall comply
with the following:
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
of inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
but not limited to parking, signs or lights.
E. No on-site parking of commercially identified vehicles shall be
permitted.
F. The business activity shall not use any equipment or process that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, that is detectable in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
H. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and shall not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area of
the dwelling.
I. The business shall not involve any illegal activity.
§ 27-1410 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1411
1:835
§ 27-1412. Keeping of Chickens. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1413. Oil and Gas Pipelines and Temporary Water Pipelines.
[Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1414. Re-Entry Drilling. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
J. The business shall register annually in January of each year with
the Zoning Officer or his or her designated representative to
demonstrate continuing compliance with these regulations.
1. For any lot two acres or greater in size, chickens and fowl may be
permissible so long as a property owner or occupant does not exceed a
ratio of four chickens or fowl per one acre. For any portion of a chicken/
fowl calculated as part of said calculation, the number of chickens/fowl
shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. Shelters, pens and
cages for such chickens shall be setback at least 30 feet from all
property and street right-of-way lines. The keeping of roosters shall be
prohibited.
2. Every owner engaged in the keeping of chickens shall provide facilities
maintained with best management practices so as to be clean,
maintained and avoid attracting vermin.
1. Notice: A company desiring to construct oil and gas pipelines or
temporary water pipelines that are regulated by state or federal
agencies are allowed to do so as a permitted use in the Township,
subject to submitting to the Township copies showing evidence that it
has obtained and maintains in good standing all required state and/or
federal permits, including proof of bonding to operate pipelines, when
such bonding is required. In addition to the required permitting
documents, applicant must also submit:
A. The origin point and destination of the pipeline to be constructed in
the Township including timeframe for activities;
B. A description of the substance to be transported through the
pipeline and a copy of the material safety data sheet (MSDS);
C. Any site reclamation plans and timeframe;
D. Location of any pressure relief devices;
E. GIS drawings; and
F. Statement concerning method of operation.
1. Notice. The operator shall provide the following notice of re-entry
drilling at least 30 days prior to initiating operations at the well site:
A. Written certification that the operator is in compliance with the
conditions contained in the initial conditional use approval;
§ 27-1411 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1414
1:836
§ 27-1415. Traffic Control Site. [Ord. No. , 7/24/2018]
B. Updated truck routing schedule over Township roads;
C. Updated compliance with the Township's road maintenance and
bond agreement for the roads to be utilized;
D. Updated drilling and related operations schedule/timeline;
E. Copies of any new or revised permits and approvals required for
the re-entry drilling;
F. Confirmation that operator is not in breach of current conditional
use approval.
2. Approval. The required information will be reviewed by the Township
Engineer and if said re-entry notice is complete the re-entry drilling will
be approved in writing without the requirement of a supplemental
hearing. The approval shall be a continuance of any previous approval
granted for oil and gas development on the subject property.
3. Supplemental Hearing. A supplemental hearing will be required if the
re-entry drilling includes a material change or includes additional
operations not covered for and/or permitted in the initial approval.
4. Scope. If required, the conditional use hearing will be limited to
testimony and exhibits explaining the specific operations not covered
by the initial conditional or permitted use approval.
5. Standards and Criteria. Operator may rely on the conditions set forth in
the original conditional use approval. The Township may not change or
amend the original conditions or ordinance terms concerning setbacks,
well site and/or access road location so long as they do not adversely
affect the health, welfare and safety of the residents.
1. Notice. The operator shall provide the following notice of a traffic
control site at least 14 days prior to initiating the use:
A. Updated truck routing schedule over Township roads;
B. Updated compliance with the Township's road maintenance and
bond agreement for the roads to be utilized;
C. A location map showing the location of the site in the Township and
the proposed ingress to and egress from the site;
D. The anticipated types of vehicles to be accommodated;
E. The relevant drilling and related operations schedule/timeline, if
available; and
F. Proof of the property owner's consent to the use.
§ 27-1414 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1415
1:837
§ 27-1416. Rooftop and Ground-Mounted Solar Systems. [Ord. No.
376, 7/24/2018]
2. Approval. The required information will be reviewed by the Township
Engineer and if said traffic control site notice is complete, the traffic
control site will be approved in writing.
1. This section applies to building-mounted and ground-mounted systems
installed and constructed after the effective date of the section. Any
upgrade, modification or structural change that materially alters the
size or placement of an existing solar PV and/or thermal system shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
2. Building-mounted and ground-mounted systems are permitted in all
zoning districts as an accessory use to any lawfully permitted principal
use on the same lot upon issuance of the proper permit and upon
compliance with all requirements of this section and as elsewhere
specified in this section. Building-integrated systems, as defined by this
section, are not considered an accessory use and are not subject to the
requirements of this section.
3. Permitted Locations; Standards.
A. Building-mounted systems are permitted to face any rear, side and
front yard or any unregulated yard area. In Residential Zoning
Districts, building-mounted systems may only be mounted on
lawfully permitted principal structures. In all other zoning districts,
building-mounted systems may be mounted on lawfully permitted
principal and/or accessory structures.
B. Ground-mounted systems shall only be permitted on lots at least
two acres in area shall not be located in the front yard of the lot.
Beyond the prohibited location in the front yard, a ground-mounted
system shall be based on the requirements for accessory uses or
structures in the property's zoning district.
§ 27-1415 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1416
1:838
Figure 1 - Permitted Location: Building Mounted Solar PV
and/or Thermal System Isometric
C. The solar PV and/or thermal system must be constructed to comply
with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), Act 45 of
1999, as amended, and any regulations adopted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry as they relate to
the UCC, except where an applicable industry standard has been
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
under its regulatory authority.
D. All wiring must comply with the National Electrical Code, most
recent edition, as amended and adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The solar PV and/or thermal system must be
constructed to comply with the most recent fire code as amended
and adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4. For ground-mounted systems, all exterior electrical lines must be
buried below the surface of the ground where possible or be placed in
conduit.
5. Ground-mounted systems. Ground-mounted systems are subject to the
accessory use or structure setback requirements in the zoning district
in which the system is to be constructed. The required setbacks are
measured from the lot line to the nearest part of the system. No part of
the ground-mounted system shall extend into the required setbacks due
to a tracking system or other adjustment of solar PV and/or thermal
related equipment or parts.
6. Notwithstanding the height limitations of the zoning district:
§ 27-1416 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1416
1:839
A. For a building-mounted system installed on a sloped roof that faces
the front yard of a lot, the system must be installed at the same
angle as the roof on which it is installed with a maximum distance,
measured perpendicular to the roof, of 18 inches between the roof
and highest edge or surface of the system.
Figure 2 - Height Restriction, Sloped Roof Facing Front
Yard: Building-Mounted Solar PV and/or Thermal System
Elevation
B. For a building-mounted system installed on a sloped roof, the
highest point of the system shall not exceed the highest point of the
roof to which it is attached.
§ 27-1416 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1416
1:840
Figure 3 - Height Restriction, Sloped Roof Facing Rear or
Side Yard: Building-Mounted Solar PV and/or Thermal
System Elevation
7. Notwithstanding the height limitations of the zoning district:
A. For a building-mounted system installed on a flat roof, the highest
point of the system shall be permitted to extend up to six feet above
the roof to which it is attached.
Figure 4 - Height Restriction, Flat Roof: Building-Mounted
Solar PV and/or Thermal System Isometric
B. Ground-mounted systems may not exceed the permitted height of
accessory structures in the zoning district where the solar PV and/
or thermal system is to be installed.
§ 27-1416 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1416
1:841
Figure 5 - Height Restriction: Ground-Mounted Solar PV
and/or Thermal System Elevation
8. Building-mounted systems on a sloped roof shall not be required to be
screened.
9. The surface area of any ground-mounted system, regardless of the
mounted angle of any portion of the system, is considered impervious
surface and shall be calculated as part of the lot coverage limitations
for the zoning district. If the ground-mounted system is mounted above
existing impervious surface, it shall not be calculated as part of the
parcel's lot coverage limitations for the zoning district.
10. Building-mounted systems:
A. If a building-mounted system is to be installed on any building or
structure that is nonconforming because its height violates the
height restrictions of the zoning district in which it is located, the
building-mounted system shall be permitted so long as the
building-mounted system does not extend above the peak or
highest point of the roof to which it is mounted and so long as it
complies with the other provisions of this section.
§ 27-1416 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1416
1:842
Figure 6 - Nonconforming Building, Sloped Roof Facing
Front Yard: Building-Mounted Solar PV and/or Thermal
System Elevation
Figure 7 - Nonconforming Building, Sloped Roof Facing
Rear or Side Yard: Building-Mounted Solar PV and/or
Thermal System Elevation
B. If a building-mounted system is to be installed on a building or
structure on a nonconforming lot that does not meet the minimum
setbacks required and/or exceeds the lot coverage limits for the
zoning district in which it is located, a building-mounted system
shall be permitted so long as there is no expansion of any setback
§ 27-1416 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1416
1:843
or lot coverage nonconformity and so long as it complies with the
other provisions of this section.
Figure 8 - Nonconforming Lot, Setbacks, and/or Lot
Coverage Limits: Building-Mounted Solar PV and/or
Thermal System Isometric.
11. Ground-mounted systems:
A. If a ground-mounted system is to be installed on a lot containing a
structure that is nonconforming because the required minimum
setbacks are exceeded, the proposed system shall be permitted so
long as the system does not encroach into the established setback
for the lot. If a ground-mounted system is to be installed on a lot
that is nonconforming because it violates zoning district
requirements other than setbacks, then a variance must be
obtained for the proposed installation.
§ 27-1416 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1416
1:844
Figure 9 - Nonconforming Lot, Setbacks: Ground-Mounted
Solar PV and/or Thermal System Isometric.
12. No signage or graphic content may be displayed on the solar PV and/or
thermal system except the manufacturer's badge, safety information
and equipment specification information. Said information shall be
depicted within an area no more than 36 square inches in size.
13. All solar PV and/or thermal systems are subject to compliance with
applicable performance standards detailed elsewhere in the Township
Official Zoning Ordinance.
14. The Township reserves the right to inspect a solar PV and/or thermal
system for building or fire code compliance and safety.
15. If upon inspection the Township determines that a fire code or building
code violation exists, or that the system otherwise poses a safety hazard
to persons or property, the Township may order the landowner to repair
or remove the system within a reasonable time. Such an order shall be
in writing, shall offer the option to repair, shall specify the code
violation or safety hazard found and shall notify the landowner of his or
her right to appeal such determination.
16. If a landowner fails to repair or remove a solar PV and/or thermal
system as ordered, and any appeal rights have been exhausted, the
Township may enter the lot remove the system and charge the
landowner for all costs and expenses of removal, including reasonable
attorney's fees or pursue other legal action to have the system removed
at the landowner's expense.
17. In addition to any other available remedies, any unpaid costs resulting
from the Township's removal of a vacated abandoned or
decommissioned solar PV and/or thermal system shall constitute a lien
upon the lot against which the costs were charged. Legal counsel of the
§ 27-1416 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1416
1:845
§ 27-1417. Medical Marijuana Dispensary Buffer Distance. [Ord.
No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1418. Off-Site Vehicle Inventory Storage. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
Township shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such
cost, plus attorney's fees, including, but not limited to filing of
municipal claims pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7107 et seq., for the cost of such
work, 6% interest per annum, plus a penalty of 5% of the amount due
plus attorney's fees and costs incurred by the Township in connection
with the removal work and the filing of the Township's claim.
18. Before any construction or installation on any solar PV and/or thermal
system shall commence, a permit issued by the Township shall be
obtained to document compliance with this section.
1. A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within 1,000 feet of
the property line of a public, private or parochial school or a day-care
center.
1. There shall be no sales activity off-site associated with vehicle inventory
stored off-site.
2. A formal agreement between the landowner where off-site vehicle
storage is being conducted and the owner of the vehicle sales use shall
be submitted to the Township for record and references.
3. Any other permit requirements associated with off-site vehicle
inventory storage shall apply.
4. Off-site vehicle inventory storage shall only be permitted within zoning
districts that permit vehicle sales as a permissible land use.
5. All off-site vehicle storage lots must comply with the Township parking
requirements for space size and aisle width.
6. Any lighting applicable to the off-site vehicle inventory storage area
shall be presented as part of a photometrics plan applicable to the lot.
Lighting levels shall not exceed the maximums as otherwise defined by
this chapter.
7. Property maintenance standards applicable to the lot shall apply to any
area utilized for off-site vehicle inventory storage.
8. All vehicle inventory shall be in operable condition; no storage of junk
or abandoned vehicles shall be permitted to occur.
§ 27-1416 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1418
1:846
Part 15
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 27-1500. Applicability. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1501. Off-Street Parking Design. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications in this Part in any district whenever any new use is
established or any existing use is changed or enlarged.
2. All parking areas established prior to the effective date of this chapter
that are not in conformance with all provisions of this Part shall be
allowed to continue as previously laid out. Any change or alteration to
these existing nonconforming parking areas shall require that the
portions to be altered be upgraded in accordance with all provisions of
this Part.
3. Any change in use or in floor area of an existing building that would
require a greater number of off-street parking spaces than the previous
use or floor area did shall provide additional off-street parking for the
new use in accordance with this Part. If the number of additional
required parking spaces results in more than a 25% increase in the total
number of parking spaces currently provided on the lot or requires the
addition of at least five more spaces, whichever is greater, then all
existing parking is also required to meet or exceed all provisions of this
Part, including surfacing.
1. Parking areas and driveways in parking areas in all zoning districts
shall comply with the following standards:
A. Size. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less
than 180 square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, shall have
minimum dimensions of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length and
shall be maintained free from obstruction. Except in the case of
residential dwellings, parking areas shall be designed to provide
sufficient turnaround area so that vehicles are not required to back
onto the cartway of any public street.
B. Design. The minimum dimensions of aisles and driveways for all
uses other than single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum width of aisles providing two-way travel shall be 22
feet.
(2) One-way aisles shall not be dead-ended. Minimum width of
aisles providing one-way travel shall vary with the angle of
parking, as follows:
§ 27-1500 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1501
1:847
Angle
Minimum width
(feet)
Parallel 12
30° 14
45° 16
60° 20
90° 22
(3) Two-way aisles may be dead-ended in off-street parking areas,
provided that they are designed according to the following
minimum standards:
(a) Depth of turnaround area: 13 feet.
(b) Width of turnaround area: 25 feet.
(4) The minimum width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(a) For one-way travel: a minimum of 12 feet.
(b) For two-way travel: a minimum of 22 feet.
(c) A maximum of 35 feet at the street right-of-way line and 54
feet at the curbline.
(5) Adequate sight distance shall be provided, subject to review
and approval by the Township Engineer. Driveways shall not
exceed a slope of 10% within 12 feet of the street right-of-way
line.
(6) Fire lanes shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the Township Fire Code and the Volunteer Fire
Departments.
C. Handicapped Parking Spaces. Handicapped-accessible parking
spaces, marked in accordance with Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
regulations and measuring 12 feet by 20 feet for automobiles and
measuring 18 feet by 20 feet for vans, must be provided for all
buildings designed for public occupancy in accordance with the
following table:
Total Parking Spaces
Required by § 27-1502C
Number of Required Spaces
That Must Be Accessible
Spaces
Up to 25 1*
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
§ 27-1501 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1501
1:848
Total Parking Spaces
Required by § 27-1502C
Number of Required Spaces
That Must Be Accessible
Spaces
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
* NOTE: If only one accessible space is required, it shall be vanaccessible.
If more than one space is required, at least one
space shall be van-accessible.
D. Access. Access to parking areas shall be provided in accordance
with the following requirements:
(1) When an existing lot does not adjoin a public or private street,
an easement of access and an access driveway shall be
provided leading to the parking areas.
(2) Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to welldefined
locations, and in no case shall there be unrestricted
access along the length of a street. In any district other than an
R Residential District, the street frontage shall be curbed to
restrict access to the lot, except where the access drives are
proposed.
(3) The number of access drives from a single lot or development
to any public street shall not exceed two for every 400 feet of
street frontage.
(4) Except on corner lots, access drives shall be located at least
200 feet from the intersection of any two street right-of-way
lines.
(5) Where a site has frontage on more than one street, secondary
access from the street with the lower traffic volume shall be
considered, and the Township may require the secondary
access based on the findings of the traffic impact study, if such
study is required.
(6) Access drives entering state highways are subject to a highway
occupancy permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
§ 27-1501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1501
1:849
(7) Access driveways entering Township streets shall comply with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Code, Title 67, Chapter
441, Access to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and
Local Roads.
(8) Each parking space shall have access directly to a driveway.
Interior circulation of traffic shall be designed so that no
driveway providing access to parking spaces shall be used as a
through street. Interior traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure safety and access by emergency vehicles.
E. Safety Requirements. The Board of Supervisors shall consider
whether safety requirements are warranted to reduce traffic
hazards that endanger public safety. The developer shall be
responsible for construction of any required islands, acceleration,
deceleration or turning lanes and shall bear the cost of installing
any required traffic control devices, signs or pavement markings
within and adjoining the boundaries of the development site.
F. Marking. In parking areas that contain five or more spaces, all
parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by painted lines, marked
with durable white or yellow paint, in stripes a minimum of four
inches wide, extending the length of the parking space. All
vehicular entrances and exits to parking areas shall be clearly
marked for all conditions. Short-term visitor parking spaces shall
be differentiated from long-term employee spaces by suitable
markings. Handicapped parking shall be appropriately marked.
G. Curbs and Wheel Stops.
(1) All outdoor hard-surfaced off-street parking areas shall be
curbed, unless sheet drainage of surface water can be
achieved, subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
(2) Wheel stops shall be provided along boundaries of adjoining
properties, public rights-of-way, sidewalks or landscaped
areas, unless curbs are provided in that portion of the parking
lot.
H. Surfacing.
(1) All outdoor off-street parking areas and access driveways shall
be paved with asphalt, concrete or similar material of adequate
thickness to support the weight of fully loaded vehicles that
customarily park or travel on them. The exceptions to this
requirement are:
(a) Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings in plans
with less than five dwelling units.
§ 27-1501 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1501
1:850
(b) Parking areas in the rear lots of the industrial districts,
which shall, as a minimum, have a dust-free slag or stone
surface parking area.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure
that driveway surface materials and stormwater runoff do not
discharge onto any public street.
I. Location of parking areas.
(1) Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with
the principal use. In the case where adequate lot area does not
exist on the same lot to meet the parking requirements, the
Zoning Hearing Board may approve off-site parking as a use by
special exception, provided that it is located no more than 400
feet from the principal entrance to the building it is intended to
serve and evidence of a lease agreement or cross-easement is
submitted for any property under different ownership
proposed to be used for off-site parking. If the off-site parking
is not located on property contiguous to the use it serves, the
off-site parking shall be used for employee parking, and a
means of safe pedestrian access shall be provided.
(2) Parking spaces accessory to nonresidential uses that are
adjacent to a property line in a residential district shall be
setback at least 25 feet from the property line. Parking
authorized in front yards shall be located at least 10 feet from
the street right-of-way line. All other parking areas containing
five or more spaces shall be setback at least 10 feet from a side
or rear property line.
J. Landscaping. Parking areas containing more than 20 spaces shall
provide landscaping as required below:
(1) In parking areas containing 50 or more parking spaces, at least
5% of the interior paved area shall be landscaped.
(2) The area of the front yard between the street right-of-way and
parking located in a front yard shall be seeded with grass or
planted with ground cover and shall be landscaped with trees
and/or shrubs that comply with the requirements for visibility
of § 27-1403D.
(3) In the event that a parking area containing 20 or more spaces
is not already screened by a buffer area, then Buffer Area C, as
defined by § 27-1402, Subsection 1, shall be provided along
any property line where the parking adjoins property in an R
Residential Zoning District.
K. Shopping Cart Return Areas. One shopping cart return area shall
be provided for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area in retail
stores that provide shopping carts. Shopping cart return areas
§ 27-1501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1501
1:851
§ 27-1502. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
shall measure nine feet by 20 feet and shall provide containment on
three sides and shall be identified by an above-grade sign secured
to the containment structure. The surface area of the sign shall not
exceed four square feet.
L. Lighting. If parking areas are proposed to be used during evening
hours, lighting shall be provided. Any lighting used to illuminate
off-street parking areas shall be designed to reflect the light away
from the adjoining premises of any residential zoning district or
residential use and away from any streets or highways. The lighting
system shall furnish a level of not less than 0.5 footcandle during
hours of operation and shall be designed with cutoff luminaires that
have a cutoff angle of 60° or less. (See Illustration in Appendix B.76)
There shall be no spillover of illumination at any property line in
excess of 0.2 footcandle.
M. Stormwater Management. All paved areas shall be designed so that
stormwater runoff shall not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Surface drainage shall be connected to the existing or proposed
drainage system. The method of stormwater management and the
design of the proposed facilities shall be subject to the
requirements of the Township Stormwater Management
Regulations in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
and to review and recommendation by the Township Engineer.
N. Slope. The maximum permissible slope of any parking area
accessory to any use other than single-family or two-family
dwellings shall be 7%. If parking spaces are provided in areas that
exceed 3% slope, all such spaces shall be parallel to the contour
lines of the area.
1. Any new use or change of use in any zoning district shall comply with
the following minimum requirements for the provision of off-street
parking spaces:
A. When the calculation of required parking spaces results in a
requirement of a fractional parking space, any fraction shall be
counted as one parking space.
B. Where more than one use exists on a lot, parking requirements for
each use shall be provided. All calculations for total parking to be
provided on a lot shall be cumulative whereas each land use's
parking requirements shall be determined and added together for
said total regardless of the hours of operation. If uses are undefined
at the time of an application to the Township, then the most
restrictive ratio identified on the Table of Parking Requirements as
76.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-1501 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1502
1:852
found in the following subsection shall be utilized as part of the
applicable parking calculation.
C. The following Table of Parking Requirements specifies the number
of spaces required for various categories of uses in any zoning
district:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Single-family and two-family
dwellings
2 parking spaces per dwelling
unit
Triplex, quadruplex, garden
apartments, townhouses
2 parking spaces per dwelling
unit, 1 of which must be in an
enclosed garage, plus 0.5 space
per dwelling unit for visitors
located within 300 feet of the
units they are intended to serve
Non-family facility type 1,
non-family facility type 2
1 parking space per dwelling unit,
plus 1 parking space for each
employee on peak shift, plus 0.5
space per dwelling unit for
visitors
Mobile home park 2 parking spaces per dwelling
unit, plus 0.5 space per dwelling
unit for visitors located within
300 feet of the units they are
intended to serve
Community centers in a
planned residential
development
1 space for each 10 dwelling units
in the development or subdivision
Agriculture 1 space per employee
Agricultural sales or
commercial greenhouse
1 space per employee, plus 1
space for each 400 square feet of
growing and display area
accessible to the public
Kennel 1 space per employee, plus 1
space for each 4 individual kennel
spaces
Surface mining, coal mine
facilities
1 space for each employee on the
2 largest shifts combined
Place of worship 1 space per 4 fixed seats or 80
lineal inches of pew, or if there
are no pews or seats, 1 per 75
square feet of net floor area used
for assembly
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:853
Use Parking Spaces Required
Day-care center, nursery
school
1 space for each teacher and/or
employee on largest shift, plus 1
space per each 6 students
Public utility building or
structure
1 space per employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each
service vehicle stored on the lot
Schools, elementary and
intermediate
1 space for each employee or
faculty member, and 1 space for
each 3 seats in the principal place
of assembly with fixed seats or 1
space for each 75 square feet of
net floor area used for assembly,
if there are no fixed seats,
whichever is greater
Schools, secondary and
postsecondary
1 space for each employee or
faculty member, plus 1 space for
each 5 students or 1 space for
each 3 seats in an auditorium and
1 space for each 80 lineal inches
of bleacher seating, whichever is
greater
Dormitories, fraternity
houses, sorority houses
1 space for each bed at maximum
capacity, plus 1 space for each
employee, and 0.5 space per bed
for guests
Theater, auditorium or
gymnasium
1 space per 3 fixed seats or, if
there are no fixed seats, 1 space
for each 75 square feet of net
floor area used for assembly, plus
1 space for each 80 lineal inches
of bleacher seating
Hospitals and nursing homes 1 space per 3 beds, and 1 space
for each employee on the peak
working shift
Hotel/motel 1 space per employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space per sleeping
unit, plus 1 space for each 75
square feet of floor area
accessible to the public, including
lobbies, restaurants, shops,
meeting rooms and the like
Professional office (other than
medical), business
1 space for every 300 square feet
of net floor area office, business
services
§ 27-1502 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1502
1:854
Use Parking Spaces Required
Medical offices, clinics 1 space for each 100 square feet
of gross floor area
Banks and financial
institutions
1 space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area, plus 1 space per
employee on peak shift, plus 5 offstreet
waiting spaces per drivethrough
service position
Group-care facility, personalcare
boarding home,
transitional dwelling
1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
resident authorized to drive, plus
1 space for each 6 beds
Retail business not otherwise
listed in this table
1 space for each 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Personal service
establishments
1 space for each 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Furniture store, appliance
store
1 space for each 1,500 square
feet of display and sales area
Vehicle sales 1 space for each 500 square feet
of showroom and indoor sales
area
Shopping center 1 space for each 200 square feet
of gross floor area
Fast-food restaurants 1 space per 50 square feet of net
floor area, plus 1 space per
employee on peak shift, plus the
waiting spaces required by
§ 27-1406 for drive-through
service positions
Nightclubs 1 space for each 30 square feet of
net floor area
Other restaurants, bars or
taverns, including catering
halls
1 space for each 75 square feet of
net floor area, plus 1 space for
each employee on peak working
shift
Casinos, gaming facilities,
betting parlors
1 space for each 3 seats or
playing positions in a casino,
gaming facility or betting parlor,
plus the number of spaces
required for a restaurant or
nightclub if those uses are
included
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1502
1:855
Use Parking Spaces Required
Racetrack 1 space for each 3 seats or lineal
inches of bleacher seating in the
grandstand or other viewing area,
plus the number of spaces
required for a restaurant or
nightclub if those uses are
included
Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each alley
Tennis, racquetball and
handball courts
1 space per employee, plus 4
spaces for each court
Golf courses 8 spaces for each hole, plus 1
space for each employee
Playing fields, play courts 2 parking spaces for each team
member on the field or court
during regulation play, plus 1
space for each 3 seats in
bleachers or viewing stands or for
each 80 lineal inches of bleacher
seating
Swimming pools, public/
commercial
1 space for each 50 square feet of
surface water area
Amusement or video arcade 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net floor area
Billiard parlors 3 spaces for each table
Dance halls, skating rinks 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net floor area
Amusement park 1 space for each 1,500 square
feet of gross lot area
Health clubs, private clubs 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net floor area
Funeral homes 1 space for each 50 square feet of
floor area in the parlors, plus 1
space for each 300 square feet of
remaining gross floor area
Indoor places of assembly
(without fixed seats)
1 space for each 75 square feet of
net floor area used for assembly
Indoor places of assembly
(with fixed seats)
1 space for each 3 seats
Outdoor places of assembly
(without fixed seats)
1 space for each 1,500 square
feet of gross lot area
§ 27-1502 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1502
1:856
§ 27-1503. Off-Street Loading. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
Use Parking Spaces Required
Outdoor places of assembly
(without fixed seats)
1 space for each 3 seats or 80
lineal inches of bleacher seating
Libraries/museums 1 space for each 500 square feet
of gross floor area, plus the
requirement for indoor assembly,
if applicable
Service stations/vehicle repair
garages
4 spaces for each bay, plus 1
space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each
business vehicle
Repair shops 1 space for each 350 square feet
of gross floor area
Manufacturing 1 space for each 1,500 square
feet of gross floor area or 1 space
for each employee on the peak
working shift, whichever is
greater
Warehousing, truck terminals,
wholesaling
1 space for each 2 employees on
peak working shift or 1 space for
each 2,000 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is greater
Mini-warehouse self-storage
facility, self-storage interior
1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 300 square feet
devoted to office
Flex space Each portion of the floor area
used for office, manufacturing
and/or warehousing shall meet
the minimum requirements of this
section for that specific use
Medical marijuana dispensary 1 space for each 200 square feet
of net floor area
Medical marijuana grower/
processor
1 space for each 2 employees on
peak shift
All other uses 1 space for each 3 occupants at
maximum permitted occupancy
under the Township Fire Code or
1 space for each 300 square feet
of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
1. In all zoning districts, whenever a new use is established or an existing
use is structurally altered, converted or enlarged, off-street loading
§ 27-1502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1503
1:857
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
A. Off-street loading design.
(1) Size. Each loading berth shall be at least 60 feet in length and
14 feet in width with an overhead clearance of 15 feet. The
area used for loading berths shall not be used to satisfy
parking area requirements and shall not block any driveway
used for circulation through the site.
(2) Access. Loading berths shall be designed to provide sufficient
turnaround area so that vehicles are not required to back onto
public streets, and the design shall be subject to review and
approval by the Township Engineer. Loading berths shall have
direct access to a driveway and shall be maintained free from
obstruction.
(3) Location. All loading berths shall be located on the same lot
with the principal use they are intended to serve. No loading
berth shall be located in the minimum required front yard
setback. Loading berths shall be located at least 25 feet from
the nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
(4) Screening. Loading berths shall be screened by a minimum
eight-foot-high wall or opaque fence on all sides that face a
residential use or an R Residential Zoning District
classification in addition to the buffer area required by
§ 27-1402, Subsection 2.
(5) Surfacing. All loading berths shall have a paved, concrete or
bituminous surface, with adequate thickness to support the
weight of a fully loaded vehicle and graded with positive
drainage to dispose of surface water.
(6) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate loading berths shall
be designed to reflect from any adjoining residential use or
zoning classification and away from any street or highway.
Spillover lighting shall not exceed 0.2 footcandle at any
property line.
B. Off-street loading requirements. In all zoning districts, every use
that requires the receipt or distribution, by tractor-trailer, of
material or merchandise shall provide off-street loading berths in
accordance with the following requirements:
Gross Floor Area Number of Berths Required
Under 5,000 square feet None
5,000 to 49,999 square feet 1 berth
50,000 to 99,999 square feet 2 berths
§ 27-1503 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1503
1:858
Gross Floor Area Number of Berths Required
100,000 to 160,000 square feet 3 berths
For each additional 80,000
square feet
1 additional berth
C. In addition to required off-street parking and loading facilities,
adequate storage areas for vehicles awaiting loading and unloading
shall be provided. Under no circumstances shall vehicles be stored
on or block access to a public right-of-way.
§ 27-1503 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1503
1:859

Part 16
SIGNS
§ 27-1600. Applicability. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The regulations contained in this Part shall apply to all signs in all zoning
districts.
§ 27-1601. Types and Classes. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. Signs in all zoning districts shall be categorized according to the types
and classes described below and shall comply with the requirements for
those types and classes described in this section.
A. Classes.
(1) Freestanding: a sign supported on a foundation or by one or
more uprights, poles or braces permanently affixed to the
ground and not attached to any building or other structure,
including:
(a) Pole sign: a freestanding sign that is supported by one or
more poles, uprights, braces or pylons and that has a
minimum clearance between the bottom edge of the sign
and the adjacent ground level, as specified by this chapter.
(b) Ground sign: a freestanding sign that is affixed to the
ground by means of a permanent foundation and that
provides a maximum clearance of 18 inches between the
bottom edge of the sign and the adjacent ground level or,
in the case of an elevated foundation, from the top of the
foundation.
(c) Monument sign: a sign supported on two posts or uprights
located at the entrance to a shopping center that identifies
the name of the shopping center and that may include the
names of one or more of the businesses in the shopping
center.
(2) Wall: a sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to
the face of an outside wall of a building, projecting outward
from the wall of the building no more than 18 inches.
(3) Canopy or awning sign: a sign that also functions as a roof-like
shelter, either permanent, retractable or removable, made of
canvas or other durable material that is affixed to a building or
is self-supporting and provides protection from sun, rain, snow
and other elements.
(4) Arcade sign: a sign suspended beneath a ceiling of an exterior
covered walkway, roof or marquee, containing only the name of
a business, for the purpose of assisting pedestrian traffic
§ 27-1600 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1601
1:861
traveling under the arcade, roof or marquee to identify the
location of establishments within a shopping center or other
multi-tenant building.
(5) Bulletin: a type of manual changeable-copy sign constructed to
allow letters or symbols to be changed periodically, such as
those used by place of worship and schools to announce
events.
(6) Roof sign: a sign erected and maintained upon or above the
roof of any building, which projects no more than six feet above
the highest point of the roof.
(7) Overhanging: a sign, other than a wall sign or arcade sign,
affixed perpendicular to a building or wall, whose leading edge
extends beyond such building or wall, but not including
awnings, canopies or marquees otherwise authorized by this
chapter.
(8) Billboard: an off-premises sign that advertises an
establishment, activity, person, product or service that is
unrelated to or unavailable on the premises where the
billboard is located. This sign may include both commercial
and noncommercial information, language, pictures, and
renderings. This is a content-neutral definition.
(9) Changeable-copy: a commercial sign that is designed so that
characters, letters or illustrations can be manually or
electronically changed or rearranged without altering the face
or surface of the sign.
(10) Portable sign: a sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, a structure or the ground and which is designed to be
moved from place to place, including but not limited to signs
attached to wood or metal frames designed to be selfsupporting
and movable, sandwich-board signs, and trailermounted
signs.
(11) Attention-getting device: a pennant, flag, valance, banner,
propeller, spinner, streamer, searchlight, balloon or other
inflatable device, or similar object or representation of a
product, vehicle, equipment or other advertising image or any
ornamentation that is designed or used for the purpose of
promoting, advertising or attracting attention.
(12) Indirectly illuminated: a sign that is lighted by means of lamps
or lighting devices external to, and reflected on, the sign,
which lighting is stationary and constant in intensity and color
at all times and which is shielded so that the illumination is
concentrated on the face of the sign and there is no spillover of
illumination or glare beyond the face of the sign.
§ 27-1601 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1601
1:862
(13) Internally illuminated: a sign that is lighted by means of lamps
or lighting devices internal to the sign, which lighting is either
behind the face of the sign or is an integral part of the sign
structure and the advertising effect.
(14) Festoon lighting: a group of two or more light bulbs of more
than 20 watts each, hung or strung overhead, not on a building
or structure, which are exposed to view by persons on a public
right-of-way, or which are not shaded or hooded to prevent the
direct rays of light from being visible from the property line,
but not including the temporary erection of lights as part of a
holiday celebration or small lights of less than 20 watts each.
B. Types. Signs are categorized by use, function or purpose into the
following types:
(1) Agricultural sales sign: a temporary sign announcing the
seasonal sale of agricultural products raised and sold on a
farm, as defined herein.
(2) Residential identification: a sign containing only the name and
address of the occupant of the premises.
(3) Home occupation identification: a sign containing only the
name and address of the occupant of the premises and their
occupation. No logos or other advertising shall be permitted.
(4) Residential plan identification sign: a permanent wall or
freestanding ground sign containing only the name and
address of a plan of subdivision or a multifamily building or
development.
(5) Real estate: a temporary sign advertising the sale or rental of
premises. The sign may also bear the words "sold," "sale
pending" or "rented."
(6) Development: a temporary sign erected during the period of
construction and/or development of a property by the
contractor and developer or their agent.
(7) Contractor: a temporary sign announcing the name of
contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in performing
work on the premises.
(8) Public sign: a sign of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by or on the order of a public officer in the
performance of any public duty, such as official signs and
notices of any public or governmental agency, or erected by or
on the order of a court or public officer, including official traffic
signs, public notices, government flags and other signs
warning of hazardous or dangerous conditions.
§ 27-1601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1601
1:863
§ 27-1602. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(9) Notification: signs bearing legal and/or property notices, such
as: no trespassing, private property, no turnaround, safety
zone, no hunting and similar messages, and signs posted by a
landowner or governmental agency for traffic control or the
safety of the general public.
(10) On-premises directional: a sign that directs and/or instructs
vehicular or pedestrian traffic relative to parking areas, proper
exits, loading areas, entrance points and similar information on
the premises on which it is located.
(11) Business identification sign: a sign that contains the name,
address and goods, services, facilities or events available on
the premises.
(12) Temporary special event sign: a banner, flag, pennant, portable
sign or similar display, constructed of durable material and
affixed to the wall of a building or the supporting structure of
an approved freestanding pole business identification sign or, if
a portable sign, adequately affixed to the ground or some
permanent structure, erected for a period not exceeding 30
days, whose sole purpose is to advertise a special event or
promotion.
(13) Temporary off-premises directional sign: a temporary sign,
located on property other than where a business or event is
located, to direct traffic to the site of the business or event,
including but not limited to real estate open houses, garage
sales, estate sales, weddings, showers, picnics, concerts,
special promotions and similar events.
(14)Window signs: a sign or group of signs affixed to the inside of a
display window in a commercial establishment that advertises
a product or service available on the premises or that
announces or promotes a special sale or special event.
1. The following regulations shall apply to signs in all zoning districts:
A. Restricted Signs. The following signs shall not be permitted in any
zoning district:
(1) Attention-getting devices.
(2) Portable signs in all districts, except where authorized as a
temporary special event sign.
(3) Festoon lighting.
(4) Moving or flashing signs, except for that portion of an
authorized sign that indicates time or temperature or an
authorized electronic changeable-copy sign.
§ 27-1601 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1602
1:864
(5) Signs on trees, utility poles or official traffic control devices or
signs within the public right- of-way.
(6) Signs that imitate traffic control devices.
(7) Signs painted on walls or chimneys of a building or on fences
or freestanding walls.
(8) Overhanging signs, as defined herein.
(9) Roof signs, as defined herein.
(10) Signs on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked
on a public right-of-way or on any public property or private
property other than the site of the business it advertises,
except for maintenance, repair, loading, unloading or
rendering a service at any location, where the apparent
purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business
or activity located on nearby property, but not including
temporary construction trailers authorized by this chapter.
B. Exempt Signs. The following signs are exempt from the
requirement to pay for a permit:
(1) Memorial/historical plaques, as defined herein.
(2) Signs which are applied for and maintained by a federal, state
or local government entity and/or agency.
(3) Political campaign signs.
C. Surface Area of Sign. The surface area of a sign shall be measured
as described below. For two- sided signs, only one sign face is
counted in computing the surface area.
(1) In the case of an advertising panel, the surface area of the sign
shall be the total area enclosed by one continuous line
connecting three extreme points or edges of the advertising
panel containing letters.
(2) In the case of freestanding letters mounted on a wall or other
surface, the surface area of the sign shall be the sum of the
areas of each individual letter, calculated by measuring the
distance between the highest and lowest points of each letter
and multiplying that distance by the distance between the
extreme horizontal distance across the letter.
(3) In the case of freestanding ground or pole signs, the area shall
not include the main supporting structure; however, logos,
ornamental attachments and framework around or connections
between advertising panels shall be included.
(4) In the case of letters that are painted on or affixed to an
awning, canopy or marquee, the surface area of the sign shall
§ 27-1602 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1602
1:865
be the area of the geometric shape formed by outlining the
height and width of all the letters, including free space
between the letters.
D. Lots With Multiple Street Frontage.
(1) In all zoning districts, lots fronting on more than one street
shall be permitted to have one of each type of sign that is
authorized for the lot only on the street address frontage.
(2) In commercial and industrial districts, lots fronting on more
than one street shall be permitted to have one of each type of
sign authorized for the lot at the entrance to the lot one each
street frontage, provided that the entrances are not visible
from one another.
E. Temporary Signs. In all zoning districts where authorized by
§ 27-1603, real estate, temporary off- premises, contractor and
development signs shall be considered temporary signs that shall
be removed within 30 days of the completion of sales or
construction.
F. Notification Signs. In all zoning districts, the number, location and
size of legal notification signs erected by public agencies shall be in
accordance with the laws of the commonwealth. In all zoning
districts, legal notification signs posted outside the public street
right-of-way on private property by property owners, such as "no
trespassing," "no hunting" and the like, shall be limited to a surface
area not exceeding two square feet. The placement and maximum
number of signs permitted along road frontages shall be one sign
for every 30 feet of road frontage.
G. Visibility. No sign shall be located in such a position that it will
cause a hazard by obstructing visibility for traffic on a street or
obscuring a traffic signal or other traffic control device. No sign,
other than official traffic signs and authorized off-premises
directional signs, shall hang over or be erected within the right-ofway
of any street. No sign shall be located within the clear sight
triangle defined by § 27-1403D of this chapter.
H. Illumination.
(1) Illumination, when authorized by this chapter, shall be directed
upon the sign face and not towards adjoining lots or streets so
that the source of illumination is not visible. Internal
illumination of signs shall be permitted only with accordance of
the lighting performance standards established with this
chapter. Lighting shall be stationary and constant in intensity
and color at all times. The intensity of any source of
illumination of any sign, whether indirect or internal, shall be
controlled so as to not create glare and to be compatible with
the intensity of ambient light and illumination on surrounding
§ 27-1602 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1602
1:866
lots. Signage illuminations shall not exceed a luminance of
1,500 nits during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset
and shall not exceed a luminance of 150 nits at all other times.
(2) Changeable-Copy.
(a) Changeable-copy signage may not change or move more
often than once every five minutes, except one for which
changes are necessary to correct hour-and-minute, date or
temperature information. Time, date, or temperature
information is considered one dynamic display and may
not be included as a component of any other dynamic
display. A display of time, date, or temperature shall
remain for at least five minutes before changing to a
different display, but the time, date, or temperature
information itself may change no more often than once
every five seconds;
(b) All changeable-copy display backgrounds/faces shall be
black and copy shall be a single color.
(c) Changeable-copy displays shall be designed and equipped
to freeze the device in one position if a malfunction occurs.
The displays must also be equipped with a means to
immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and
the sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display
when notified by the Zoning Officer that it is not complying
with the standards of this chapter;
I. Design, Construction, Maintenance and Inspection. All signs shall
be designed to be compatible with the architecture of the principal
use to which they are accessory. Signs shall comply with Route 19
Corridor Design Guidelines, if applicable. All signs shall be
constructed of a durable material and shall be maintained in good
condition. All freestanding signs shall be designed to withstand a
sustained 100 mph wind load. Any sign found to be in an unsafe
condition upon inspection shall be declared to be a public nuisance,
and the Zoning Officer shall give notice to the owner, in writing, in
accordance with § 27-1901, Subsection 2, of this chapter, to repair
or remove the sign within 10 days. Upon failure of the owner to
comply, the Township shall remove the sign at the owner's expense.
The Township may lien the property for the cost of removing the
sign and all legal fees and costs incurred with filing and enforcing
the lien.
J. Removal of Signs. Whenever any business is discontinued or
vacated with no intention to reopen under the same name, all sign
advertising panels containing the name of the discontinued or
vacated business shall be removed within 30 days of the vacation or
discontinuance of the business. Upon failure of the owner to
comply, the Township may remove the sign at the owner's expense.
§ 27-1602 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1602
1:867
§ 27-1603. Signs Authorized in All Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 376,
7/24/2018]
The Township may lien the property for the cost of removing the
sign and all legal fees and costs incurred with filing and enforcing
the lien.
K. Permits Required.
(1) No permit shall be required for the following types of signs, as
described in § 27-1601B above: residential identification,
notification, real estate, contractor and window signs. Included
are temporary off-premises directional signs that are erected
for no more than a two-week period and removed within 24
hours after the conclusion of the event for which the sign was
erected.
(2) Permits shall be required in accordance with § 27-1906 of this
chapter for all other signs authorized by §§ 27-1603 through
27-1606. The Zoning Officer shall issue the required permits
upon submission of an application which complies with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and payment of the
required fee established from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
L. Expiration of Permits. Any permit issued by the Zoning Officer for
erection, alteration, replacement or relocation of any sign shall
expire automatically within six months of the date of issuance if
work authorized by the permit has not been initiated and diligently
pursued.
M. Sign Location. Except for billboards, as defined and authorized by
this chapter, all signs shall be located on the premises which they
are intended to serve.
1. In addition to the signs authorized by §§ 27-1604 through 27-1606 in
specific zoning districts, the following signs are authorized in all zoning
districts:
A. Bulletin Sign. One bulletin sign that is nonilluminated or indirectly
or internally illuminated shall be permitted in connection with any
place of worship, school, library or similar public or semipublic
building. If the bulletin sign is a wall sign, the surface area shall not
exceed 12 square feet. If the bulletin sign is a freestanding ground
sign, the surface area shall not exceed 24 square feet.
B. Real Estate Sign. One nonilluminated temporary real estate sign
shall be permitted on each lot, provided that the sign shall not
exceed six feet in height. The real estate sign shall not exceed 12
square feet in surface area when located in any residential zoning
district and shall not exceed 32 square feet in any other zoning
§ 27-1602 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1603
1:868
district. Such sign shall be removed within 30 days of the sale or
rental of the property on which it is located.
C. Development Sign. One nonilluminated temporary development
sign shall be permitted on each development site, provided that the
surface area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface
area. If the development is phased, the development sign shall be
located in the phase that is currently under construction. A second
nonilluminated temporary development sign shall be permitted at
the entrance to the development, provided that the surface area of
the sign shall not exceed 16 square feet. The development sign
shall not exceed eight feet in height. Such sign shall be removed
within 30 days of the sale or rental of the last lot or completion of
the proposed construction in the development.
D. Contractor Sign. One nonilluminated temporary contractor sign
announcing the names of contractors, mechanics or artisans
engaged in performing work on the premises shall be permitted on
a lot, provided that the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
nor six feet in height and shall be removed within 30 days of the
completion of the work.
E. Temporary Special Event Signs for Public and Nonprofit
Organizations. One nonilluminated temporary special event sign,
as defined by this chapter, shall be permitted to be erected on the
face of a public building, place of worship or building housing a
nonprofit organization, provided that the area of the sign shall not
exceed 40 square feet and provided that the sign is displayed for a
period no longer than 30 days and is removed within five days
following the event that it is erected to promote. Each organization
may display a temporary special event sign a maximum of four
times in any twelve-month period for a maximum of 30 days each
time.
F. Home Occupation Identification Sign. One nonilluminated home
occupation identification sign shall be permitted for an approved
home occupation, provided that the surface area of the sign does
not exceed one square foot and the sign shall contain only the
name, address and occupation of the resident and shall not contain
any logo or other advertising. The sign shall be wall-mounted or
affixed to the structure supporting the mailbox.
G. On-Premises Directional Signs.
(1) On any lot that contains two or more multifamily or
nonresidential buildings and/or on any lot that provides more
than 100 parking spaces, on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted, provided that the surface area of any one sign shall
not exceed four square feet.
(2) On lots with areas less than one acre, a maximum of four
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated on-premises
§ 27-1603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1603
1:869
§ 27-1604. Signs Authorized in Residential Zoning Districts. [Ord.
No. 376, 7/24/2018]
directional signs shall be permitted. On lots with areas of one
acre or more, a maximum of six nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated on-premises directional signs shall be permitted on
the first acre. For each additional acre or fraction thereof over
one acre, two additional on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted.
H. Temporary Off-Premises Directional Sign. Temporary off-premises
directional signs may be located in the street right-of-way with the
permission of the owner of the right-of-way or located on private
property with the permission of the landowner. The maximum
surface area of such sign shall be four square feet. Such sign shall
not be illuminated and shall be removed within 24 hours of the
event for which it was erected.
I. Agricultural Sales Sign. In those districts where agricultural sales
are authorized or may exist as a legal nonconforming use, one
nonilluminated freestanding agricultural sales sign shall be
permitted to announce the agricultural sales, provided that the
maximum surface area of the sign shall not exceed 24 square feet,
the height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet and the sign shall
be located no closer than 10 feet to any property line or street
right-of-way.
J. Residential Identification Sign. One nonilluminated residential
identification sign shall be permitted on each lot, provided that the
sign shall not exceed one square foot in surface area and the
maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be two feet. The
residential identification sign may be affixed to the mailbox or to
the wall of the dwelling or may be freestanding in the front yard.
1. In addition to the signs authorized in all zoning districts in § 27-1603,
the following signs shall be permitted in all residential districts:
A. Residential Plan Identification Sign. One nonilluminated or
indirectly illuminated permanent wall or freestanding ground
residential plan identification sign containing only the street
address and/or name of a residential subdivision plan or
multifamily building or development shall be permitted, provided
that the sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. A sign
identifying the name of a residential subdivision or land
development may be affixed to a freestanding decorative wall,
rather than to a building wall, provided that the decorative wall
meets all applicable ordinance requirements and does not obstruct
visibility for traffic entering or leaving the plan in compliance with
the clear sight triangle required by § 27-1403D. Such signs shall
not be located in any public street right-of-way without the
permission of the owner of the right-of-way and an agreement for
§ 27-1603 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1604
1:870
§ 27-1605. Signs Authorized in Commercial and Industrial Districts.
[Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
maintenance of the sign by a homeowners' association or similar
private organization.
B. Business identification sign for authorized conditional uses, uses by
special exception or legal nonconforming uses. If a business
identification sign is not otherwise authorized and regulated by this
chapter for a legal nonconforming use or a conditional use or use
by special exception in an R Residential District, such business may
have one nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated wall or
freestanding ground identification sign, provided that the sign shall
not exceed 12 square feet in area and the maximum height of a
freestanding sign shall not exceed six feet.
C. On-Premises Directional Signs.
(1) On any lot that contains two or more multifamily or
nonresidential buildings and/or on any lot that provides more
than 100 parking spaces, on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted, provided that the surface area of any one sign shall
not exceed four square feet.
(2) One lots with areas less than one acre, a maximum of four
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated on-premises
directional signs shall be permitted. On lots with areas of one
acre or more, a maximum of six nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated on-premises directional signs shall be permitted on
the first acre. For each additional acre or fraction thereof over
one acre, two additional on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted.
1. In addition to the signs authorized in § 27-1603 in all districts, only the
following signs shall be permitted in all C-1, C-2 and I-1 Districts:
A. Temporary Special Event Signs for Businesses. Temporary special
event signs, as defined by this chapter, shall be permitted, provided
that:
(1) No more than two signs or banners shall be permitted on any
establishment at any one time.
(2) The temporary special event signs shall be securely attached to
the building or to the supporting structure of a freestanding
pole business identification sign.
(3) Temporary special event signs may be displayed a maximum of
three times in any twelve-month period, provided that each
display shall not exceed 30 days.
§ 27-1604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1605
1:871
(4) The aggregate surface area of all temporary special event
signs shall not exceed 24 square feet per establishment. In the
event that there is more than one establishment on a site, the
maximum aggregate surface area of all temporary special
event signs on the site at any one time shall not exceed 70
square feet.
(5) Portable signs may be used as temporary special event signs,
provided that they are securely anchored, are located outside
any public street right-of-way and do not constitute a hazard
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(6) Temporary special event signs may be illuminated, but the
message shall remain stationary at all times.
B. Changeable-Copy Sign.
(1) One nonilluminated or internally illuminated manual or
electronic changeable-copy sign shall be permitted per lot,
regardless of the number of businesses on the lot. The
changeable-copy sign shall be permanently affixed to the wall
of the building or to the supporting structure of an authorized
freestanding sign on the lot or, in the case of an automobile
service station, on the canopy over the gas pumps. The surface
area of the changeable-copy sign shall not exceed 24 square
feet.
C. Business Identification Sign.
(1) Wall Signs.
(a) In the C-1, C-2 and I-1 Districts, each business
establishment shall be permitted to have wall signs that
may be illuminated or nonilluminated. The wall sign shall
not be located on the roof nor extend above the height of
the building.
(b) In the C-1 District, the aggregate surface area of all wall
signs shall not exceed one square foot for each two lineal
feet of width of the front wall of the building or portion of
the building occupied by the business or a maximum of 64
square feet, whichever is less.
(c) In the C-2 and I-1 Districts, the aggregate surface area of
all wall signs for each business shall not exceed one square
foot for each lineal foot of width of the front wall of the
building, or portion of the building, occupied by the
business or a maximum of 100 square feet, whichever is
less.
(d) In the case of a shopping center where buildings are
setback from the public street a distance in excess of 500
§ 27-1605 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1605
1:872
feet, the aggregate surface area of all wall signs for a
business shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(2) Ground Signs. In addition to the wall signs, one freestanding
ground sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of the
number of businesses on the lot, provided that:
(a) No freestanding pole sign exists or is proposed to be
erected on the lot and the lot is not located in a planned
shopping center that has a monument sign.
(b) The maximum surface area of the ground sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet in the C-1 District and shall not
exceed 64 square feet in the C-2 and I-1 Districts.
(c) The height and location of the sign shall be designed so as
to not interfere with visibility for vehicular traffic entering
or leaving the lot or traveling on any street, and in no case
shall the total height exceed eight feet above the adjacent
ground level on which it is located. The sign shall comply
with the visibility requirements of § 27-1403D.
(d) Ground signs may be nonilluminated, indirectly
illuminated or internally illuminated.
(e) All freestanding ground signs shall be located at least 15
feet from any property line, except that, where property
abuts on a public right-of-way, the ground sign shall be set
back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way, or at least 20
feet from the edge of the cartway if the right-of-way is not
contiguous with the front lot line.
(3) Pole Signs. In addition to the authorized wall signs, one
freestanding pole sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of
the number of businesses on the lot, provided that:
(a) No freestanding ground sign exists or is proposed to be
erected on the lot and the lot is not located in a planned
shopping center that has a monument sign.
(b) The pole sign shall be nonilluminated, indirectly
illuminated or internally illuminated.
(c) The maximum height of the top of the pole sign shall be 25
feet above the adjacent street level from which the sign is
to be viewed.
(d) The minimum height of the bottom edge of the sign shall
be 14 feet if traffic circulates under the sign.
(e) The maximum surface area of the freestanding pole sign
shall not exceed 40 square feet if there are fewer than
three businesses on the lot and shall not exceed 64 square
§ 27-1605 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1605
1:873
feet if there are three or more businesses on the lot.
Neither dimension of such sign shall be less than five feet.
(f) No portion of any sign shall project over any public rightof-
way, nor shall it be located within the clear sight
triangle of any street intersection, as defined by
§ 27-1403D of this chapter.
(g) All freestanding pole signs shall be setback a distance
equivalent to the height of the sign from every property
line, except that, where property abuts on a public right-ofway,
the sign shall be setback at least 15 feet from the
right-of-way.
(4) Monument Signs.
(a) One illuminated or nonilluminated monument sign shall be
permitted at the main entrance to a planned shopping
center or planned industrial park, provided that a ground
sign or pole sign does not exist and is not proposed at that
entrance. Outparcels in a planned shopping center and
lots fronting on a public street in a planned industrial park
owned in fee simple may have a ground sign or pole sign
authorized by § 27-1605C(2) and (3). No other businesses
within a planned shopping center or planned industrial
park shall be permitted to have a ground sign or pole sign;
however, each business shall be permitted to have the wall
signs authorized by § 27-1605C(1).
(b) The maximum surface area of a monument sign shall be
150 square feet. The maximum height of the monument
sign shall be 25 feet. The monument sign shall be located
at least 10 feet from any property line or street right-ofway
line. The monument sign shall comply with the
visibility requirements of § 27-1403D. The base of the sign
shall be landscaped with shrubs, perennials and annuals
for a minimum distance of three feet from the base of the
sign.
(5) Arcade Signs. In shopping center or office complex that have
pedestrian accessways covered by a roof, marquee or exterior
arcade, one arcade sign, as defined herein, shall be permitted
for each business in the building, provided that the maximum
surface area of each sign shall not exceed eight square feet.
(6) Canopy Signs. Canopy signs may be erected at the street-level
entrance to a building. In the case of multitenant buildings,
each business with a street-level entrance may have a canopy
sign. Canopy signs shall not be illuminated. No more than one
canopy sign shall be permitted for each building. The
maximum height of the letters on a canopy sign shall be six
inches.
§ 27-1605 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1605
1:874
§ 27-1606. Billboards. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
(7) Window Signs. The total area of all window signs on display at
any one time, including temporary window promotional signs,
shall not exceed 25% of the total area of the display window in
which they are located. A series of windows that are separated
by frames less than six inches in width shall be considered as a
single window for the purpose of this computation.
D. On-Premises Directional Signs.
(1) On any lot that contains two or more multifamily or
nonresidential buildings and/or on any lot that provides more
than 100 parking spaces, on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted, provided that the surface area of any one sign shall
not exceed four square feet.
(2) On lots with areas less than one acre, a maximum of four
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated on-premises
directional signs shall be permitted. On lots with areas of one
acre or more, a maximum of six nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated on-premises directional signs shall be permitted on
the first acre. For each additional acre or fraction thereof over
one acre, two additional on-premises directional signs shall be
permitted.
1. Location. Billboards shall be authorized only within 400 feet of the
center line of a limited-access federal highway as a conditional use on
property in any zoning district, provided that all of the following
requirements are met:
A. Billboards shall not be erected within 500 feet of the boundary line
of any R Residential District or within 500 feet of any public or
private school, place of worship or cemetery, said 500 feet being
measured along the radius of a circle from the centermost point of
the billboard structure extending in all directions.
B. Billboards shall not be erected within 500 feet of an interchange or
safety rest area, measured along the interstate or limited access
highway from the beginning or ending of the pavement widening at
the exit from or entrance to the main traveled way.
C. Billboards shall maintain a lateral minimum spacing between any
existing or proposed billboard structure of 1,000 feet. Required
spacing shall be measured along both sides of the same roadway
frontage from the centermost point of the billboard structure along
a line extending from the centermost point of the billboard that is
parallel to the centerline of the roadway to which the billboard is
oriented.
D. No part of the billboard shall be located closer than 15 feet to the
limited access federal highway right-of-way.
§ 27-1605 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1606
1:875
E. Except along the limited access federal highway right-of-way, the
minimum front, side and rear yard requirements applying to a
principal structure as set forth within the zoning district in which
the billboard is to be located shall apply to all parts of each
billboard structure.
F. No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view
from the road or street of any existing business identification sign
or residential or nonresidential structure or limit or reduce the
light and ventilation requirements.
G. No billboard shall be constructed within the clear sight triangle of
the public street or road on which it is situated, as defined by
§ 27-1403D of this chapter, and it shall not in any case obstruct or
impede traffic safety.
H. No billboard shall be erected over any sidewalk or public right-ofway.
I. Billboards shall not be part of a roof or wall, nor shall they be
mounted on the roof, wall or other part of a building or any other
structure.
2. Size and Height. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable gross
surface area of 750 square feet per sign face. This gross surface area
shall be permitted, provided that all of the following additional
requirements are met:
A. A billboard shall have no more than two sign faces per billboard
structure, which may be placed back to back or in a V-shaped
configuration having an interior angle of 90° or less.
B. Neither dimension of the billboard's sign face shall exceed 24 feet
in total height or 48 feet in total length, provided that the total
allowable gross surface area for the sign face is not exceeded.
C. A billboard structure shall have a maximum height above the curb
of the roadway from which it is intended to be viewed of 40 feet.
3. Construction Methods. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, as now or
hereafter amended, and shall meet all of the following additional
requirements:
A. A billboard structure shall have a maximum of one vertical support
being a maximum of three feet in diameter or width and without
additional racing or vertical supports.
B. A billboard sign face shall be independently supported and have
vertical supports of metal which are galvanized or constructed of
approved corrosive-resistant, noncombustible materials.
Structures constructed with galvanized metal shall be painted.
§ 27-1606 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1606
1:876
C. The one vertical support shall be capable of enabling the entire
sign face to be able to withstand a minimum 100 miles per hour
wind load. Structural design computations shall be made and
certified by a registered engineer and shall be submitted to the
Township with the application for conditional use.
D. The base shall be installed using a foundation and footings
approved by the Township Engineer for the type of construction
proposed.
E. The entire base of the billboard structure parallel to the sign face
shall be permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/or
bushes of minimum height of three feet, placed in such manner as
to screen the foundation of the structure.
F. Landscaping shall be maintained by the sign owner in an attractive
and healthy manner in accordance with accepted conservation
practices.
G. No bare cuts shall be permitted on a hillside.
H. All cuts or fills shall be permanently seeded or planted.
I. A billboard with display lighting shall be constructed so that it does
not glare upon adjoining property and shall not exceed a maximum
of 1.0 footcandle upon the adjoining property.
J. Display lighting shall not operate between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m., prevailing local time.
K. No billboard structure, sign face or display lighting shall flash or
emit noise. No display lighting shall cause distractions, confusion,
nuisance or hazard to traffic, aircraft or other properties.
4. Maintenance.
A. A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three years,
unless constructed of an approved corrosive-resistant material.
B. Every 10 years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a qualified Pennsylvania
registered engineer and shall provide to the Township a written
report and certification from that engineer certifying that the
billboard is structurally sound.
C. Annual visual inspections of the billboard may be conducted by the
Township to determine continuing compliance with this chapter.
Upon such inspection, the owner shall pay an annual inspection fee,
as established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. Billboards found to be in violation of this chapter shall be brought
into compliance or removed within 30 days upon proper
§ 27-1606 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1606
1:877
notification by the Township issued in accordance with § 27-1901,
Subsection 2, of this chapter.
E. Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be
maintained in such condition as to eliminate loose or frayed
material protruding or hanging from the structure. All paper and
other waste materials shall be removed from the site and disposed
of properly whenever any sign face is changed.
5. Liability Insurance. The applicant for a sign permit to erect a billboard
shall provide a certificate of insurance for public liability and property
damage, that holds the Township harmless, in an amount no less than
$500,000 or as may be adjusted from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. The insurance certificate shall contain a clause
stating that the insurance shall not be canceled or reduced without first
giving 10 days' notice to the Township.
6. Permits.
A. Prior to submission of an application for a sign permit, the
applicant for a billboard shall obtain and submit with the
application approvals from the United States Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), when applicable.
B. Approval of the conditional use shall be valid for six months from
the date of action by the Board of Supervisors granting the
conditional use. If the applicant fails to obtain a sign permit for the
approved billboard within the six-month period, approval of the
conditional use shall expire automatically, without written notice to
the applicant.
C. The issuance of a sign permit for a billboard that has been granted
approval of a conditional use shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) for billboards along state highways. If the applicant
fails to submit evidence of the required approval by PennDOT
within 30 days of the issuance of the conditional sign permit, the
sign permit shall be revoked by the Township Zoning Officer, who
shall provide written notice to the applicant.
D. The applicant may reapply for the required sign permit, upon
submission of evidence of PennDOT approval, without payment of
any additional sign permit fee, provided that the application is filed
within the six-month period during which the conditional use
approval is valid.
7. Application Fees. Said application shall be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount equal to that set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
8. Nonconforming Billboards.
§ 27-1606 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1606
1:878
A. Any billboard that does not conform to the requirements of this
section shall not be enlarged or moved unless the billboard
complies with all provisions of this section.
B. Any billboard that is damaged or destroyed by more than 51% of its
replacement value at the time of damage or destruction shall be
reconstructed only in compliance with all provisions of this
§ 27-1606.
9. Illumination. See § 27-1602H.
§ 27-1606 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1606
1:879

Part 17
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
§ 27-1700. Applicability. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
This Part shall apply to all nonconforming uses, structures and lots, as
defined by this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall require any change
in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any
development, building, structure or part thereof for which official approval
and required permits have been granted prior to the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto.
§ 27-1701. Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. These regulations shall apply to any use of a structure or lot in any
zoning district that is a nonconforming use, as defined by this chapter.
Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to
transfer an area from one zoning district to another zoning district of a
different classification, these regulations shall apply to any uses which
thereby become nonconforming.
A. Continuation and Sale. Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, a lawful use of a lot or structure exists
that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter
as enacted or amended, such use may be sold or otherwise
transferred to other owners and may be continued as long as it
remains otherwise lawful in accordance with the provisions of this
Part.
B. Enlargement or Expansion.
(1) Single-family dwellings that are nonconforming uses in any
nonresidential zoning district classification may be enlarged or
expanded to occupy a greater area of the lot or to increase the
height of the dwelling, provided that all applicable area and
bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
located are met.
(2) No other nonconforming use of a lot or nonconforming use of a
structure shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy
a greater area of the lot or structure than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, unless
the Zoning Hearing Board, after a public hearing, shall
interpret that the enlargement or extension is necessitated by
the natural expansion and growth of the nonconforming use.
Any such enlargement or expansion shall conform to the area,
height and yard requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located.
§ 27-1700 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1701
1:881
(3) No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
(4) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part
of a structure that way designed for such use at the time the
use became nonconforming; however, a nonconforming use
shall not be extended to occupy any structure, lot or portion of
a lot that way not owned by the owner of the nonconforming
use at the time the use became nonconforming.
C. Change of Use.
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other
than a conforming use, except as permitted as a use by special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
following standards:
(a) The new use will more closely correspond to the uses
authorized in the district as permitted uses, conditional
uses or uses by special exception.
(b) The new use will be in keeping with the character of the
neighborhood in which it is located and will have an equal
or lesser impact on the neighborhood than the existing
nonconforming use.
(c) Any change from one nonconforming use to another shall
comply with the parking requirements of Part 15 for the
new use and shall be subject to the area, bulk and buffer
area regulations for such use in the zoning district where
such use is authorized as a permitted use, conditional use
or use by special exception.
(2) When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the
use thereafter shall not be changed to a nonconforming use.
(3) Where a nonconforming use exists on a lot, a conforming use
shall not be established on the same lot unless the
nonconforming use is discontinued.
D. Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of a structure and/or lot
is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months, the
structure and/or lot shall not thereafter be used except in
conformance with the regulations of the zoning district in which it
is located.
E. Damage or Destruction.
(1) Residential dwellings that are nonconforming uses in the C-1,
C-2 or I-1 District may be rebuilt on the existing foundation in
the event of damage or destruction, provided that the
§ 27-1701 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1701
1:882
§ 27-1702. Nonconforming Structures. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
reconstruction is started within 18 months of the date of
destruction.
(2) In the case of nonconforming uses, other than dwellings, when
damage or destruction of a structure in which the
nonconforming use is conducted involves 50% or less of the
gross floor area of the structure, repairs or reconstruction may
be undertaken, provided that such restoration is started within
18 months of the date of destruction. No enlargement or
expansion of the nonconforming structure shall be undertaken
unless the provisions of § 27-1701B are met.
(3) In the case of nonconforming uses other than dwellings, when
the structure in which the nonconforming use is conducted is
damaged or destroyed by fire or other means to an extent of
more than 50% of its gross floor area, the structure shall be
reconstructed only to house a conforming use.
1. These regulations shall apply to all nonconforming structures, as
defined by this chapter, in all zoning districts.
A. Structural Alteration. A nonconforming structure may be enlarged
or structurally altered, provided that the enlargement or alteration
does not encroach any further into a required yard setback than the
existing nonconforming structure does, and further provided that
no new nonconformities are created. All other alterations or
enlargements shall require review by the Zoning Hearing Board;
and, after public hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board may determine
undue hardship and may authorize a variance for the reasonable
modification of such structure.
B. Damage or Destruction. Any nonconforming structure that has
been partially or completely damaged or destroyed by fire or other
means may be rebuilt or repaired on its existing foundation even
though such foundation may violate the setback requirements for
the zoning district in which the structure is located, provided that
the repair or reconstruction and reoccupancy of the structure
occurs within 18 months of the date that the original structure was
damaged or destroyed. No enlargement or expansion of the
nonconforming structure shall be undertaken unless the provisions
of § 27-1702A are met.
C. Moving. Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any
reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
D. Signs.
(1) Nonconforming signs may be repaired or reconstructed,
provided that no structural alterations are made that increase
§ 27-1701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1702
1:883
§ 27-1703. Nonconforming Lots. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1704. Registration of Nonconformity. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
the gross surface area of the sign; however, nonconforming
signs that are damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than
51% of their replacement cost at the time of destruction shall
not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. Replacement cost shall be determined by the
Township Engineer upon request by the Township. The
Engineer shall inspect the sign and submit a report to the
Zoning Officer within five working days of the Township's
request. The cost of the services of the Township Engineer
shall be borne by the applicant. Said cost shall not exceed
the amount established from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged, added to or
replaced by another nonconforming sign, use or structure,
except that the interchange of advertising panels shall be
permitted, subject to obtaining the sign permit required by
§ 27-1906.
E. Nonconforming Billboards. Nonconforming billboards are
regulated by § 27-1606H of this chapter.
F. Repair or Maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the safety of the public, provided that all
other requirements of this section are met.
1. The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming lots, as defined
by this chapter.
A. Lot Area or Lot Width. Any lot of record existing at the effective
date of this chapter may be used for the erection of a structure
conforming to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it
is located, without a lot area or lot width variance, even though its
lot area and width are less than the minimum required by this
chapter; however, such lot must comply with the front, rear and
side yards, height and lot coverage standards of the zoning district
wherein it is located.
B. Front Yard Setback. Where structures exist on adjacent
nonconforming lots of record that have front yards less than the
minimum depth required, the minimum front yard for an adjacent
nonconforming lot of record shall be the average depth of the
nonconforming front yards on the adjacent nonconforming lots in
the same block on the same side of the street.
§ 27-1702 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1704
1:884
1. The owner of a nonconforming use shall make an application for
registration of the nonconforming use; and upon presentation of
documentation acceptable to the Zoning Officer that the use was
lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter or any
amendment that created the nonconformity, the Zoning Officer shall
register the same on a map and by the Washington County Assessor's
tax parcel number as a legal nonconforming use.
2. In the course of administering this chapter and reviewing applications
for zoning certificates, certificates of occupancy or variances, the
Zoning Officer shall register all nonconforming structures and
nonconforming lots as they become known through the application
process.
§ 27-1704 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1704
1:885

Part 18
ZONING HEARING BOARD
§ 27-1800. Membership. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five residents
of the Township appointed by the Board of Supervisors. Their terms of
office shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one
member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly
notify the Board of Supervisors when vacancies occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other elected or appointed office in
the Township, nor shall any member be an employee of the Township.
§ 27-1801. Alternate Members. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
1. Appointment of Alternate Members. The Board of Supervisors may
appoint by resolution at least one, but no more than three, residents of
the Township to serve as alternate members of the Zoning Hearing
Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years.
When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 27-1801, Subsection 2, an
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Zoning Hearing Board to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Zoning Hearing Board members, including
specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the
proceedings, and shall have all the power and duties set forth in this
chapter and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no
other elected or appointed office in the Township, including service as a
member of the Planning Commission or as Zoning Officer, nor shall any
alternate be an employee of the Township. Any alternate may
participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Zoning Hearing
Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Zoning
Hearing Board unless designated as a voting alternate member
pursuant to § 27-1801, Subsection 2, of this chapter.
2. Participation by Alternate Members. The Chairman of the Zoning
Hearing Board may designate alternate members of the Board to
replace any absent or disqualified members; and if, by reason of
absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the
Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as many
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on the Zoning
Hearing Board as may be needed to reach a quorum. Any alternate
member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve on the
Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case
for which the alternate was initially appointed until the Zoning Hearing
Board has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation
of an alternate pursuant to this subsection shall be made on a case-bycase
basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all
alternates.
§ 27-1800 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1802
1:887
§ 27-1802. Removal of Members. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in the office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the Board of Supervisors taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote. A hearing
shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing.
§ 27-1803. Organization of the Zoning Hearing Board. [Ord. No.
376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1804. Jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board. [Ord. No. 376,
7/24/2018]
1. Officers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own
membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may
succeed themselves.
2. Quorum. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Zoning
Hearing Board; except that when member(s) of the Zoning Hearing
Board are disqualified to act in a particular matter, alternate members
shall be appointed to provide a quorum.
3. Hearing Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a hearing
officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf,
and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing Board
and accept the findings or decision of the hearing officer as final.
4. Procedures. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind
rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the
Township and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
5. Files and Annual Report. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep full
public records of its business and shall submit a report of its activities
to the Board of Supervisors once a year.
1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following matters:
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except curative amendments brought before the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of the
ordinance.
§ 27-1802 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1804
1:888
§ 27-1805. Variances. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act
on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and- desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance
pursuant to § 27-1805.
F. Applications for uses by special exception under this chapter or
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance, pursuant to Part 13 and § 27-1806 of this
chapter.
G. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247,
as amended).
H. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving subdivision and land development or
planned residential development.
1. The Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall have the power to
authorize variances from the requirements of this chapter and to attach
such conditions to the variance as it deems necessary to assure
compliance with the purposes of this chapter. A variance may be
granted if all of the following findings are made, where relevant in a
given case:
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
B. That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
§ 27-1804 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1805
1:889
§ 27-1806. Uses by Special Exception. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to hear and decide on
applications for uses by special exception as authorized by this chapter, in
harmony with its general purpose and intent, and in accordance with the
standards set forth in Part 13. The Zoning Hearing Board shall approve
a use by special exception only if it meets all applicable requirements of
this chapter and the express standards and criteria set forth in Part 13. In
granting a use by special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach
such reasonable safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter,
as it may deem necessary to properly implement this chapter and protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 27-1807. Notice and Conduct of Hearings. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance necessary to afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
1. Notice.
A. Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the public, the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Board of Supervisors, the
Planning Commission and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. A notice of the hearing shall be given to other
persons at such a time and in such manner as the Board of
Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate.
B. Public notice, as defined herein, shall be given for the public
hearing. In addition, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the public hearing.
C. In addition, at least 14 days prior to the public hearing, written
notices shall be sent by first- class mail to the addresses to which
real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within 300
feet of the property line boundaries of the property for which the
appeal is filed, including properties across any street right-of-way.
The names and addresses shall be provided by the appellant.
§ 27-1805 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1807
1:890
2. Conduct of Hearing. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings
in accordance with the following requirements:
A. The first hearing shall be commenced within 60 days from the date
of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time.
B. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall
be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise
agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant
shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days
of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or
hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least
seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first
hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the
presentation of their opposition to the application within 100 days
of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's
case-in-chief. And the applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief, provided that the
persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon
the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and
the Township, be granted additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application, provided that the applicant is granted
an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
C. The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board or
the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member as a hearing
officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings
shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board; however, the appellant
or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Township,
may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings
by the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the decision or findings of
the hearing officer as final.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Zoning Hearing Board, and any other person,
including civic or community organizations, permitted to appear by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Zoning
Hearing Board for that purpose.
E. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or
the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths
and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
§ 27-1807 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1807
1:891
§ 27-1808. Failure to Render a Decision. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
F. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
G. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
H. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may
be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. Fees for
the stenographer and transcript are governed by § 27-1810,
Subsection 2, of this chapter.
I. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any parties or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials, accept advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed, and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative
unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
J. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may
be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for,
make written findings on the application within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer.
Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If
the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Zoning
Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the
Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30
days after the report of the hearing officer.
1. Where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render a decision within the
required forty-five-day period or fails to commence or complete the
required hearing as provided in § 27-1807, Subsection 2A and B, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on the record,
to an extension of time.
§ 27-1807 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1808
1:892
§ 27-1809. Mediation. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
2. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
failure of the Zoning Hearing Board to meet or render a decision, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall give public notice of the decision within 10
days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided in § 27-1807, Subsection 1. If the Zoning Hearing
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this section shall prejudice the right of any parts opposing the
application to appeal the decision to the court of common pleas.
1. Parties to proceedings authorized in this Part may utilize mediation as
an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board
initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this Part once they have
been formally initiated. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted
as expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as modifying any
principles of substantive law.
2. Participation in Mediation shall be Wholly Voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The
municipality, in offering the mediation option, shall assure that in each
case the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate,
develop terms and conditions for:
A. Funding mediation.
B. Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
C. Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
D. Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter or in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended), provided that there is written consent by the mediating
parties, and by an applicant or Township decision-making code, if
either is not a party to the mediation.
E. Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
F. Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
G. Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decision-making body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in this chapter.
§ 27-1808 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1809
1:893
§ 27-1810. Fees and Expenditures. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
§ 27-1811. Time Limitations. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
3. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
1. Fees. The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said
hearings may include compensation for the Secretary and members of
the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
2. Stenographer's appearance fee and transcripts. The appearance fee for
a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Zoning
Hearing Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the
Zoning Hearing Board if the transcript is ordered by the Zoning
Hearing Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the person
appealing from the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board if such appeal
is made; and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid
by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the parts
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
3. Expenditures. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed by the
Board of Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the Board of
Supervisors. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of
Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for
secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical
services.
1. No person shall file any proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
later than 30 days after a preliminary or final application for
development has been approved by an appropriate Township officer,
agency or body, if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to
limit the approval in any manner, unless such person alleges and proves
that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest
after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest.
2. The failure of any one, other than the landowner, to appeal from an
adverse decision on an application for tentative approval of a planned
residential development or from an adverse decision by a Zoning
Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map filed
pursuant to Section 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
§ 27-1809 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1811
1:894
§ 27-1812. Stay of Proceedings. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
Code shall preclude an appeal from a final approval, except in the case
where the final submission substantially deviates from the approved
tentative approval.
3. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
1. Upon filing of any proceeding and during its pendency before the
Zoning Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any
agency or body and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless
the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to
the Zoning Hearing Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
Official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
that may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the
applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of the
zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to
continuing the proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board. The
question of whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court.
2. All appeals from decisions rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be taken to the Washington County Court of Common Pleas and shall be
filed within 30 days after the entry of the decision or, in the case of a
deemed decision, within 30 days after the date upon which notice of
said deemed decision is given as required by Subsection 908(9) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).
§ 27-1811 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1812
1:895

Part 19
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 27-1900. Zoning Officer Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
1. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The
Zoning Officer shall hold no elective office in the Township. The Zoning
Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the Township and
shall be able to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Township, a
working knowledge of municipal zoning.
2. The Zoning Officer shall have all the powers and duties conferred upon
him by this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
The Zoning Officer's duties shall include the following:
A. Receive and examine all applications for zoning certificates and
certificates of occupancy.
B. Notify applications of any deficiencies in applications and request
additional information.
C. Process applications for zoning certificates and certificates of
occupancy for all permitted uses.
D. Receive applications for uses by special exception and variances
and forward these applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for
action prior to considering issuance of zoning certificates or
certificates of occupancy for the proposed use.
E. Receive applications for conditional uses and forward these
applications to the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors
for recommendation and action prior to considering issuance of
zoning certificates or certificate of occupancy for the proposed use.
F. Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, with other Township ordinances and with the laws of
the commonwealth.
G. Issue denials of zoning certificates or certificates of occupancy and
refer any appeal of the denial to the Zoning Hearing Board for
action thereon.
H. Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with this chapter.
I. Issue notices of violation in accordance with the requirements of
§ 27-1901 below.
J. With the approval of the Board of Supervisors, or when directed by
the Board of Supervisors, institute, in the name of the Township,
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent unlawful erection,
§ 27-1900 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1900
1:897
§ 27-1901. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation so
as to prevent the occupancy or use of any building, structure or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or
about such premises.
K. Revoke any order or permit issued under a mistake of fact or
contrary to the law or the provisions of this chapter.
L. Record and file all applications for zoning certificates and
certificates of occupancy, with accompanying plans and documents,
and maintain those files as a public record.
M. Maintain the Official Zoning District Map for the Township.
N. Register nonconforming uses, structures and lots in accordance
with § 27-1704 of this chapter.
O. Submit a monthly written report to the Board of Supervisors of all
zoning certificates, certificates of occupancy, sign permits,
temporary use permits and all notices of violation and orders
issued.
P. Meet with the Planning Commission no less frequently than
quarterly to advise the Commission regarding potential
developments and to discuss any problems in administering this
chapter and/or recommend amendments to this chapter.
1. Violations. Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter; failure
to secure a zoning certificate prior to the erection, construction,
extension, structural alteration, addition or occupancy of a building or
structure; or failure to secure a certificate of occupancy for the use or
change of use or occupancy of structures or land shall be a violation of
this chapter.
2. Enforcement Notice. The enforcement notice shall contain the following
information:
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
B. The location of the property in violation.
C. The specific violation, with a description of the requirements that
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
D. The date before which steps for compliance must be commenced
and the date before which the steps must be completed.
§ 27-1900 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1901
1:898
E. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
F. That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
3. Enforcement Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there has
been a violation, further determines that there is a good-faith basis
for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there is no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney's fees collected for the violation of this chapter
shall be paid over to the Township.
C. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
D. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the
Township the right to commence any action for enforcement
pursuant to this subsection.
4. Causes of Action. In case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, structurally altered, repaired, converted or
maintained or any building or structure or land is used in violation of
this chapter or of any other ordinance or regulation made under
authority conferred hereby, the Board of Supervisors or, with approval
of the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Officer or other proper official,
in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, structural
§ 27-1901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1901
1:899
§ 27-1902. Coordination with Other Township Requirements and
Permits and State and Federal Requirements and Permits. [Ord. No.
376, 7/24/2018]
In all cases, any application for a permit of any of the types described
in this chapter shall be decided not only on the basis of compliance with
this chapter but also on the basis of compliance with all other applicable
Township ordinances and all other applicable rules and regulations of the
various Township authorities and agencies that might be concerned, as well
as state and federal requirements and permits.
§ 27-1903. Zoning Certificate Required. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to prevent the
occupancy of any building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal
act, conduct, business or use that constitutes a violation.
1. When Required.
A. No land use may be established or changed; no structure or
building may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, structurally
altered, razed or removed; and no building or structure may be
used or occupied or the use changed until a zoning certificate has
been obtained from the Zoning Officer.
B. In the instances where a building permit is required and applied
for, a zoning certificate shall be prerequisite to issuance of the
building permit. In those instances where no building permit is
required, an application for a certificate of occupancy for a new or
changed use of land or structure shall be accompanied by a zoning
certificate.
C. In the case of a conditional use or use by special exception, the
Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors or to the Zoning Hearing
Board, whichever is applicable, for a decision granting approval of
the conditional use or use by special exception prerequisite to
issuing a zoning certificate. Whenever the approval of a conditional
use or use by special exception includes conditions attached to the
approval, said conditions shall be incorporated into the zoning
certificate.
D. In the case of a permitted use, the Zoning Officer shall not issue the
zoning certificate unless and until all applicable regulations of this
chapter have been met and, in the case of a use for which land
development plan approval is required by the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance,77 unless and until final approval
of the land development plan has been granted by the Board of
Supervisors. Whenever final approval of a land development plan is
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 27-1901 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1903
1:900
subject to conditions, those conditions shall be incorporated into
the zoning certificate.
2. Application for Zoning Certificate.
A. All applications for zoning certificates shall be made in writing by
the owner or his authorized agent on a form furnished by the
Township and shall include a statement of the intended use of the
building and a property survey, both prepared in duplicate and
drawn to scale, and copies of all required county, state and/or
federal permits as approved by the appropriate agency and shall
include the following information at a minimum:
(1) All applications for a proposed use that does not involve
construction, alteration or enlargement of a principal or
accessory structure shall include a property survey showing
compliance with any applicable requirements for the proposed
use, such as signage, parking, buffer areas and the like, as well
as a narrative describing the proposed use and demonstrating
compliance with all applicable criteria for approval, including
but not limited to any express standards and criteria for a
conditional use or use by special exception.
(2) All applications for a zoning certificate for a principal structure
where construction is proposed shall be accompanied by two
copies of a property survey, drawn to scale, showing: key
location map; graphic scale; North arrow; closest intersecting
public road; exact dimensions and total acreage of the lot(s) or
parcel; zoning of lots and zoning of all abutting properties;
exact location and exterior dimensions of the existing and
proposed building(s) or other structure(s); exact location and
area of all existing and proposed watercourses; drainage ways,
rights-of-way and easements; exact location of existing and
proposed driveways, streets and roads within, adjacent and
opposite to the lot(s) or parcel; exact location of existing and
proposed off-street parking, loading and pedestrian movement
facilities; exact dimensions of front, side and rear yards for all
principal and accessory uses; and any other additional data as
may be deemed necessary and be requested by the Zoning
Officer to determine compliance with this chapter.
(3) All applications for construction, alteration or enlargement of
an accessory structure shall be accompanied by two copies of a
plot plan showing the principal structure, the proposed
location of the accessory structure, setbacks for the accessory
structure, its relationship to the principal structure and all
easements and rights-of-way on the property.
(4) The Zoning Officer may require an applicant to furnish a
survey of the property by a Pennsylvania-registered land
§ 27-1903 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1903
1:901
§ 27-1904. Certificates of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
surveyor when complete and accurate information is not
readily available from existing records.
(5) The Zoning Officer may require additional data to determine
compliance with this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the application to
determine if all necessary information has been submitted or to
request more information of the applicant and Officially receive the
application for review by the appropriate Township agencies.
C. All applications for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a
fee, to be based upon the fee schedule of the Township, as provided
for in § 27-1810 of this chapter.
D. Zoning Certificate. Upon approval of the application for a zoning
certificate, one copy of the approved zoning certificate, with the
approved application attached, shall be returned to the applicant.
One copy of such zoning certificate shall be kept on file in the
Township Office.
3. Denial of Zoning Certificate. In the event of a denial, the Zoning Officer
shall state, in writing, the reason(s) for such denial, including the
citation of the specific section(s) of this chapter or other pertinent
ordinances that have not been met.
4. Inspection. The Zoning Officer, or his duly appointed representative,
may make inspections on the property for which an application for a
zoning certificate has been submitted, issued or completed.
5. Failure to Obtain Zoning Certificate. Failure to obtain a zoning
certificate shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement remedies of § 27-1901 of this chapter.
1. A certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall be required prior to:
A. Occupancy of any structure following completion of construction,
reconstruction or enlargement of the structure governed by an
approved building permit.
B. Occupancy of any land or structure for which a building permit is
not required.
C. A change in the use of an existing building, structure, water body
or land area.
D. A change of a nonconforming use, building or structure authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. Application for Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 27-1903 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1904
1:902
A. A certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to the use and
occupancy of any structure, building, water body or land area.
B. All requests for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing,
on a form furnished by the Township, completed by the owner or
other authorized agent, and shall include a statement that the use
and/or construction authorized by the approved zoning certificate
has been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the
application to determine if all necessary information has been
submitted, to request more information of the applicant and to
officially receive the application.
(2) All applications for a certificate of occupancy shall be
accompanied by a fee to be based upon the fee schedule of the
Township, as provided for in § 27-1810 of this chapter.
C. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.
(1) Applications for a certificate of occupancy shall be reviewed by
the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall either issue
findings as a basis for denial or shall approve the application.
(2) Upon approval of the request for a certificate of occupancy, one
copy of the certificate of occupancy shall be given to the
applicant, and one copy of the certificate of occupancy shall be
kept on file in the Township Office.
3. Denial of Certificate of Occupancy. In the event of denial, the Zoning
Officer shall forward to the applicant a written statement containing
the reason(s) for such denial and shall cite the specific requirements of
this chapter that have not been met.
4. Time Limitations. A certificate of occupancy shall remain valid for as
long as the structure, building, water body or land area is used in the
manner for which the certificate of occupancy has been issued.
5. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Officer for a period not
exceeding six months to permit partial occupancy of a building,
structure, water body or land area while work is being completed,
provided that such temporary certificate of occupancy may require
such conditions and safeguards as may be warranted, including posting
of surety, to protect the health and safety of the occupants and the
public and guarantee compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
any conditions attached to the zoning certificate.
6. Failure to Obtain a Certificate of Occupancy. Failure to obtain a
certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
§ 27-1904 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1904
1:903
§ 27-1905. Temporary Use Permits. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
subject to enforcement remedies as provided in § 27-1901 of this
chapter.
1. A temporary use permit shall be required prior to the initiation of a
permitted temporary use of a structure, land or water body and shall
meet the following requirements.
A. Approvals Required.
(1) Sidewalk sales, carload sales and other special promotions
conducted on the site of an existing retail business with the
permission of the landowner for a period of not more than 72
consecutive hours shall be exempt from obtaining a temporary
use permit. Any such activity that exceeds 72 consecutive
hours in duration shall be subject to approval by the Zoning
Officer of a temporary use permit and this section, provided
that the Zoning Officer determines compliance with all
applicable standards of Subsection A(4) below.
(2) Temporary uses, such as festivals, fairs or other similar
activities, sponsored by a governmental, local nonprofit,
community or charitable organization and seasonal
agricultural activities shall be subject to approval of a
temporary use permit, provided that the Zoning Officer
determines compliance with the standards of Subsection A(4)
below as a condition precedent to obtaining the temporary use
permit under this section.
(3) Temporary construction trailers, model homes or sales offices
shall be subject to approval of a temporary use permit by the
Zoning Officer under this section, provided that the Zoning
Officer also determines compliance with § 27-1407.
(4) All other temporary uses shall be subject to a determination by
the Zoning Officer that all of the following criteria are met as a
condition precedent to obtaining a temporary use permit under
this section:
(a) A transient merchant license, if required by Township
ordinance, shall be obtained.
(b) The proposed temporary use or structure shall be limited
to those uses or structures otherwise authorized in the
zoning district.
(c) In the C-1, C-2 and I-1 Districts, preparation and/or
serving of food in an outdoor setting for a period of more
than 72 consecutive hours shall be permitted only if all of
the following requirements are met:
§ 27-1904 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1905
1:904
1) Evidence of an approved permit from the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Food Safety and
Laboratory Services, or its successor agency.
2) The preparation and serving of food shall not be
permitted on any vacant lot and shall only be
permitted on the site of an existing business.
3) The area used for preparing and serving the food shall
not obstruct any sidewalk or public right-of-way nor
shall it obstruct the free flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on the site or adjoining the site. On
any sidewalk, there shall be maintained a minimum of
five feet of unobstructed width for the passage of
pedestrians, and, in the case where there is parallel
parking permitted along such sidewalk, a minimum of
four feet adjacent to the curb to permit the
discharging of passengers shall be provided. These
required unobstructed areas on the sidewalk may be
combined into one area at least five feet wide along
the curb.
4) No noise or odor shall emanate from such outdoor
area where food is prepared and/or served that
adversely affects any adjoining residentially zoned
property within 300 feet of the outdoor area.
5) The area used for preparing and serving food shall not
eliminate the availability of the minimum required
number of parking spaces on the site.
6) The activity shall comply with all applicable Township
codes and ordinances.
7) The site intended to be used for the preparation and/
or serving of food shall provide restroom facilities
available to the public, unless the existing business on
the site has restroom facilities that will be available to
the public visiting the temporary use.
8) The owner of the existing business or the operator of
the temporary use involving the preparation and/or
serving of food in an outdoor setting shall provide the
Township with a certificate of insurance, in an amount
at least equal to $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$1,000,000 aggregate, indemnifying the Township
against any liability resulting from such use.
(d) Approval of temporary uses or structures shall be granted
for a specific time period not to exceed six months. If
continued need for the temporary use or structure on an
annual basis is demonstrated by the applicant, approval
§ 27-1905 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1905
1:905
may be granted for annual renewal by the Zoning Officer
of the permit for the temporary use or structure, provided
that all conditions of the original approval are maintained.
(e) All temporary uses or structures shall be removed within
10 days of the expiration of the specific period for which
the structure or use is approved.
(f) All temporary uses or structures that are proposed to be
accessible to the public shall provide off-street parking in
accordance with the requirements of § 27-1502 for the
proposed use if parking is not already available on the site.
(g) Existing parking on the site may be used for the temporary
use, provided that it does not reduce the available parking
on the site by more than 10%.
(h) Vehicular access for all temporary uses or structures that
are proposed to be accessible to the public shall be
designed to minimize congestion on the lot and not impede
the free flow of traffic for any other permanent use or
structure on the lot.
(i) All temporary uses or structures proposed to be used as
principal uses or structures shall comply with all area and
bulk regulations of the zoning district in which they are
located. All temporary uses or structures that are
proposed to be used as accessory uses or structures shall
comply with the requirements of the zoning district for
accessory structures.
(j) Temporary uses or structures that are authorized for a
particular event shall be removed within 48 hours after the
completion of the event.
(k) Temporary uses or structures that are proposed as
principal uses or structures and that are accessible to the
public shall provide sanitary facilities, unless such
facilities already exist on the lot.
(5) Where any doubt arises as to compliance with these criteria,
the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Zoning
Hearing Board for consideration as a use by special exception.
B. Application for Temporary Use Permit. All requests for temporary
use permits shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the
Township and shall include a full description of the type of use for
which such permit is being sought and the dates during which this
use is proposed to be in existence.
§ 27-1905 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1905
1:906
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the
application for compliance, request more information of the
applicant and officially receive the application.
(2) All applications for a temporary use permit shall be
accompanied by a fee, to be based upon the fee schedule
adopted by the Township, as provided for in § 27-1908 of this
chapter.
(3) All applications for a temporary use permit shall include a
written statement describing the proposed use and
demonstrating compliance with the applicable criteria of
§ 27-1905A(4).
C. Issuance of Permit.
(1) Applications for a temporary use permit shall be reviewed by
the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall either issue
findings as a basis for denial or shall approve the temporary
use permit.
(2) Upon approval of the application for a temporary use permit,
one copy of the permit shall be given to the applicant. The copy
of the permit must be publicly displayed at the site of the
temporary use during the existence of the use. One copy of the
permit shall be kept on file in the Township Office.
D. Denial of Permit. In the event of denial, the Zoning Officer shall
forward to the applicant a written statement containing the
reason(s) for such denial and shall cite the specific requirements of
this chapter that have not been met.
E. Time Limitations. Temporary use permits are valid for the time
period(s) specified in the approval. Annual renewal may be
granted, subject to the Zoning Officer's determination that there is
continuing compliance with § 27-1905A.
F. Inspections.
(1) The Zoning Officer, or his fully appointed representative, may
make an inspection of the property on which such temporary
use is to be located to determine the suitability of the site for
the use. This inspection shall be made prior to issuing a permit,
prior to initiation of the use or, in the event a renewal of the
permit is requested, during the time the use is in existence.
(2) In the event of such inspection, a record shall be made
indicating the time and date of inspection, the findings of the
Zoning Officer in regard to conformance with this chapter and
other Township ordinances, and the opinion of the Zoning
Officer in regard to the suitability of the site for this use.
§ 27-1905 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1905
1:907
§ 27-1906. Sign Permits. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
G. Failure to obtain a temporary use permit. Failure to obtain a
temporary use permit shall be a violation of this chapter and shall
be subject to enforcement remedies as provided in § 27-1901 of this
chapter.
1. A sign permit shall be required prior to the erection or structural
alteration of any sign, either permanent or temporary, except that no
sign permit shall be required for real estate signs, residential
identification signs, contractor signs, window signs, public signs or
notification signs, as defined in § 27-1601B of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to commence work for the erection or
alteration of any sign until a permit has been issued.
A. Application for Permit. All requests for sign permits shall be made
in writing on a form furnished by the Township and shall include a
full description of the proposed sign, a description of the lot upon
which such proposed sign is to be located and a description of any
other existing signs on the same lot.
(1) All applications for a sign permit shall be accompanied by two
copies of a drawing showing: width of sign; height of sign;
gross surface area of sign; total height of sign above adjacent
ground level; clearance between bottommost part of sign and
ground level; and, for freestanding signs, the distance between
the front edge of the sign and adjacent street right-of-way and
the distance between the side or rear edge of the sign and the
side or rear property line; the proposed message; construction
specifications; the type of foundation, structural integrity and
ability to withstand wind loads; the form of illumination
proposed, if any; and compliance with the visibility
requirements of § 27-1403D of this chapter.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the
application for completeness and compliance, request more
information of the applicant or officially receive the application
for the sign.
(3) All applications for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a
fee, to be based upon the fee schedule of the Township as
provided for in § 27-1908 of this chapter.
(4) In the case of new construction of a multitenant development
site, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to submit an
application for a sign package that includes any monument
signs, pole signs or ground signs proposed for the site, as well
as any on-premises directional signs. Individual businesses
shall apply for permits for any wall signs proposed for their
buildings and, in the case of outparcels, any freestanding signs
proposed.
§ 27-1905 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1906
1:908
§ 27-1907. Procedure for Amendments. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
B. Issuance of Permit. Applications for a sign permit shall be reviewed
by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall either issue findings
as a basis for denial or shall approve the application.
(1) Upon approval of the sign permit, one copy of the permit shall
be given to the applicant, and one copy of the permit shall be
kept on file in the Township Office.
C. Denial of Permit. In the event of denial, the Zoning Officer shall
forward to the applicant a written statement containing the
reason(s) for such denial and shall cite the specific requirements of
this chapter that have not been met.
D. Inspections. For a sign permit, the Zoning Officer, or his fully
appointed representative, may make the following inspections on
that property on which the permanent sign is to be located: prior to
installation of the sign; following installation of the sign;
occasionally to determine continued maintenance and compliance
with this chapter; in response to any written complaint; whenever
the sign is proposed to be replaced or modified; and upon cessation
of the use for which the sign way erected.
E. Failure to Obtain a Sign Permit. Failure to obtain a sign permit shall
be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to enforcement
remedies as provided in this chapter.
1. The Board of Supervisors may introduce and/or consider amendments
to this chapter and to the Zoning District Map. In addition, the Board of
Supervisors may consider amendments to this chapter and to the
Zoning District Map that are proposed by the Planning Commission or
by a petition of landowners of property within the Township.
A. Petitions. Petitions for amendments by landowners shall be filed
with the Planning Commission at least 20 calendar days prior to the
meeting at which the petition is to be heard. In the case of a
petition for reclassification of property, the petitioners, upon such
filing, shall submit a legal description of the property proposed to
be rezoned. All petitions shall include a statement justifying the
request and documenting consistency with the Township's
Comprehensive Plan and a filing fee, in accordance with the fee
schedule fixed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The
Planning Commission shall review the proposed amendment and
report its findings and recommendations in writing to the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Referral. Any proposed amendment presented to the Board of
Supervisors without written findings and recommendations from
the Township Planning Commission and the Washington County
Planning Commission shall be referred to these agencies for review
§ 27-1906 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1907
1:909
at least 30 days prior to the public hearing of the Board of
Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall not hold a public
hearing upon such amendments until the required reviews are
received or the expiration of 30 days from the date of referral,
whichever comes first.
C. Posting of Property. If the proposed amendment involves a change
to the Zoning District Map, notice of the public hearing shall be
conspicuously posted by the Township at points deemed sufficient
by the Township along the tract to notify potentially interested
citizens at least seven days prior to the date of the public hearing.
D. Mailing of Notices. In addition to posting the property, if the
proposed amendment involves a change to the Zoning District Map,
notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the Township, at
least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, by first class mail, to
the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real
property located within the area being rezoned, as evidenced by
tax records within the possession of the Township. The notice shall
include the location, date and time of the public hearing. A good
faith effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy the
requirements of this subsection. This subsection shall not apply
when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
E. Public Notice and Public Hearing. Before acting on a proposed
amendment, the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing
thereon. Public notice, as defined by this chapter, shall be given
containing a brief summary of the proposed amendment and
reference to the place where copies of the same may be examined.
F. Readvertisement. If, after any public hearing is held upon a
proposed amendment, the amendment is substantially changed or
revised to include land not previously affected by the amendment,
the Board of Supervisors shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
G. Publication, Advertisement and Availability.
(1) Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless the Board of
Supervisors gives notice of the proposed enactment, including
the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered and a reference to the place in the Township where
copies of the proposed amendment may be examined without
charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost
thereof.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall publish the proposed
amendment once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township not more than 60 nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include
either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary
§ 27-1907 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1907
1:910
§ 27-1908. Fees. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
The Board of Supervisors shall establish and revise, from time to time, a
schedule of fees, by resolution, as well as a collection procedure, for all
applications submitted under the provisions of this chapter. The schedule
of fees shall be available to the public from the Zoning Officer or Township
Manager.
§ 27-1909. Landowner Curative Amendment. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
prepared by the Township Solicitor setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be provided to the newspaper at the
time public notice is published; and
(b) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in
the County Law Library.
H. Action. In the case of proposed adoption of a completely revised
Zoning Ordinance, within 90 days of the date when the public
hearing on the proposed ordinance is officially closed, the Board of
Supervisors shall vote on the proposed ordinance. In the event
substantial amendments are made in the proposed ordinance or
amendment, the Board of Supervisors shall readvertise in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Township a brief summary
of the ordinance or amendments at least 10 days prior to
enactment.
I. Filing Amendment With County Planning Commission. Within 30
days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this chapter
shall be forwarded to the Washington County Planning
Commission.
J. Mediation Option. The Board of Supervisors may offer the
mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings authorized by
this § 27-1907. The Township and the mediating parties shall meet
the stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in § 27-1809 of
this chapter.
1. A curative amendment may be filed by a landowner who desires to
challenge, on substantive grounds, the validity of this chapter or the
Zoning District Map or any provision thereof, that prohibits or restricts
the use or development of land in which he has an interest.
A. Procedure. The landowner may submit a curative amendment to
the Board of Supervisors with a written request that his challenge
and proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in
Sections 609.1 and 1004 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended. As with other proposed
amendments, the curative amendment shall be referred to the
§ 27-1907 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-1909
1:911
Township Planning Commission and the Washington County
Planning Commission at least 30 days before the hearing is
conducted by the Board of Supervisors. Public notice shall be
given in accordance with Sections 610, 1004 and other applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The
hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
Subsections (4) through (8) of Section 908 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, and all references in that section
to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be references to the Board of
Supervisors.
B. Evaluation of Merits of Curative Amendment. If the Board of
Supervisors determines that a validity challenge has merit, the
Board of Supervisors may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative
amendment that will cure the alleged defects. The Board of
Supervisors shall consider the curative amendments, plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of this
chapter or Zoning District Map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of the use proposed
by the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses that are essential to public health and
welfare.
C. Declaration of Invalidity by Court. If the Township does not accept
a landowner's curative amendment brought in accordance with this
section and a court subsequently rules the challenge has merit, the
court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this
entire chapter, but only for those provisions that specifically relate
to the landowner's curative amendment challenge.
§ 27-1909 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-1909
1:912
Part 20
REZONING
§ 27-2000. Purpose of Rezoning. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
Rezoning can be initiated to protect the safety, capacity and efficiency of the
Township's existing infrastructure systems; to maintain fiscal responsibility;
and to uphold the objectives of the North Strabane Township
Comprehensive Plan. See also the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code § 27-609.
§ 27-2001. Rezoning Application Forms. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
Rezoning applications are completed on the official forms provided by the
Zoning Officer. All applicants submitting rezoning applications are required
to prepare a series of plans, analyses and reports as enumerated below to
demonstrate the compatibility of a rezoning proposal.
§ 27-2002. Review of Rezoning Applications. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/
2018]
1. The Zoning Officer:
A. Will perform a review of the application and packet for
completeness. An incomplete or insufficient application and packet
will be returned to the applicant. A completed application and
packet will be forwarded to the Township Planning Commission for
review.
B. Will provide the applicant a letter within seven business days
stating that the application has been submitted with all required
information attached.
2. As part of the rezoning approval process, the Township Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors can consider the motivation and
implications of each plan, analysis and report.
3. The Township Planning Commission:
A. Will consider any projected beneficial and/or detrimental effects on
the Township and may hold a public hearing on the application, if
they deem it applicable.
B. Will submit a written recommendation either in favor or not in
favor of the rezoning proposal including a specific statement as to
whether or not the proposed rezoning is in accordance with the
objectives of the North Strabane Township Comprehensive Plan.
C. Will forward Township Board of Supervisors a recommendation for
the nature of action regarding rezoning.
§ 27-2000 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2002
1:913
§ 27-2003. Application Criteria. [Ord. No. 376, 7/24/2018]
4. The Township Board of Supervisors will hold a public hearing on the
application and compose a brief summary explanation of its decision
and forward the decision and explanation to the applicant. Upon
rezoning approval, the Zoning Officer will update the Zoning Map
accordingly.
5. Washington County Planning Commission shall review such requests
and provide comments, as necessary.
1. Application Requirements. The plans and reports that a landowner and/
or developer are to submit shall include:
A. Conceptual site development plan.
B. Topographic survey.
C. Site conditions report.
D. Estimated infrastructure (sanitary sewer and potable water)
demands (gallons per day).
E. Off-street parking projections (number of parking spaces) available
on site.
F. A summary of anticipated impacts on adjoining lots including but
not limited to noise, vibration, night-time lighting, service area
locations and visibility, hours of operation.
G. Existing zoning of surrounding parcels and closest adjacency of
zoning district identical to request.
H. Classifications of existing roadways/streets adjacent to and within
300 feet of the perimeter of the proposed site.
I. Calculation of average daily trips and peak hour trips proposed to
be generated by development on the lot as presented on a proposed
sketch plan as enabled by the PA Municipalities Planning Code. The
most current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers'
Trip Generation Manual shall be used as part of said calculation.
J. Calculation of average daily trips and peak hour trips proposed to
be generated based upon proposed conceptual site development
plan.
K. The percentage of proposed dwelling units and any associated
limitations that are specific to a particular segment of potential
residential demographics/socioeconomics.
L. Depending upon the location of lot access, infrastructure service/
demands and impacts identified on adjoining lots, the Township
may require a landowner and/or developer to prepare other
potential related studies such as:
§ 27-2002 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 27-2003
1:914
(1) Traffic-related studies.
(2) Fiscal impact analysis.
(3) Density comparison to base zoning.
(4) Geotechnical/stormwater analysis.
2. The Township will evaluate the proposed development of the proposed
zoning in relationship to the potential development in the existing
zoning. The Township Planning Commission and Township Board of
Supervisors reserve the right to require additional information as part
of the review and approval processes in order to evaluate the
applicability of the rezoning.
§ 27-2003 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 27-2003
1:915
Appendix
Appendix A
BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
§ 101. Bond Issues and Loans.
Ord. No Date Type of Action Amount Purpose
85 9/25/1975 Increasing
indebtedness
$100,000 Street improvement
89 6/17/1976 General obligation
bonds
$585,000 Municipal Building
101 —/—/— Increasing
indebtedness
$100,000 Motor grader
107 3/1/1979 Increasing
indebtedness
$100,000 Road improvements
refinancing
109 3/13/1980 Increasing
indebtedness
$200,000 Repayment of tax
anticipation loans
150 6/9/1987 Increasing
indebtedness
$505,000 Road construction
176 7/10/1990 Increasing
indebtedness
$256,045 Sewer improvements
202 17/29/1994 Increasing
indebtedness
$1,600,000 Refund to North Strabane
Township Municipal
Authority
206 2/7/1995 General obligation
bonds
$1,665,000 Various municipal
improvements
257 2/23/1999 General obligation
bonds
$1,480,000 Refunding of general
obligation bonds
268 4/25/2000 General obligation
note
$300,000 Operation of the
Intermunicipal
Composting Cooperative
293 8/19/2003 Lease rental
indebtedness
$6,025,000 Authorizing the incurring
of lease rental
indebtedness by executing
a guaranty agreement
330 10/28/2008 Lease rental
indebtedness
$1,500,000 Sewers project
333 11/25/2008 General obligation
bonds
$10,000,000 Various capital projects
§ 27-2003 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:916
Ord. No Date Type of Action Amount Purpose
338 10/20/2010 Lease rental
indebtedness
$8,505,000 Authorizing the incurring
of lease rental
indebtedness by executing
a guaranty agreement
343 1/24/2012 General obligation
bonds
$12,000,000 Refunding of general
obligation bonds
355 9/23/2014 Lease rental
indebtedness
$11,915,000 Guaranty agreement in
support of debt service on
bonds issued by the
Municipal Authority
366 1/26/2016 Lease rental
indebtedness
$10,680,000 Guaranty agreement in
support of debt service on
bonds issued by the
Municipal Authority
374 11/28/2017 General obligation
bonds
$12,000,000 Incurrence of nonelectoral
debt
380 10/23/2018 General obligation
bonds
$19,500,000 Incurrence or
nonelectoral debt
384 6/25/2019 Lease rental
indebtedness
$11,500,000 Guaranty agreement in
support of debt service on
bonds issued by the
Municipal Authority
Appendix B
FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
§ 101. Franchises and Services.
B-1. Entering into an agreement with Western Pennsylvania Water
Company-Washington District to shut off water service at installations
where sufficient funds for such service have not been collected. (Ord. 76,
8/27/1973)
B-2. Authorizing execution of a cable franchise agreement between the
Township and Comcast of Pennsylvania II, Inc. (Ord. 305, 10/25/2005)
B-3. Authorizing execution of a cable franchise agreement between the
Township and Verizon Pennsylvania, Inc. (Ord. 327, 3/25/2008)
B-4. Authorizing execution of a cable franchise agreement between the
Township and Comcast of Pennsylvania II, Inc. (Ord. 353, 9/24/2013)
Appendix C
GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:917
§ 101. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs.
Ord. No. Date Description
Res. 4-71 1/28/1971 Rendering mutual assistance, in the case of
emergencies, to the Borough of Canonsburg,
Borough of Houston, and Township of Chartiers
Res. 1/27/1972 Establishing a permanent Police Department
Ord. 75 7/31/1973 Authorizing an election to be held in the
Township of North Strabane, Pennsylvania, on
the question of whether a government study
commission of nine members shall be elected
to study the character and plan of government
of the Township of North Strabane, Washington
County, Pennsylvania, and to study and consider
the advisability of adoption of an optional plan
of government or a home rule charter and to
recommend whether or not an optional form of
government or a home rule charter should be
elected
Res. 7/15/1977 Mutual aid agreement with the Township of
Cecil and the Township of Chartiers
Res. 8/21/1978 Joining in contract for mutual police aid and
assistance between the City of Washington,
Boroughs of Canonsburg and Houston, and the
Townships of North Strabane and North
Franklin
Ord. 157 6/7/1988 Authorizing the rescission and termination of
the old 1967 Agreement of Lease and the
execution and delivery of a 1988 Agreement of
Lease between the North Strabane Township
Municipal Authority and the Township of North
Strabane in support of the 1988 Permanent
Financing Project for the public utility system
Ord. 158 6/7/1988 Approving the consulting engineer's report and
cost estimate with regard to the 1988
Permanent Financing Project of the North
Strabane Township Municipal Authority's public
utility system
Ord. 161 6/7/1988 Authorizing the execution and delivery of a first
amendment of the Management Agreement
between the North Strabane Township
Municipal Authority and the Township of North
Strabane covering the improved and expanded
public utility system
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:918
Ord. No. Date Description
Ord. 194 12/14/1993 Authorizing an amendment to the agreement
dated February 9, 1993, between North
Strabane Township and the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Board to increase the
Township contributions to the Municipal Pension
Plan and to amend the vesting requirements
(Repealed by Ord. 328, 7/22/2008)
Ord. 230 2/11/1997 Setting the compensation of the duly elected Tax
Collector
Ord. 238 9/23/1997 Setting the compensation of the Supervisors of
North Strabane Township
Ord. 258 4/27/1999 Revising the Township Police Pension Plan
Ord. 264 3/28/2000 Amending Ord. 238, the manner of
compensation of the Supervisors of North
Strabane Township
Ord. 276 2/13/2001 Adjusting the compensation of the North
Strabane Township Real Estate Tax Collector
Ord. 278 11/27/2001 Revising the Township Police Pension Plan
Ord. 279 2/26/2002 Repealing Ord. 264 such that all parts of Ord.
238 remain in full force and effect
Ord. 280 2/26/2002 Amending Ord. 238, the manner of
compensation of the Supervisors of North
Strabane Township
Ord. 294 8/26/2003 Amending the Township Police Pension Plan
Ord. 322 8/28/2007 Providing for the installation of a waterline in
conjunction with Pennsylvania-American Water
Company to serve portions of McBride Road,
Lindley Road and Shady Lane and assessment of
the costs of construction against the properties
served by the waterline
Ord. 340 9/27/2011 Revising the Township Police Pension Plan
Ord. 345 2/22/2012 Revising the Township Police Pension Plan
Ord. 360 4/28/2015 Authorizing Township participation in the
Pennsylvania Townships Health Insurance
Cooperative Trust
Ord. 361 4/28/2015 Authorizing Township participation in the
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group
Trust
Ord. 375 3/27/2018 Amending Municipal and Fire Pension Plans
Appendix D
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:919
PLAN APPROVAL
§ 101. Plan Approval.
D-1. Approving the plan of Willolake Development. (Res. 12/29/1977)
Appendix E
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 101. Public Property.
E-1. Accepting a deed of dedication from Gibson and Leveto. (Ord. 16, 5/4/
1953)
E-2. Accepting a deed of dedication from H.H. White. (Ord. 17, 5/29/1953)
E-3. Accepting a deed of dedication from Andrew C. and Floretta R.
Schure. (Ord. 24, 12/23/1957)
E-4. Purchasing certain tracts of land, but not the coal underneath, from
the Consolidation Coal Company, in an indenture. (Ord. 12/30/1964)
E-5. Condemning and taking over certain land of Margaret and Samuel Van
Eman. (Res. 3/18/1976)
Appendix F
SEWERS
§ 101. Sewers.
F-1. Joint sewer agreement between the Canonsburg-Houston Joint
Authority, the Boroughs of Canonsburg and Houston, and the Township of
North Strabane. (Res. 1962)
F-2. Constructing certain sanitary collector sewers throughout the
Township. (Ord. 42, 6/29/1967)
F-3. Authorizing the execution and delivery of an agreement of lease
between North Strabane Township Municipal Authority and the Township
of North Strabane for a system of sanitary sewers composing the initial
portion of the public utility system and the establishment of the public
utility system fund. (Ord. 43, 6/29/1967)
F-4. Authorizing North Strabane Municipal Authority of lay, construct,
maintain, repair and replace sanitary sewer lines and the appurtenances
thereof in streets, roads, alleys and rights-of-way of the Township of North
Strabane. (Ord. 46, 6/29/1967)
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:920
F-5. Authorizing Peters Creek Sanitary Authority to lay construct,
maintain, repair and replace sanitary sewer lines and the appurtenances
thereof, in streets, roads, alleys and right-of-way of the Township of North
Strabane in furtherance of the construction of its sewer system. (Ord. 93,
4/27/1977)
F-6. Conveying the Old Strabane Sewer System and all other sanitary
and combined sewers from the Township of North Strabane Township
Municipal Authority. (Ord. 159, 6/7/1988)
F-7. Providing for the installation of sanitary sewers in a portion of the
Alexander Avenue area near the end of Latimer Avenue of North Strabane
Township (known as "Shouptown") and assessment of the costs of
construction against the properties benefitted. (Ord. 220, 1/23/1996)
F-8. Providing for the installation of sanitary sewers in a portion of the
Alexander Avenue area near the end of Latimer Avenue of North Strabane
Township (known as "Shouptown") and assessment of the costs of
construction against the properties benefitted. (Ord. 232, 2/25/1997)
F-9. Authorizing the execution and delivery of a management agreement
between North Strabane Township Municipal Authority and the Township
of North Strabane covering the sanitary sewage system and prior existing
public utility system. (Ord. 265, 3/28/2000)
F-10. Establishing the Waterdam Farms Sewer District and the
reimbursement tapping fee in conjunction thereto. (Ord. 288, 12/17/2002)
Appendix G
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 101. Streets and Sidewalks.
Street Activity Ord. or Res.
Alley "A" Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Alley "B" Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Alley "C" Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Alley "D" Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Alley "E" Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Alley "F" Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Alley "G" Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Allison Road Vacating a portion 347, 6/26/2012
Arnold Avenue Opening 10, 10/31/1951
Baltimore Avenue Opening portion 7, 10/31/1951
Barber Avenue Opening 5, 10/31/1951
Boon Avenue Naming 28, 11/26/1958
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:921
Street Activity Ord. or Res.
Buckboard Court Acceptance Res. 1993-5, 7/13/
1993
Canterbury Road Opening 31, 10/28/1959
Carl Avenue Opening 19, 2/28/1955
Carol Drive Opening 18, 9/30/1954
Carriage Court Acceptance Res. 1993-5, 7/13/
1993
Cherry Street Opening 22, 11/27/1957
Cherry Street Opening 23, 11/27/1957
Chesnic Drive Opening 12, 4/30/1952
Colby Street Vacating portion 323, 8/28/2007
Cricketwood Court Opening Res. 5-71, 3/25/1971
Cricketwood Court Opening Res. 11/10/1997
Dante Avenue Vacating portion 323, 8/28/2007
Elm Street Opening 1, 12/30/1949
Francis Street Opening 2, 4/28/1950
Garden Street Naming 29, 11/26/1958
Giffin Drive Opening 30, 3/29/1959
Glencannon Drive Opening Res. 5-71, 3/15/1971
Glencannon Drive Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Griffwood Drive Opening 11, 2/29/1952
Griffwood Drive Opening 32, 10/28/1959
Helen Street Opening 19, 2/28/1995
Hitchman Street Opening portion 8, 10/31/1951
Hitchman Street Vacating portion 295, 9/23/2003
Hunting Creek Road Opening Res. 5-71, 3/25/1971
Hunting Creek Road Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Kidder Lane Naming 15, 12/31/1952
Lenor Way Opening 20, 12/21/1955
Locust Avenue Naming 29, 11/26/1958
Locust Circle Naming 23, 11/26/1958
Locust Drive Opening 18, 9/30/1954
Locust Street Vacating 215, 6/27/1995
McGregor Avenue Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Marple Street Naming 3, 8/30/1951
Marple Street Opening 9, 10/31/1951
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:922
Street Activity Ord. or Res.
Mary Lane Acceptance Res. 1993-6, 8/24/
1993
Merino Drive Acceptance Res. 5/12/1992
Michigan Avenue Vacating unopened
portion
310, 5/23/2006
Mockingbird Drive Vacating portion 287, 8/27/2002
Morganza Street Vacating 215, 6/27/1995
Motor Avenue Alley Vacating portion 284, 3/26/2002
Nancy's Lane Opening 20, 12/21/1955
North Spring Valley Road Abandoning portion 245, 3/24/1998
Old Farm Road Vacating portion 250, 6/4/1998
Old L.R. 62090 Acceptance Res. 11/10/1977
Old Meadow Court Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Old Meadow Road Opening Res. 5-71, 3/25/1971
Old Meadow Road Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Old Pike Street Acceptance Res. 11/10/1977
Partridge Way Opening Res. 5-71, 3/25/1971
Partridge Way Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Pearl Drive Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Pheasant Cove Opening Res. 5071, 3/25/1971
Pheasant Cove Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Rose Street Opening 19, 2/18/1955
Smallwood Avenue Opening 6, 10/31/1951
Smith Place Acceptance Res. 11/10/1977
Strabane Street Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Surrey Drive Acceptance Res. 1993-5, 7/13/
1993
Sweet Briar Lane Vacating portion 250, 6/4/1998
T.R. 652 Vacating portion 137, 3/22/1983
T.R. 700 Vacating portion 55, 6/9/1955
Taylor Drive Opening 20, 12/21/1955
Unnamed alley (Kidder Lane) Opening 14, 9/30/1952
Unnamed alley (Kidder Lane) Naming Kidder Lane 15, 12/31/1952
Unnamed alleys (4) Taking over 72B, 8/25/1965
Unnamed alley Vacating portion 237, 7/22/1997
Unnamed alley in the
Reedville Plan of Lots
Vacating 311, 5/23/2006
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:923
Street Activity Ord. or Res.
Unnamed streets/alleys in the
Reedville Plan of Lots, to
include areas at or near
William Avenue and Dante
Avenue
Vacating 321, 7/24/2007
Unnamed alleys in the
Reedville Plan of Lots
Vacating 323, 8/28/2007
Unnamed 10-foot paper alley
in the Reedville Plan of Lots
Vacating 351, 1/22/2013
Unnamed 15-foot alley,
portion between Smallwood
Avenue and Welby Street, in
the Reedville Plan of Lots
Vacating 356, 9/23/2014
Unnamed street Opening 36, 1/31/1962
Unnamed paper alleys off
McClelland Road
Vacating 346, 6/26/2012
Unopened paper streets/
alleys in the Curry Plan of
Lots (Birch Street, Maryland
Avenue, and Michigan
Avenue)
Vacating 364, 5/26/2015
Unnamed paper streets/
roadways/alleys located
adjacent to or near property
of Robinson Limited
Partnership Company
Vacating 339, 4/26/2011
Vance Drive Opening 18, 9/30/1954
Vandale Drive Vacating portion 146, 9/10/1985
Village Drive Opening Res. 5-71, 3/25/1971
Village Drive Opening Res. 11/10/1977
Welby Avenue Vacating portion 323, 8/28/2007
Welby Avenue Vacating portion 351, 1/22/2013
William Avenue Vacating portion 237, 7/22/1997
William Avenue Vacating portion 319, 5/29/2007
William Avenue Vacating portion 323, 8/28/2007
William Drive Acceptance Res. 5/12/1992
Appendix H
WATER
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:924
§ 101. Water.
H-1. Providing for the construction and laying of a stormwater pipe line
along Oak Lane, Sweet Briar Road, and Lakewood Drive in said Township.
(Ord. 84A, 9/25/1975)
H-2. Providing for the installation of a water pumping station on lines
of the Pennsylvania-American Water Company to serve a portion of the
Christy Road Strabane Township and assessment of the costs of
construction of the pump station against the properties benefitted. (Ord.
231, 2/25/1997)
H-3. Providing for the installation of a water pumping station on lines
of the Pennsylvania-American Water Company to serve a portion of the
Christy Road area, Mansfield Road area, Conklin Road area and Linnwood
Road area of North Strabane Township and assessment of the costs of
construction of the pump station against the properties benefitted. (Ord.
242, 1/27/1998)
H-4. Amending Ord. 242 providing for the installation of a water pumping
station on lines of the Pennsylvania-American Water Company to serve
a portion of the Christy Road area, Mansfield Road, area, Conklin Road
area and Linnwood Road area of North Strabane Township and assessment
of the costs of construction of the pump station against the properties
benefitted. (Ord. 246, 4/28/1998)
H-5. Providing for the installation of a waterline in conjunction with
Pennsylvania-American Water Company to serve a portion of Chubbic Road
and assessment of the cost of construction of said lien against the
properties served by the waterline. (Ord. 261, 6/22/1999)
H-6. Providing for the installation of a waterline(s) of the Pennsylvania-
American Water Company to serve a portion of Green Valley Road, Sundust
Road and Gilkeson Road areas of North Strabane Township and assessment
of the costs of construction of the same against the properties benefited.
(Ord. 272, 10/24/2000)
Appendix I
ZONING RECLASSIFICATION
§ 101. Zoning Reclassification.
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Description From To
Ord. 69 6/1/1972 A certain
tract of land
C-1
Commercial
R-1
Residential
Ord. 70 6/1/1972 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 71 7/3/1972 A certain
tract of land
C-2
Commercial
R-3
Residential
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:925
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Description From To
Ord. 73 8/27/1973 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 77 8/27/1973 A certain
tract of land
C-2
Commercial
R-1
Residential
Ord. 78 8/27/1973 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
R-2
Residential
Ord. 79 11/26/1973 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 82 –/–/1974 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
I-1 Industrial
Ord. 90 9/9/1976 A certain
tract of land
I-1
Industrial
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 91 9/27/1976 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 97 1/26/1978 A certain
tract of land
R-2
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 99 10/26/1978 A certain
tract of land
R-2
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 110 3/7/1980 A certain
tract of land
R-2
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 113 10/14/1980 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 168 11/28/1989 A certain
tract of land
C-1
Commercial
R-2
Residential
Ord. 179 3/26/1991 A certain
tract of land
C-1
Commercial
and I-1
Industrial
Exclusively
I-1 Industrial
Ord. 201 7/26/1994 A certain
tract of land
R-1
Residential
R-3
Residential
Ord. 216 7/25/1995 A certain
tract of land
A-1
Agricultural
R-3
Residential
Ord. 223 3/26/1996 A certain
tract of land
C-1
Commercial
and R-3
Residential
I-1 Industrial
Ord. 227 11/26/1996 Property of
Gladys Kopp/
John Milhoan
A-1
Agricultural
I-1 Industrial
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:926
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Description From To
Ord. 243 1/27/1998 A 26-acre
parcel
located at
the
southwest
quadrant of
Route 19 and
Weavertown
Road
C-1
Commercial
R-2
Residential
Ord. 252 10/28/1998 Approximately
11.58 acres
located at
the corner of
West
McMurray
Road and
Hahn Drive
owned by
Lisa M.
Falconi
R-1
Residential
R-3
Residential
Ord. 254 12/15/1998 10.14 acres
located at
the corner of
Route 19 and
Meadow
Brook Drive)
A-1
Agricultural
5.10 acres
C-1,
Commercial
and 5.043
acres R-2
Residential
Ord. 255 1/26/1999 13.5046
acres located
at the corner
of
Washington
Road (Route
19) and
Meadow
Brook Drive
A-1
Agricultural
R-2
Residential
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:927
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Description From To
Ord. 266 4/25/2000 3 parcels of
property
(2.148 acres)
on Route 19
at the
southbound
side of
Washington
Road and
north of
Locust
Avenue
R-2
Residential
C-1
Commercial
Ord. 267 4/25/2000 1 parcel of
property
(1.58 acres)
on Route 19
at the north
side of
Washington
Road
between
Galley Road
and Locust
Street
R-2
Residential
C-1
Commercial
Ord. 269 6/27/2000 Approximately
18.81 acres
located on
Route 19
near
Weavertown
Road
C-1
Commercial
R-2
Residential
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:928
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Description From To
Ord. 271 10/24/2000 3 parcels of
property
(9.02 acres)
designated
as Parcels
E1, E2 and
E3 in the
Yablonski-
Meadows
Real Estate
Subdivision
as recorded
in Plan Book
Volume 23,
Pages 302
through
302A, at
Johnson and
McBride
Roads
I-1
Industrial
A-1
Agricultural
Ord. 282 2/26/2002 Approximately
12.9 acres of
real property
located at
the corner of
Washington
Road and
Conklin Road
R-2
Residential
C-1
Commercial
Ord. 291 5/27/2003 27.56 acres
located on
Houston Hill
Church Road
as requested
by Maronda
Homes, Inc.
C-1
Commercial
R-2
Residential
Ord. 297 3/23/2004 Approximately
43.77 acres
located at
the end of
Hunting
Creek Road
and fronting
McDowell
Lane
R-1
Residential
R-3
Residential
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:929
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Description From To
Ord. 298 3/23/2004 Approximately
86.87 acres
located at
the corner of
Route 19 and
Galley Road
R-1
Residential
R-3
Residential
Ord. 320 7/24/2007 Approximately
27.68 acres
located off of
Interstate 79
on Hill
Church
Houston
Road
R-3
Residential
C-2
Commercial
Ord. 324 9/25/2007 Approximately
0.912 acre
located at
the
intersection
of Galley
Road and
Route 19
R-3
Residential
C-1
Commercial
Ord. 342 12/21/2011 Approximately
32.6 acres
located along
Route 19
C-2
Commercial
and R-2
Residential
C-1
Commercial
Ord. 344 3/27/2012 Approximately
7.398 acres
located off
Chesnic
Drive
R-3
Residential
C-1
Commercial
Ord. 352 6/25/2013 Approximately
4.09 acres
off Burkett
Lane
R-2
Residential
C-1
Commercial
Ord. 358 3/24/2015 Approximately
1.862 acres
between Hill
Church-
Houston
Road and
Bruce Drive
R-3
Residential
C-1
Commercial
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:930
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Description From To
Ord. 362 5/26/2016 Approximately
100 acres
located on
Thomas
Eighty-Four
Road
A-1
Agricultural
R-2
Residential
Ord. 363 5/26/2016 Approximately
13.68 acres
located on
Weavertown
Road
R-3
Residential
I-1 Industrial
Appendix J
ZONING; PRIOR ORDINANCES
§ 101. Zoning; Prior Ordinances.
The current Township Zoning Ordinance, Ord. 314, was adopted 7/25/
2006. It superseded the prior Zoning Ordinance and its amendments. The
numbers and dates of adoption of the prior Zoning Ordinance and its
amendments are listed here for reference.
Ordinance
Number Adoption Date
154 12/27/1988
200 6/28/1994
205 11/22/1994
213 3/28/1995
218 9/27/1995
222 1/23/1996
226 9/24/1996
253 11/17/1998
256 1/26/1999
260 6/22/1999
270 7/25/2000
290 2/25/2003
314 7/25/2006
317 5/1/2007
331 10/28/2008
332 11/25/2008
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:931
Ordinance
Number Adoption Date
335 8/25/2009
337 8/24/2010
354 11/26/2013
376 7/24/2018
Key
Chapter KO
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ALL ORDINANCES AND
RESOLUTIONS
§ 101. Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances and Resolutions.
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
1 Appendix C
2 Appendix G
3 Appendix G
4 Superseded by 147
5 Appendix D
6 Appendix G
7 Appendix G
8 Appendix G
9 Appendix G
10 Appendix G
11 Appendix G
12 Appendix G
13 Repealed by 37
14 Appendix G
15 Appendix G
16 Appendix E
17 Appendix F
18 Appendix G
19 Appendix G
20 Appendix G
21 Repealed by 96
22 Appendix G
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:932
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
23 Appendix G
24 Appendix E
25 Superseded by 147
26 Superseded by 147
27 Repealed by 62
28 Appendix G
29 Appendix G
Res. of 1959 Repealed by 147
30 Appendix G
31 Appendix G
32 Appendix G
33 Chapter 7 §§ 101-104
34 Superseded by 136
35 Superseded by 147
Res. 10/25/1961 Chapter 22 § 601
Res. 1962 Appendix F
36(A) Appendix G
36(B) Zoning Ordinance
37 Repealed by 44
38 Chapter 24 §§ 201-207
12/30/1964 Appendix E
39 Repealed by 147
40 Chapter 1 §§ 101-103
41 Superseded by 306
42 Appendix F
43 Appendix F
44 Repealed by 160
45 Repealed by 117
46 Appendix F
47 Repealed by 147
48 Zoning Amendment
49 Superseded by 207
50 Repealed by 209
51 Zoning Amendment
52 Superseded by 147
53 Not Codified
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:933
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
54 Zoning Amendment
55 Appendix G
56 Repealed by 147
57 Repealed by 147
58 Zoning Amendment
59 Repealed by 147
60 Repealed by 167
61 Superseded by 312
62 Repealed by 147
63 Repealed by 147
64 Repealed by 103
65 Repealed by 147
66 Repealed by 162
67 Zoning Amendment
Res. 4-71 Appendix C
Res. 5-71 Appendix G
68 Chapter 18 § 107 note
Chapter 26 Contents note
Res. 1/27/1972 Appendix C
69 Appendix I
70 Appendix I
71 Appendix I
72A Repealed by 147
72B Appendix G
73 Appendix I
74 Superseded by 147
75 Appendix C
76 Appendix B
77 Appendix I
78 Appendix I
79 Appendix I
80 Chapter 21 §§ 101-120
81 Repealed by 147
82 Appendix I
Res. 4/29/1974 Repealed by 192
83A Superseded by 147
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:934
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
83B Chapter 13 §§ 101-105
84 Repealed by 147
84A Appendix H
85 Appendix A
86 Chapter 24 §§ 101-109
87 Chapter 1 §§ 301-307
88 Superseded by 147
Res. 3/18/1976 Appendix E
89 Appendix A
90 Appendix I
91 Appendix I
92 Repealed by 147
93 Appendix F
94 Chapter 18 §§ 201-210
95 Repealed by 248
Res. 7/15/1977 Appendix C
96 Chapter 6 §§ 201-208
Res. 11/10/1977 Appendix G
Res. 12/19/1977 Appendix D
97 Appendix I
98 Chapter 13 § 402
Res. 8/21/1978 Appendix C
99 Appendix I
100 Chapter 13 §§ 301-313
101 Appendix A
102 Chapter 9 § 106
103 Repealed by 138
104 Repealed by 147
105 Chapter 11 §§ 101-107
106 Not Passed
107 Appendix A
108 Superseded by 144
109 Appendix A
110 Appendix I
111 Repealed by 117
112 Repealed by 117
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:935
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
113 Appendix I
114 Chapter 13 §§ 501-510
115 Superseded by 147
116 Superseded by 164
117 Repealed by 152
118 Chapter 13 § 402
119 to 135 Not used
136 Repealed by 155
137 Appendix G
138 Repealed by 147
139 Superseded by 147
140 Chapter 1 §§ 302-307
141 Chapter 7 §§ 201-207
142 Chapter 24 §§ 201-207
143 Chapter 7 §§ 301-307
144 Repealed by 365
145 Chapter 13 §§ 701-706
146 Appendix G
147 Adopting Ordinance
148 Chapter 2 §§ 101-304
149 Superseded by 315
150 Appendix A
151 Superseded by 188
152 Chapter 18 §§ 301-310
153 Repealed by 160
154 Superseded by 314
155 Repealed by 181
156 Repealed by 182
157 Appendix C
158 Appendix C
159 Appendix F
160 Chapter 18 §§ 101-137, 306.1,
501-557, Schedule A
161 Appendix C
162 Chapter 9 §§ 101-128
163 Chapter 18 § 118
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:936
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
164 Chapter 18 §§ 401-414
165 Chapter 18 § 405
166 Repealed by 209
167 Chapter 13 §§ 401-437
168 Appendix I
169 Chapter 7 §§ 101-103; 106-108
170 Chapter 7 §§ 303, 305, 307
171 Superseded by 300
172 Chapter 7 §§ 501-511
173 Chapter 7 §§ 201-205
174 Chapter 18 §§ 302-304.1,
307-311
175 Repealed by 209
176 Appendix A
177 Chapter 15 § 207
178 Chapter 18 §§ 302-304, 304.1,
305-307, 311
179 Appendix I
180 Chapter 18 §§ 101, 103, 104,
108, 113, 118, 118.1,
119, 119.1, 126
181 Chapter 20 §§ 101-109
182 Chapter 20 §§ 201-211
183 Chapter 20 §§ 301-312
184 Repealed by 365
Res. 5/12/1992 Appendix G
185 Chapter 18 §§ 303, 306.1, 312
186 Chapter 18 § 101
187 Chapter 18 §§ 307, 311
188 Repealed by 328
189 Chapter 18 §§ 601-610
190 Chapter 20 §§ 203, 207A
Res. 1993-5 Appendix G
Res. 1993-6 Appendix G
191 Superseded by 207
192 Repealed by 278
193 Chapter 20 § 308
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:937
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
194 Repealed by 328
195 Chapter 18 Schedule A
196 Chapter 15 §§ 701-705
197 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 212, 403
198 Chapter 4 §§ 201-206
199 Chapter 15 § 403
200 Superseded by 314
201 Appendix I
202 Appendix A
203 Chapter 15 § 212
204 Chapter 6 §§ 401-403
205 Superseded by 314
206 Appendix A
207 Chapter 13 §§ 201-209
208 Chapter 5 §§ 101-119
209 Repealed by 235
210 Repealed by 236
211 Repealed by 300
212 Repealed by 300
213 Superseded by 314
214 Repealed by 329
215 Appendix G
216 Appendix I
217 Superseded by 334
218 Superseded by 314
219 Chapter 26 §§ 901-905
220 Appendix F
221 Chapter 18 §§ 307, 313
222 Superseded by 314
223 Appendix I
224 Chapter 7 §§ 101-103, 106, 107
225 Repealed by 300
226 Superseded by 314
227 Appendix I
228 Chapter 15 § 212
229 Repealed by 329
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:938
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
230 Appendix C
231 Appendix H
232 Appendix F
233 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 212
234 Chapter 22 §§ 101-1013
235 Superseded by 300
236 Superseded by 300
237 Appendix G
238 Appendix C
239 Chapter 13 §§ 503, 507
240 Chapter 2 §§ 107, 304
Chapter 4, § 109 Superseded by 147
Chapter 4 § 206
Chapter 5 §§ 117, 405, 506, 605
Chapter 6 §§ 105, 206, 305, 403
Chapter 7, § 410 Superseded by 300
Chapter 7 §§ 197, 203, 305, 510
Chapter 8 Repealed by 365
Chapter 9 § 127
Chapter 10 Superseded by 312
Chapter 11 § 107
Chapter 13 §§ 105, 313, 508,
603, 706
Chapter 14 § 114
Chapter 18 §§ 107, 137, 210,
413, 556, 609
Chapter 18, § 703 Superseded by 334
Chapter 20 §§ 109, 210, 310
Chapter 21 §§ 119, 206, 304,
603, 703
Chapter 24 Superseded by 306
Chapter 26 §§ 504, 905
Chapter 16, § 108 Repealed by 248
241 Chapter 7 §§ 503, 505, 510
242 Appendix H
243 Appendix I
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:939
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
244 Chapter 18 § 118; Schedule A
245 Appendix G
246 Appendix H
247 Chapter 7 §§ 521-526
248 Repealed by 348
249 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 212, 403
250 Appendix G
251 Superseded by 328
252 Appendix I
253 Superseded by 314
254 Appendix I
255 Appendix I
256 Superseded by 314
257 Appendix A
258 Repealed by 278
259 Chapter 13 §§ 801-821
260 Superseded by 314
261 Appendix H
262 Chapter 18 §§ 304, 311
263 Chapter 15 §§ 212, 403
264 Repealed by 279
265 Appendix F
266 Appendix I
267 Appendix I
268 Appendix A
269 Appendix I
270 Superseded by 314
271 Appendix I
272 Appendix H
273 Chapter 1 Part 7
274 Chapter 18 §§ 307, 311
275 Chapter 15 § 216
276 Appendix C
277 Chapter 7 §§ 201, 203
278 Appendix C
279 Repeals 264
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:940
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
280 Appendix C
281 Chapter 13 §§ 503, 504, 507
282 Appendix I
283 Chapter 15 §§ 212, 403
284 Appendix G
285 Chapter 1 § 705
286 Chapter 2 §§ 401-404
287 Appendix G
288 Appendix F
289 Chapter 18 § 113
290 Superseded by 314
291 Appendix I
292 Chapter 15 § 212
293 Appendix A
294 Appendix C
295 Appendix G
296 Chapter 15 § 201
297 Appendix I
298 Appendix I
299 Chapter 13 §§ 901-909
300 Repealed by 369
301 Repealed by 369
302 Repealed by 369
303 Chapter 22 §§ 1101-1105
304 Chapter 18 Part 1, Appendix A
305 Appendix B
306 Superseded by 325
307 Chapter 7 § 103
308 Chapter 18 § 304, Schedule A
309 Chapter 21 §§ 801-820
310 Appendix G
311 Appendix G
312 Repealed by 369
313 Chapter 7 §§ 502, 503, 505,
506, 521
314 Chapter 27 §§ 101-1909
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:941
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
315 Chapter 24 §§ 401-406
316 Chapter 7 §§ 502, 503, 505, 506
317 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 901, 1002,
1102, 1303, 1403
318 Chapter 18 §§ 101, 105, 106,
109, 110, 112, 120,
123, 125, 127, 128,
129, 131, 132, 133,
134, 135, 136, 208,
303, 306, 306.1, 307,
405, 503, 511, 512,
514, 518, 532, 533,
537, 538
319 Appendix G
320 Appendix I
321 Appendix G
322 Appendix C
323 Appendix G
324 Appendix I
325 Chapter 24 §§ 601-612
326 Chapter 22 § 513
327 Appendix B
328 Chapter 1 Part 6
Appendix C (repealer only)
329 Chapter 24 Part 5 (repealer only)
330 Appendix A
331 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 701, 801,
901, 1001, 1303
332 Chapter 27 §§ 1601, 1602, 1606
333 Appendix A
334 Chapter 18 Part 7
335 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 401, 501,
601, 701, 801, 901,
1001, 1101, 1303
336 Chapter 20 § 105
337 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 501, 701,
1101, 1303
338 Appendix A
339 Appendix G
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:942
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
340 Appendix C
341 Chapter 24 Part 2
342 Appendix I
343 Appendix A
344 Appendix I
345 Appendix C
346 Appendix G
347 Appendix G
348 Chapter 16 §§ 101-109
349 Chapter 24 § 603
350 Chapter 18 § 304
351 Appendix G
352 Appendix I
353 Appendix B
354 Chapter 27 § 901
355 Appendix A
356 Appendix G
357 Repealed by 359
358 Appendix I
359 Chapter 1 Part 6
360 Appendix C
361 Appendix C
362 Appendix I
363 Appendix I
364 Appendix G
365 Chapter 8 Parts 1 – 10
366 Appendix B
367 Superseded
368 Superseded
369 Chapter 4 §§ 101, 203
Chapter 5 §§ 101, 105 – 107,
109 – 118; Part 2;
Part 3
Chapter 15 Part 5
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:943
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
370 2/28/2017 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
Ch. 18 26
374 11/28/2017 Bond Issues and
Loans
Appendix A 26
375 3/27/2018 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix C 26
376 7/24/2018 Zoning Ch. 27 26
380 10/23/2018 Bond Issues and
Loans
Appendix A 26
381 11/27/2018 Grading and
Excavating: General
Regulations
Ch. 9, Pt. 1 26
382 6/25/2019 Administration and
Government: Police
Department
Ch. 1, Pt. 2 26
383 8/27/2019 Water Ch. 26 26
384 6/25/2019 Bond Issues and
Loans
Appendix A 26
§ 101 NORTH STRABANE CODE § 101
1:944